While Nakula's father the householder was being exhorted by Nakula's mother with this exhortation, his disease was immediately allayed.
And he recovered from his disease.
That was how Nakula's father's disease was abandoned.
Then, soon after Nakula's father the householder had recovered from being sick, not long after his recovery from his illness, he went leaning on a stick to the Blessed One.
On arrival, having bowed down to the Blessed One, he sat to one side.
As he was sitting there, the Blessed One said to him, “It is your gain, your great gain, householder, that you have Nakula's mother — sympathetic & wishing for your welfare — as your counselor & instructor.
To the extent that I have white-clad householder female disciples who act fully in accordance with the precepts, she is one of them.
To the extent that I have white-clad householder female disciples who attain inner tranquillity of awareness, she is one of them.
To the extent that I have white-clad householder female disciples who reach firm ground in this Doctrine & Discipline, attain a firm foothold, attain consolation, overcome their doubts, dispel their perplexity, reach fearlessness, & gain independence from others with regard to the Teacher's message, she is one of them.
It is your gain, your great gain, householder, that you have Nakula's mother — sympathetic & wishing for your welfare — as your counselor & instructor.
I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Vesali, in the Great Forest, at the Gabled Pavilion.
Then, in the late afternoon, he left his seclusion and went to the sick ward.
On arrival he sat down on a prepared seat.
As he was sitting there, he addressed the monks: “A monk should approach the time of death mindful & alert.
This is our instruction to you all.
“And how is a monk mindful?
There is the case where a monk remains focused on the body in & of itself — ardent, alert, & mindful — putting aside greed & distress with reference to the world.
He remains focused on feelings in & of themselves… mind in & of itself… mental qualities in & of themselves — ardent, alert, & mindful — putting aside greed & distress with reference to the world.
This is how a monk is mindful.
“And how is a monk alert?
When going forward & returning, he makes himself fully alert; when looking toward & looking away… when bending & extending his limbs… when carrying his outer cloak, his upper robe & his bowl… when eating, drinking, chewing, & savoring… when urinating & defecating… when walking, standing, sitting, falling asleep, waking up, talking, & remaining silent, he makes himself fully alert.
This is how a monk is alert.
“So a monk should approach the time of death mindful & alert.
This is our instruction to you all.
“As a monk is dwelling thus mindful & alert — heedful, ardent, & resolute — a feeling of pleasure arises in him.
He discerns that 'A feeling of pleasure has arisen in me.
It is dependent on a requisite condition, not independent.
Dependent on what?
Dependent on this body.
Now, this body is inconstant, fabricated, dependently co-arisen.
Being dependent on a body that is inconstant, fabricated, & dependently co-arisen, how can this feeling of pleasure that has arisen be constant?' He remains focused on inconstancy with regard to the body & to the feeling of pleasure.
He remains focused on dissolution… dispassion… cessation… relinquishment with regard to the body & to the feeling of pleasure.
As he remains focused on inconstancy… dissolution… dispassion… cessation… relinquishment with regard to the body & to the feeling of pleasure, he abandons any passion-obsession with regard to the body & the feeling of pleasure.
“As he is dwelling thus mindful & alert — heedful, ardent, & resolute — a feeling of pain arises in him.
He discerns that 'A feeling of pain has arisen in me.
It is dependent on a requisite condition, not independent.
Dependent on what?
Dependent on this body.
Now, this body is inconstant, fabricated, dependently co-arisen.
Being dependent on a body that is inconstant, fabricated, & dependently co-arisen, how can this feeling of pain that has arisen be constant?' He remains focused on inconstancy with regard to the body & to the feeling of pain.
He remains focused on dissolution… dispassion… cessation… relinquishment with regard to the body & to the feeling of pain.
As he remains focused on inconstancy… dissolution… dispassion… cessation… relinquishment with regard to the body & to the feeling of pain, he abandons any resistance-obsession with regard to the body & the feeling of pain.
“As he is dwelling thus mindful & alert — heedful, ardent, & resolute — a feeling of neither-pleasure-nor-pain arises in him.
He discerns that 'A feeling of neither-pleasure-nor-pain has arisen in me.
It is dependent on a requisite condition, not independent.
Dependent on what?
Dependent on this body.
Now, this body is inconstant, fabricated, dependently co-arisen.
Being dependent on a body that is inconstant, fabricated, & dependently co-arisen, how can this feeling of neither-pleasure-nor-pain that has arisen be constant?' He remains focused on inconstancy with regard to the body & to the feeling of neither-pleasure-nor-pain.
He remains focused on dissolution… dispassion… cessation… relinquishment with regard to the body & to the feeling of neither-pleasure-nor-pain.
As he remains focused on inconstancy… dissolution… dispassion… cessation… relinquishment with regard to the body & to the feeling of neither-pleasure-nor-pain, he abandons any ignorance-obsession with regard to the body & the feeling of neither-pleasure-nor-pain.
“Sensing a feeling of pleasure, he discerns that it is inconstant, not grasped at, not relished.
Sensing a feeling of pain… Sensing a feeling of neither-pleasure-nor-pain, he discerns that it is inconstant, not grasped at, not relished.
Sensing a feeling of pleasure, he senses it disjoined from it.
Sensing a feeling of pain… Sensing a feeling of neither-pleasure-nor-pain, he senses it disjoined from it.
When sensing a feeling limited to the body, he discerns that 'I am sensing a feeling limited to the body.' When sensing a feeling limited to life, he discerns that 'I am sensing a feeling limited to life.' He discerns that 'With the break-up of the body, after the termination of life, all that is sensed, not being relished, will grow cold right here.'
“Just as an oil lamp burns in dependence on oil & wick; and from the termination of the oil & wick — and from not being provided any other sustenance — it goes out unnourished; in the same way, when sensing a feeling limited to the body, he discerns that 'I am sensing a feeling limited to the body.' When sensing a feeling limited to life, he discerns that 'I am sensing a feeling limited to life.' He discerns that 'With the break-up of the body, after the termination of life, all that is sensed, not being relished, will grow cold right here.'
Then, early in the morning, Upacala the nun put on her robes and, taking her bowl & outer robe, went into Savatthi for alms.
When she had gone for alms in Savatthi and had returned from her alms round, after her meal she went to the Grove of the Blind to spend the day.
Having gone deep into the Grove of the Blind, she sat down at the foot of a tree for the day's abiding.
Then Mara the Evil One, wanting to arouse fear, horripilation, & terror in her, wanting to make her fall from solitude, approached her & said, “Where do you want to reappear, nun?
“I don't want to reappear anywhere, my friend.
Then Mara the Evil One — sad & dejected at realizing, “Upacala the nun knows me” — vanished right there.
Then Ven.
Sariputta… went to the residence of the householder Anathapindika with Ven.
Ananda as his attendant.
On arrival, he sat down on a prepared seat and said to the householder Anathapindika: “I hope you are getting better, householder.
I hope you are comfortable.
I hope that your pains are lessening and not increasing.
I hope that there are signs of their lessening, and not of their increasing.
“I am not getting better, venerable sir.
I am not comfortable.
My extreme pains are increasing, not lessening.
There are signs of their increasing, and not of their lessening.
Extreme forces slice through my head, just as if a strong man were slicing my head open with a sharp sword… Extreme pains have arisen in my head, just as if a strong man were tightening a turban made of tough leather straps around my head… Extreme forces carve up my stomach cavity, just as if a butcher or his apprentice were to carve up the stomach cavity of an ox… There is an extreme burning in my body, just as if two strong men, grabbing a weaker man by the arms, were to roast and broil him over a pit of hot embers.
I am not getting better, venerable sir.
I am not comfortable.
My extreme pains are increasing, not lessening.
There are signs of their increasing, and not of their lessening.
“Then, householder, you should train yourself in this way: 'I won't cling to the eye; my consciousness will not be dependent on the eye.' Thus you should train yourself.
'I won't cling to the ear… nose… tongue… body; my consciousness will not be dependent on the body'… 'I won't cling to the intellect; my consciousness will not be dependent on the intellect'…
“'I won't cling to forms… sounds… smells… tastes… tactile sensations; my consciousness will not be dependent on tactile sensations'… 'I won't cling to ideas; my consciousness will not be dependent on ideas'…
“'I won't cling to eye-consciousness… ear-consciousness… nose-consciousness… tongue-consciousness… body-consciousness; my consciousness will not be dependent on body-consciousness'… 'I won't cling to intellect-consciousness; my consciousness will not be dependent on intellect-consciousness'…
“'I won't cling to contact at the eye… contact at the ear… contact at the nose… contact at the tongue… contact at the body; my consciousness will not be dependent on contact at the body'… 'I won't cling to contact at the intellect; my consciousness will not be dependent on contact at the intellect'…
“'I won't cling to feeling born of contact at the eye… feeling born of contact at the ear… feeling born of contact at the nose… feeling born of contact at the tongue… feeling born of contact at the body; my consciousness will not be dependent on feeling born of contact at the body'… 'I won't cling to feeling born of contact at the intellect; my consciousness will not be dependent on feeling born of contact at the intellect'…
“'I won't cling to the earth property… liquid property… fire property… wind property… space property; my consciousness will not be dependent on the space property'… 'I won't cling to the consciousness property; my consciousness will not be dependent on the consciousness property'…
“'I won't cling to form… feeling… perception… thought-fabrications; my consciousness will not be dependent on thought-fabrications'… 'I won't cling to consciousness; my consciousness will not be dependent on consciousness'…
“'I won't cling to the dimension of the infinitude of space… the dimension of the infinitude of consciousness… the dimension of nothingness; my consciousness will not be dependent on the dimension of nothingness'… 'I won't cling to the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception; my consciousness will not be dependent on the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception'…
“'I won't cling to this world; my consciousness will not be dependent on this world… I won't cling to the world beyond; my consciousness will not be dependent on the world beyond'…
“'I won't cling to what is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, attained, sought after, pondered by the intellect; my consciousness will not be dependent on that.' Thus you should train yourself.
When this was said, the householder Anathapindika wept and shed tears.
Ven.
Ananda said to him, “Are you sinking, householder?
Are you foundering?
“No, venerable sir.
I'm not sinking, nor am I foundering.
It's just that for a long time I have attended to the Teacher, and to the monks who inspire my heart, but never before have I heard this sort of talk on the Dhamma.
“This sort of talk on the Dhamma, householder, is not given to lay people clad in white.
This sort of talk on the Dhamma is given to those gone forth.
“In that case, Ven.
Sariputta, please let this sort of talk on the Dhamma be given to lay people clad in white.
There are clansmen with little dust in their eyes who are wasting away through not hearing Dhamma.
There will be those who will understand it.
Then Ven.
Sariputta and Ven.
Ananda, having given this instruction to the householder Anathapindika, got up from their seats and left.
Then, not long after they left, the householder Anathapindika died and reappeared in the Tusita heaven.
§.

Once the Blessed One was staying near Savatthi in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's monastery.
Then King Pasenadi the Kosalan went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down, sat to one side.
Now, at that time Queen Mallika died.
Then a certain man went to the king and whispered in his ear: “Your majesty, Queen Mallika has died.” When this was said, King Pasenadi the Kosalan sat there miserable, sick at heart, his shoulders drooping, his face down, brooding, at a loss for words.
Then the Blessed One saw the king sitting there miserable, sick at heart… at a loss for words, and so said to him, “There are these five things, great king, that cannot be gotten by a contemplative, a brahman, a deva, a Mara, a Brahma, or anyone at all in the world.
Which five?
“'May what is subject to aging not age.' This is something that cannot be gotten by a contemplative, a brahman, a deva, a Mara, a Brahma, or anyone at all in the world.
“'May what is subject to illnes not grow ill.' This is something that cannot be gotten by a contemplative, a brahman, a deva, a Mara, a Brahma, or anyone at all in the world.
“'May what is subject to death not die.' This is something that cannot be gotten by a contemplative, a brahman, a deva, a Mara, a Brahma, or anyone at all in the world.
“'May what is subject to ending not end.' This is something that cannot be gotten by a contemplative, a brahman, a deva, a Mara, a Brahma, or anyone at all in the world.
“'May what is subject to destruction not be destroyed.' This is something that cannot be gotten by a contemplative, a brahman, a deva, a Mara, a Brahma, or anyone at all in the world.
“Now, it happens to an uninstructed run-of-the-mill person that something that is subject to aging ages.
With the aging of what is subject to aging, he does not reflect: 'It doesn't happen only to me that what is subject to aging will age.
To the extent that there are beings — past & future, passing away & re-arising — it happens to all of them that what is subject to aging will age.
And if, with the aging of what is subject to aging, I were to sorrow, grieve, lament, beat my breast, & become distraught, food would not agree with me, my body would become unattractive, my affairs would go untended, my enemies would be gratified and my friends unhappy.' So, with the aging of what is subject to aging, he sorrows, grieves, laments, beats his breast, & becomes distraught.
This is called an uninstructed run-of-the-mill person pierced by the poisoned arrow of sorrow, tormenting himself.
“Furthermore, it happens to an uninstructed run-of-the-mill person that something that is subject to illness grows ill… that something subject to death dies… that something subject to ending ends… that something subject to destruction is destroyed.
With the destruction of what is subject to destruction, he does not reflect: 'It doesn't happen only to me that what is subject to destruction will be destroyed.
To the extent that there are beings — past & future, passing away & re-arising — it happens to all of them that what is subject to destruction will be destroyed.
And if, with the destruction of what is subject to destruction, I were to sorrow, grieve, lament, beat my breast, & become distraught, food would not agree with me, my body would become unattractive, my affairs would go untended, my enemies would be gratified and my friends unhappy.' So, with the destruction of what is subject to destruction, he sorrows, grieves, laments, beats his breast, & becomes distraught.
This is called an uninstructed run-of-the-mill person pierced by the poisoned arrow of sorrow, tormenting himself.
“Now, it happens to a well-instructed disciple of the noble ones that something that is subject to aging ages.
With the aging of what is subject to aging, he reflects: 'It doesn't happen only to me that what is subject to aging will age.
To the extent that there are beings — past & future, passing away & re-arising — it happens to all of them that what is subject to aging will age.
And if, with the aging of what is subject to aging, I were to sorrow, grieve, lament, beat my breast, & become distraught, food would not agree with me, my body would become unattractive, my affairs would go untended, my enemies would be gratified and my friends unhappy.' So, with the aging of what is subject to aging, he does not sorrow, grieve, or lament, does not beat his breast or become distraught.
This is called a well-instructed disciple of the noble ones who has pulled out the poisoned arrow of sorrow pierced with which the uninstructed run-of-the-mill person torments himself.
Sorrowless, arrowless, the disciple of the noble ones is totally unbound right within himself.
“Furthermore, it happens to a well-instructed disciple of the noble ones that something that is subject to illness grows ill… that something subject to death dies… that something subject to ending ends… that something subject to destruction is destroyed.
With the destruction of what is subject to destruction, he reflects: 'It doesn't happen only to me that what is subject to destruction will be destroyed.
To the extent that there are beings — past & future, passing away & re-arising — it happens to all of them that what is subject to destruction will be destroyed.
And if, with the destruction of what is subject to destruction, I were to sorrow, grieve, lament, beat my breast, & become distraught, food would not agree with me, my body would become unattractive, my affairs would go untended, my enemies would be gratified and my friends unhappy.' So, with the destruction of what is subject to destruction, he does not sorrow, grieve, or lament, does not beat his breast or become distraught.
This is called a well-instructed disciple of the noble ones who has pulled out the poisoned arrow of sorrow pierced with which the uninstructed run-of-the-mill person torments himself.
Sorrowless, arrowless, the disciple of the noble ones is totally unbound right within himself.
“These are the five things, great king, that cannot be gotten by a contemplative, a brahman, a deva, a Mara, a Brahma, or anyone at all in the world.
§.
§.
Now at that time a dear and beloved grandson of Visakha, Migara's mother, had died.
So Visakha, Migara's mother — her clothes wet, her hair wet — went to the Blessed One in the middle of the day and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side.
As she was sitting there the Blessed One said to her: “Why have you come here, Visakha — your clothes wet, your hair wet — in the middle of the day?
When this was said, she said to the Blessed One, “My dear and beloved grandson has died.
This is why I have come here — my clothes wet, my hair wet — in the middle of the day.
“Visakha, would you like to have as many children and grandchildren as there are people in Savatthi?
“Yes, lord, I would like to have as many children and grandchildren as there are people in Savatthi.
“But how many people in Savatthi die in the course of a day?
“Sometimes ten people die in Savatthi in the course of a day, sometimes nine… eight… seven… six… five… four… three… two… Sometimes one person dies in Savatthi in the course of a day.
Savatthi is never free from people dying.
“So what do you think, Visakha: Would you ever be free from wet clothes and wet hair?
“No, lord.
Enough of my having as many children and grandchildren as there are people in Savatthi.
“Visakha, those who have a hundred dear ones have a hundred sufferings.
Those who have ninety dear ones have ninety sufferings.
Those who have eighty… seventy… sixty… fifty… forty… thirty… twenty… ten… nine… eight… seven… six… five… four… three… two… Those who have one dear one have one suffering.
For those with no dear ones, there are no sufferings.
They are free from sorrow, free from stain, free from lamentation, I tell you.
Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion exclaimed:
On one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Savatthi in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's monastery.
Now at that time Ven.
Sariputta was staying among the Magadhans in Nalaka village — diseased, in pain, severely ill.
Cunda the novice was his attendant.
Then, because of that illness, Ven.
Sariputta attained total Unbinding.
So Cunda the novice, taking Ven.
Sariputta's bowl & robes, went to Ven.
Ananda in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's monastery, near Savatthi, and on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side.
As he was sitting there he said to Ven.
Ananda: “Venerable sir, Ven.
Sariputta has attained total Unbinding.
Here are his bowl & robes.
“Cunda, my friend, this news is reason for seeing the Blessed One.
Come, let's go to the Blessed One and report this matter to him.
“Yes, venerable sir,” Cunda the novice replied.
So Ven.
Ananda & Cunda the novice went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side.
As they were sitting there, Ven.
Ananda said to him, “Lord, just now Cunda the novice said to me, 'Venerable sir, Ven.
Sariputta has attained total Unbinding.
Here are his bowl & robes.' It was as if my body were drugged, I lost my bearings, things weren't clear to me, on hearing that Ven.
Sariputta had attained total Unbinding.
“But, Ananda, when he attained total Unbinding, did Sariputta take the aggregate of virtue along with him?
Did he take the aggregate of concentration… discernment… release… the aggregate of knowledge & vision of release along with him?
“No, lord, when he attained total Unbinding, Ven.
Sariputta didn't take the aggregate of virtue… concentration… discernment… release… the aggregate of knowledge & vision of release along with him.
It's just that he was my instructor & counselor, one who exhorted, urged, roused, & encouraged me.
He was tireless in teaching the Dhamma, a help to his companions in the holy life.
We miss the nourishment of his Dhamma, the wealth of his Dhamma, his help in the Dhamma.
“But, Ananda, haven't I already taught you the state of growing different with regard to all things dear & appealing, the state of becoming separate, the state of becoming otherwise?
What else is there to expect?
It's impossible that one could forbid anything born, existent, fabricated, & subject to disintegration from disintegrating.
“Just as if the largest limb were to fall off of a great tree composed of heartwood, standing firm; in the same way, Sariputta has attained total Unbinding from this great community of monks composed of heartwood, standing firm.
What else is there to expect?
It's impossible that one could forbid anything born, existent, fabricated, & subject to disintegration from disintegrating.
“Therefore, Ananda, each of you should remain with your self as an island, your self as your refuge, without anything else as a refuge.
Remain with the Dhamma as an island, the Dhamma as your refuge, without anything else as a refuge.
And how does a monk remain with his self as an island, his self as his refuge, without anything else as a refuge?
How does he remain with the Dhamma as an island, the Dhamma as his refuge, without anything else as a refuge?
There is the case where a monk remains focused on the body in & of itself — ardent, alert, & mindful — putting aside greed & distress with reference to the world.
He remains focused on feelings… mind… mental qualities in & of themselves — ardent, alert, & mindful — putting aside greed & distress with reference to the world.
This is how a monk remains with his self as an island, his self as his refuge, without anything else as a refuge, with the Dhamma as an island, the Dhamma as his refuge, without anything else as a refuge.
For those who — now or after I am gone — remain with their self as an island, their self as their refuge, without anything else as a refuge, with the Dhamma as an island, the Dhamma as their refuge, without anything else as a refuge, they will be the highest of the monks who desire training.
On one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Savatthi, in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's monastery.
Then Rohitassa, the son of a deva, in the far extreme of the night, his extreme radiance lighting up the entirety of Jeta's Grove, went to the Blessed One.
On arrival, having bowed down to the Blessed One, he stood to one side.
As he was standing there he said to the Blessed One: “Is it possible, lord, by traveling, to know or see or reach a far end of the cosmos where one does not take birth, age, die, pass away or reappear?
“I tell you, friend, that it is not possible by traveling to know or see or reach a far end of the cosmos where one does not take birth, age, die, pass away, or reappear.
“It is amazing, lord, and awesome, how well that has been said by the Blessed One: 'I tell you, friend, that it is not possible by traveling to know or see or reach a far end of the cosmos where one does not take birth, age, die, pass away, or reappear.' Once I was a seer named Rohitassa, a student of Bhoja, a powerful sky-walker.
My speed was as fast as that of a strong archer — well-trained, a practiced hand, a practiced sharp-shooter — shooting a light arrow across the shadow of a palm tree.
My stride stretched as far as the east sea is from the west.
To me, endowed with such speed, such a stride, there came the desire: 'I will go traveling to the end of the cosmos.' I — with a one-hundred year life, a one-hundred year span — spent one hundred years traveling — apart from the time spent on eating, drinking, chewing & tasting, urinating & defecating, and sleeping to fight off weariness — but without reaching the end of the cosmos I died along the way.
So it is amazing, lord, and awesome, how well that has been said by the Blessed One: 'I tell you, friend, that it is not possible by traveling to know or see or reach a far end of the cosmos where one does not take birth, age, die, pass away, or reappear.' “I tell you, friend, that it is not possible by traveling to know or see or reach a far end of the cosmos where one does not take birth, age, die, pass away, or reappear.
But at the same time, I tell you that there is no making an end of suffering & stress without reaching the end of the cosmos.
Yet it is just within this fathom-long body, with its perception & intellect, that I declare that there is the cosmos, the origination of the cosmos, the cessation of the cosmos, and the path of practice leading to the cessation of the cosmos.
I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying at Varanasi in the Game Refuge at Isipatana.
There he addressed the group of five monks:
“There are these two extremes that are not to be indulged in by one who has gone forth.
Which two?
That which is devoted to sensual pleasure with reference to sensual objects: base, vulgar, common, ignoble, unprofitable; and that which is devoted to self-affliction: painful, ignoble, unprofitable.
Avoiding both of these extremes, the middle way realized by the Tathagata — producing vision, producing knowledge — leads to calm, to direct knowledge, to self-awakening, to Unbinding.
“And what is the middle way realized by the Tathagata that — producing vision, producing knowledge — leads to calm, to direct knowledge, to self-awakening, to Unbinding?
Precisely this Noble Eightfold Path: right view, right resolve, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration.
This is the middle way realized by the Tathagata that — producing vision, producing knowledge — leads to calm, to direct knowledge, to self-awakening, to Unbinding.
“Now this, monks, is the noble truth of stress: Birth is stressful, aging is stressful, death is stressful; sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are stressful; association with the unbeloved is stressful, separation from the loved is stressful, not getting what is wanted is stressful.
In short, the five clinging-aggregates are stressful.
“And this, monks, is the noble truth of the origination of stress: the craving that makes for further becoming — accompanied by passion & delight, relishing now here & now there — i.e., craving for sensual pleasure, craving for becoming, craving for non-becoming.
“And this, monks, is the noble truth of the cessation of stress: the remainderless fading & cessation, renunciation, relinquishment, release, & letting go of that very craving.
“And this, monks, is the noble truth of the way of practice leading to the cessation of stress: precisely this Noble Eightfold Path — right view, right resolve, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration.
“Vision arose, insight arose, discernment arose, knowledge arose, illumination arose within me with regard to things never heard before: 'This is the noble truth of stress'… 'This noble truth of stress is to be comprehended'… 'This noble truth of stress has been comprehended.'
“Vision arose, insight arose, discernment arose, knowledge arose, illumination arose within me with regard to things never heard before: 'This is the noble truth of the origination of stress'… 'This noble truth of the origination of stress is to be abandoned'… 'This noble truth of the origination of stress has been abandoned.'
“Vision arose, insight arose, discernment arose, knowledge arose, illumination arose within me with regard to things never heard before: 'This is the noble truth of the cessation of stress'… 'This noble truth of the cessation of stress is to be directly experienced'… 'This noble truth of the cessation of stress has been directly experienced.'
“Vision arose, insight arose, discernment arose, knowledge arose, illumination arose within me with regard to things never heard before: 'This is the noble truth of the way of practice leading to the cessation of stress'… 'This noble truth of the way of practice leading to the cessation of stress is to be developed'… 'This noble truth of the way of practice leading to the cessation of stress has been developed.'
“And, monks, as long as this knowledge & vision of mine — with its three rounds & twelve permutations concerning these four noble truths as they actually are present — was not pure, I did not claim to have directly awakened to the right self-awakening unexcelled in the cosmos with its devas, Maras, & Brahmas, with its contemplatives & brahmans, its royalty & commonfolk.
But as soon as this knowledge & vision of mine — with its three rounds & twelve permutations concerning these four noble truths as they actually are present — was truly pure, then I did claim to have directly awakened to the right self-awakening unexcelled in the cosmos with its devas, Maras & Brahmas, with its contemplatives & brahmans, its royalty & commonfolk.
Knowledge & vision arose in me: 'Unprovoked is my release.
This is the last birth.
There is now no further becoming.' That is what the Blessed One said.
Gratified, the group of five monks delighted at his words.
And while this explanation was being given, there arose to Ven.
Kondañña the dustless, stainless Dhamma eye: Whatever is subject to origination is all subject to cessation.
“Now what is the noble truth of stress?
Birth is stressful, aging is stressful, death is stressful; sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are stressful; association with the unbeloved is stressful; separation from the loved is stressful; not getting what is wanted is stressful; not getting what is wanted is stressful.
In short, the five clinging-aggregates are stressful.
“And what is birth?
Whatever birth, taking birth, descent, coming-to-be, coming-forth, appearance of aggregates, & acquisition of spheres of the various beings in this or that group of beings, that is called birth.
“And what is aging?
Whatever aging, decrepitude, brokenness, graying, wrinkling, decline of life-force, weakening of the faculties of the various beings in this or that group of beings, that is called aging.
“And what is death?
Whatever deceasing, passing away, breaking up, disappearance, dying, death, completion of time, break up of the aggregates, casting off of the body, interruption in the life faculty of the various beings in this or that group of beings, that is called death.
“And what is sorrow?
Whatever sorrow, sorrowing, sadness, inward sorrow, inward sadness of anyone suffering from misfortune, touched by a painful thing, that is called sorrow.
“And what is lamentation?
Whatever crying, grieving, lamenting, weeping, wailing, lamentation of anyone suffering from misfortune, touched by a painful thing, that is called lamentation.
“And what is pain?
Whatever is experienced as bodily pain, bodily discomfort, pain or discomfort born of bodily contact, that is called pain.
“And what is distress?
Whatever is experienced as mental pain, mental discomfort, pain or discomfort born of mental contact, that is called distress.
“And what is despair?
Whatever despair, despondency, desperation of anyone suffering from misfortune, touched by a painful thing, that is called despair.
“And what is the stress of association with the unbeloved?
There is the case where undesirable, unpleasing, unattractive sights, sounds, aromas, flavors, or tactile sensations occur to one; or one has connection, contact, relationship, interaction with those who wish one ill, who wish for one's harm, who wish for one's discomfort, who wish one no security from the yoke.
This is called the stress of association with the unbeloved.
“And what is the stress of separation from the loved?
There is the case where desirable, pleasing, attractive sights, sounds, aromas, flavors, or tactile sensations do not occur to one; or one has no connection, no contact, no relationship, no interaction with those who wish one well, who wish for one's benefit, who wish for one's comfort, who wish one security from the yoke, nor with one's mother, father, brother, sister, friends, companions, or relatives.
This is called the stress of separation from the loved.
“And what is the stress of not getting what is wanted?
In beings subject to birth, the wish arises, 'O, may we not be subject to birth, and may birth not come to us.' But this is not to be achieved by wishing.
This is the stress of not getting what one wants.
In beings subject to aging… illness… death… sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair, the wish arises, 'O, may we not be subject to aging… illness… death… sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair, and may aging… illness… death… sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair not come to us.' But this is not to be achieved by wishing.
This is the stress of not getting what is wanted.
“And what are the five clinging-aggregates that, in short, are stressful?
Form as a clinging-aggregate, feeling as a clinging-aggregate, perception as a clinging-aggregate, fabrications as a clinging-aggregate, consciousness as a clinging-aggregate: These are called the five clinging-aggregates that, in short, are stressful.
“This is called the noble truth of stress.
The Blessed One said, “Monks, I will teach you the five aggregates & the five clinging-aggregates.
Listen & pay close attention.
I will speak.
“As you say, lord,” the monks responded.
The Blessed One said, “Now what, monks, are the five aggregates?
“Whatever form is past, future, or present; internal or external; blatant or subtle, common or sublime, far or near: that is called the aggregate of form.
“Whatever feeling is past, future, or present; internal or external; blatant or subtle, common or sublime, far or near: that is called the aggregate of feeling.
“Whatever perception is past, future, or present; internal or external; blatant or subtle, common or sublime, far or near: that is called the aggregate of perception.
“Whatever fabrications are past, future, or present; internal or external; blatant or subtle, common or sublime, far or near: those are called the aggregate of fabrication.
“Whatever consciousness is past, future, or present; internal or external; blatant or subtle, common or sublime, far or near: that is called the aggregate of consciousness.
“These are called the five aggregates.
“And what are the five clinging-aggregates?
“Whatever form — past, future, or present; internal or external; blatant or subtle, common or sublime, far or near — is clingable, offers sustenance, and is accompanied with mental fermentation: that is called form as a clinging-aggregate.
“Whatever feeling — past, future, or present; internal or external; blatant or subtle, common or sublime, far or near — is clingable, offers sustenance, and is accompanied with mental fermentation: that is called feeling as a clinging-aggregate.
“Whatever perception — past, future, or present; internal or external; blatant or subtle, common or sublime, far or near — is clingable, offers sustenance, and is accompanied with mental fermentation: that is called perception as a clinging-aggregate.
“Whatever fabrications — past, future, or present; internal or external; blatant or subtle, common or sublime, far or near — are clingable, offer sustenance, and are accompanied with mental fermentation: those are called fabrication as a clinging-aggregate.
“Whatever consciousness — past, future, or present; internal or external; blatant or subtle, common or sublime, far or near — is clingable, offers sustenance, and is accompanied with mental fermentation: that is called consciousness as a clinging-aggregate.
“These are called the five clinging-aggregates.
As he was sitting there, Ven.
Kotthita said to Ven.
Sariputta, “Sariputta my friend, which things should a virtuous monk attend to in an appropriate way?
“A virtuous monk, Kotthita my friend, should attend in an appropriate way to the five clinging-aggregates as inconstant, stressful, a disease, a cancer, an arrow, painful, an affliction, alien, a dissolution, an emptiness, not-self.
Which five?
Form as a clinging-aggregate, feeling… perception… fabrications… consciousness as a clinging-aggregate.
A virtuous monk should attend in an appropriate way to these five clinging-aggregates as inconstant, stressful, a disease, a cancer, an arrow, painful, an affliction, alien, a dissolution, an emptiness, not-self.
For it is possible that a virtuous monk, attending in an appropriate way to these five clinging-aggregates as inconstant… not-self, would realize the fruit of stream-entry.
“Then which things should a monk who has attained stream-entry attend to in an appropriate way?
“A monk who has attained stream-entry should attend in an appropriate way to these five clinging-aggregates as inconstant, stressful, a disease, a cancer, an arrow, painful, an affliction, alien, a dissolution, an emptiness, not-self.
For it is possible that a monk who has attained stream-entry, attending in an appropriate way to these five clinging-aggregates as inconstant… not-self, would realize the fruit of once-returning.
“Then which things should a monk who has attained once-returning attend to in an appropriate way?
“A monk who has attained once-returning should attend in an appropriate way to these five clinging-aggregates as inconstant, stressful, a disease, a cancer, an arrow, painful, an affliction, alien, a dissolution, an emptiness, not-self.
For it is possible that a monk who has attained once-returning, attending in an appropriate way to these five clinging-aggregates as inconstant… not-self, would realize the fruit of non-returning.
“Then which things should a monk who has attained non-returning attend to in an appropriate way?
“A monk who has attained non-returning should attend in an appropriate way to these five clinging-aggregates as inconstant, stressful, a disease, a cancer, an arrow, painful, an affliction, alien, a dissolution, an emptiness, not-self.
For it is possible that a monk who has attained non-returning, attending in an appropriate way to these five clinging-aggregates as inconstant… not-self, would realize the fruit of arahantship.
“Then which things should an arahant attend to in an appropriate way?
“An arahant should attend in an appropriate way to these five clinging-aggregates as inconstant, stressful, a disease, a cancer, an arrow, painful, an affliction, alien, a dissolution, an emptiness, not-self.
Although, for an arahant, there is nothing further to do, and nothing to add to what has been done, still these things — when developed & pursued — lead both to a pleasant abiding in the here-&-now and to mindfulness & alertness.
“Suppose there were a householder or householder's son — rich, wealthy, with many possessions — who was thoroughly well-guarded.
Then there came along a certain man, desiring what was not his benefit, desiring what was not his welfare, desiring his loss of security, desiring to kill him.
The thought would occur to this man: 'It would not be easy to kill this person by force.
What if I were to sneak in and then kill him?'
“So he would go to the householder or householder's son and say, 'May you take me on as a servant, lord.' With that, the householder or householder's son would take the man on as a servant.
“Having been taken on as a servant, the man would rise in the morning before his master, go to bed in the evening only after his master, doing whatever his master ordered, always acting to please him, speaking politely to him.
Then the householder or householder's son would come to regard him as a friend & companion, and would fall into his trust.
When the man realizes, 'This householder or householder's son trusts me,' then encountering him in a solitary place, he would kill him with a sharp knife.
“Now what do you think, my friend Yamaka?
When that man went to the householder or householder's son and said, 'May you take me on as a servant, lord': wasn't he even then a murderer?
And yet although he was a murderer, the householder or householder's son did not know him as 'my murderer.' And when, taken on as a servant, he would rise in the morning before his master, go to bed in the evening only after his master, doing whatever his master ordered, always acting to please him, speaking politely to him: wasn't he even then a murderer?
And yet although he was a murderer, the householder or householder's son did not know him as 'my murderer.' And when he encountered him in a solitary place and killed him with a sharp knife: wasn't he even then a murderer?
And yet although he was a murderer, the householder or householder's son did not know him as 'my murderer.' “Yes, my friend.
“In the same way, an uninstructed, run-of-the-mill person… assumes form to be the self, or the self as possessing form, or form as in the self, or the self as in form.
“He assumes feeling to be the self…
“He assumes perception to be the self…
“He assumes fabrications to be the self…
“He assumes consciousness to be the self, or the self as possessing consciousness, or consciousness as in the self, or the self as in consciousness.
“He does not discern inconstant form, as it actually is present, as 'inconstant form.' He does not discern inconstant feeling, as it actually is present, as 'inconstant feeling.' He does not discern inconstant perception… He does not discern inconstant fabrications… He does not discern inconstant consciousness, as it actually is present, as 'inconstant consciousness.'
“He does not discern stressful form, as it actually is present, as 'stressful form.' He does not discern stressful feeling… He does not discern stressful perception… He does not discern stressful fabrications… He does not discern stressful consciousness, as it actually is present, as 'stressful consciousness.'
“He does not discern not-self form, as it actually is present, as 'not-self form.' He does not discern not-self feeling… He does not discern not-self perception… He does not discern not-self fabrications… He does not discern not-self consciousness, as it actually is present, as 'not-self consciousness.'
“He does not discern fabricated form, as it actually is present, as 'fabricated form.' He does not discern fabricated feeling… He does not discern fabricated perception… He does not discern fabricated fabrications… He does not discern fabricated consciousness, as it actually is present, as 'fabricated consciousness.'
“He does not discern murderous form, as it actually is present, as 'murderous form.' He does not discern murderous feeling… He does not discern murderous perception… He does not discern murderous fabrications… He does not discern murderous consciousness, as it actually is present, as 'murderous consciousness.'
“He gets attached to form, clings to form, & determines it to be 'my self.' He gets attached to feeling… He gets attached to perception… He gets attached to fabrications… He gets attached to consciousness, clings to consciousness, & determines it to be 'my self.' These five clinging-aggregates — attached to, clung to — lead to his long-term loss & suffering.
“Now, the well-instructed, disciple of the noble ones… does not assume form to be the self, or the self as possessing form, or form as in the self, or the self as in form.
“He does not assume feeling to be the self…
“He does not assume perception to be the self…
“He does not assume fabrications to be the self…
“He does not assume consciousness to be the self, or the self as possessing consciousness, or consciousness as in the self, or the self as in consciousness.
“He discerns inconstant form, as it actually is present, as 'inconstant form.' He discerns inconstant feeling… He discerns inconstant perception… He discerns inconstant fabrications… He discerns inconstant consciousness, as it actually is present, as 'inconstant consciousness.'
“He discerns stressful form, as it actually is present, as 'stressful form.' He discerns stressful feeling… He discerns stressful perception… He discerns stressful fabrications… He discerns stressful consciousness, as it actually is present, as 'stressful consciousness.'
“He discerns not-self form, as it actually is present, as 'not-self form.' He discerns not-self feeling… He discerns not-self perception… He discerns not-self fabrications… He discerns not-self consciousness, as it actually is present, as 'not-self consciousness.'
“He discerns fabricated form, as it actually is present, as 'fabricated form.' He discerns fabricated feeling… He discerns fabricated perception… He discerns fabricated fabrications… He discerns fabricated consciousness, as it actually is present, as 'fabricated consciousness.'
“He discerns murderous form, as it actually is present, as 'murderous form.' He discerns murderous feeling… He discerns murderous perception… He discerns murderous fabrications… He discerns murderous consciousness, as it actually is present, as 'murderous consciousness.'
“He does not get attached to form, does not cling to form, does not determine it to be 'my self.' He does not get attached to feeling… He does not get attached to perception… He does not get attached to fabrications… He does not get attached to consciousness, does not cling to consciousness, does not determine it to be 'my self.' These five clinging-aggregates — not attached to, not clung to — lead to his long-term happiness & well-being.
“Even so, my friend Sariputta, are those who have people like you as their fellows in the holy life, teaching them, admonishing them out of sympathy, desiring their welfare.
For now that I have heard this explanation of the Dhamma from you, my mind — through lack of clinging/sustenance — has been released from the effluents.
“Monks, suppose there were a river, flowing down from the mountains, going far, its current swift, carrying everything with it, and — holding on to both banks — kasa grasses, kusa grasses, reeds, birana grasses, & trees were growing.
Then a man swept away by the current would grab hold of the kasa grasses, but they would tear away, and so from that cause he would come to disaster.
He would grab hold of the kusa grasses… the reeds… the birana grasses… the trees, but they would tear away, and so from that cause he would come to disaster.
“In the same way, there is the case where an uninstructed, run-of-the-mill person — who has no regard for noble ones, is not well-versed or disciplined in their Dhamma; who has no regard for men of integrity, is not well-versed or disciplined in their Dhamma — assumes form to be the self, or the self as possessing form, or form as in the self, or the self as in form.
That form tears away from him, and so from that cause he would come to disaster.
“He assumes feeling to be the self, or the self as possessing feeling, or feeling as in the self, or the self as in feeling.
That feeling tears away from him, and so from that cause he would come to disaster.
“He assumes perception to be the self, or the self as possessing perception, or perception as in the self, or the self as in perception.
That perception tears away from him, and so from that cause he would come to disaster.
“He assumes fabrications to be the self, or the self as possessing fabrications, or fabrications as in the self, or the self as in fabrications.
Those fabrications tear away from him, and so from that cause he would come to disaster.
“He assumes consciousness to be the self, or the self as possessing consciousness, or consciousness as in the self, or the self as in consciousness.
That consciousness tears away from him, and so from that cause he would come to disaster.
“What do you think, monks — Is form constant or inconstant?
“Inconstant, lord.
“And is that which is inconstant easeful or stressful?
“Stressful, lord.
“And is it fitting to regard what is inconstant, stressful, subject to change as: 'This is mine.
This is my self.
This is what I am'?
“No, lord.
“…Is feeling constant or inconstant?
“Inconstant, lord.”…
”…Is perception constant or inconstant?
“Inconstant, lord.”…
”…Are fabrications constant or inconstant?
“Inconstant, lord.”…
“What do you think, monks — Is consciousness constant or inconstant?
“Inconstant, lord.
“And is that which is inconstant easeful or stressful?
“Stressful, lord.
“And is it fitting to regard what is inconstant, stressful, subject to change as: 'This is mine.
This is my self.
This is what I am'?
“No, lord.
“Thus, monks, any form whatsoever that is past, future, or present; internal or external; blatant or subtle; common or sublime; far or near: every form is to be seen as it actually is with right discernment as: 'This is not mine.
This is not my self.
This is not what I am.'
“Any feeling whatsoever…
“Any perception whatsoever…
“Any fabrications whatsoever…
“Any consciousness whatsoever that is past, future, or present; internal or external; blatant or subtle; common or sublime; far or near: every consciousness is to be seen as it actually is with right discernment as: 'This is not mine.
This is not my self.
This is not what I am.'
“Seeing thus, the well-instructed disciple of the noble ones grows disenchanted with form, disenchanted with feeling, disenchanted with perception, disenchanted with fabrications, disenchanted with consciousness.
Disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate.
Through dispassion, he is fully released.
With full release, there is the knowledge, 'Fully released.' He discerns that 'Birth is ended, the holy life fulfilled, the task done.
There is nothing further for this world.'
Then, early in the morning, Cala the nun put on her robes and, taking her bowl & outer robe, went into Savatthi for alms.
When she had gone for alms in Savatthi and had returned from her alms round, after her meal she went to the Grove of the Blind to spend the day.
Having gone deep into the Grove of the Blind, she sat down at the foot of a tree for the day's abiding.
Then Mara the Evil One, wanting to arouse fear, horripilation, & terror in her, wanting to make her fall from solitude, approached her & said, “What is it that you don't approve of, nun?
“I don't approve of birth, my friend.
Then Mara the Evil One — sad & dejected at realizing, “Cala the nun knows me” — vanished right there.
I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Savatthi in the Eastern Monastery, the palace of Migara's mother.
Now on that occasion the Blessed One, on emerging from seclusion in the late afternoon, sat warming his back in the western sun.
Then Ven.
Ananda went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to the Blessed One, massaged the Blessed One's limbs with his hand and said, “It's amazing, lord.
It's astounding, how the Blessed One's complexion is no longer so clear & bright; his limbs are flabby & wrinkled; his back, bent forward; there's a discernible change in his faculties — the faculty of the eye, the faculty of the ear, the faculty of the nose, the faculty of the tongue, the faculty of the body.
“That's the way it is, Ananda.
When young, one is subject to aging; when healthy, subject to illness; when alive, subject to death.
The complexion is no longer so clear & bright; the limbs are flabby & wrinkled; the back, bent forward; there's a discernible change in the faculties — the faculty of the eye, the faculty of the ear, the faculty of the nose, the faculty of the tongue, the faculty of the body.
That is what the Blessed One said.
Having said that, the One Well-gone, the Teacher, said further:
Janussonin: I hold that there is no one who, subject to death, is not afraid or in terror of death.
The Buddha: There are those who, subject to death, are afraid and in terror of death.
And there are those who, subject to death, are not afraid or in terror of death.
And who is the person who, subject to death, is afraid and in terror of death?
There is the case of the person who has not abandoned passion, desire, fondness, thirst, fever, and craving for sensuality.
When he comes down with a serious disease, the thought occurs to him, “O, those beloved sensual pleasures will be taken from me, and I will be taken from them!” He grieves and is tormented, weeps, beats his breast, and grows delirious…
Furthermore, there is the case of the person who has not abandoned passion, desire, fondness, thirst, fever, and craving for the body.
When he is touched by a serious disease, the thought occurs to him, “O, my beloved body will be taken from me, and I will be taken from my body!” He grieves and is tormented, weeps, beats his breast, and grows delirious…
Furthermore, there is the case of the person who has not done what is good, has not done what is skillful, has not given protection to those in fear, and instead has done what is evil, savage, and cruel.
When he comes down with a serious disease, the thought occurs to him, “…After death I am headed for the destination of those who have done what is evil, savage, and cruel.” He grieves and is tormented, weeps, beats his breast, and grows delirious…
Furthermore, there is the case of the person in doubt and perplexity, who has not arrived at certainty with regard to the True Dhamma.
When he comes down with a serious disease, the thought occurs to him, “How doubtful and perplexed I am!
I have not arrived at any certainty with regard to the True Dhamma!” He grieves and is tormented, weeps, beats his breast, and grows delirious.
This is another person who, subject to death, is afraid and in terror of death.
And who is the person who, subject to death, is not afraid or in terror of death?
There is the case of the person who has abandoned passion, desire, fondness, thirst, fever, and craving for sensuality… who has abandoned passion, desire, fondness, thirst, fever, and craving for the body… who has done what is good, what is skillful, has given protection to those in fear, and has not done what is evil, savage, or cruel… who has no doubt or perplexity, who has arrived at certainty with regard to the True Dhamma.
When he comes down with a serious disease… he does not grieve, is not tormented, does not weep or beat his breast or grow delirious.
This is another person who, subject to death, is not afraid or in terror of death.
“Gain arises for an uninstructed run-of-the-mill person.
He does not reflect, 'Gain has arisen for me.
It is inconstant, stressful, & subject to change.' He does not discern it as it actually is.
“Loss arises… Status arises… Disgrace arises… Censure arises… Praise arises… Pleasure arises…
“Pain arises.
He does not reflect, 'Pain has arisen for me.
It is inconstant, stressful, & subject to change.' He does not discern it as it actually is.
“His mind remains consumed with the gain.
His mind remains consumed with the loss… with the status… the disgrace… the censure… the praise… the pleasure.
His mind remains consumed with the pain.
“He welcomes the arisen gain and rebels against the arisen loss.
He welcomes the arisen status and rebels against the arisen disgrace.
He welcomes the arisen praise and rebels against the arisen censure.
He welcomes the arisen pleasure and rebels against the arisen pain.
As he is thus engaged in welcoming & rebelling, he is not released from birth, aging, or death; from sorrows, lamentations, pains, distresses, or despairs.
He is not released, I tell you, from suffering & stress.
“Now, gain arises for a well-instructed disciple of the noble ones.
He reflects, 'Gain has arisen for me.
It is inconstant, stressful, & subject to change.' He discerns it as it actually is.
“Loss arises… Status arises… Disgrace arises… Censure arises… Praise arises… Pleasure arises…
“Pain arises.
He reflects, 'Pain has arisen for me.
It is inconstant, stressful, & subject to change.' He discerns it as it actually is.
“His mind does not remain consumed with the gain.
His mind does not remain consumed with the loss… with the status… the disgrace… the censure… the praise… the pleasure.
His mind does not remain consumed with the pain.
“He does not welcome the arisen gain, or rebel against the arisen loss.
He does not welcome the arisen status, or rebel against the arisen disgrace.
He does not welcome the arisen praise, or rebel against the arisen censure.
He does not welcome the arisen pleasure, or rebel against the arisen pain.
As he thus abandons welcoming & rebelling, he is released from birth, aging, & death; from sorrows, lamentations, pains, distresses, & despairs.
He is released, I tell you, from suffering & stress.
“This is the difference, this the distinction, this the distinguishing factor between the well-instructed disciple of the noble ones and the uninstructed run-of-the-mill person.
“'It's through adversity that a person's endurance may be known, and then only after a long period, not a short period; by one who is attentive, not by one who is inattentive; by one who is discerning, not by one who is not discerning': Thus was it said.
And in reference to what was it said?
“There is the case where a person, suffering loss of relatives, loss of wealth, or loss through disease, does not reflect: 'That's how it is when living together in the world.
That's how it is when gaining a personal identity.
When there is living in the world, when there is the gaining of a personal identity, these eight worldly conditions spin after the world, and the world spins after these eight worldly conditions: gain, loss, status, disgrace, censure, praise, pleasure, & pain.' Suffering loss of relatives, loss of wealth, or loss through disease, he sorrows, grieves, & laments, beats his breast, becomes distraught.
And then there is the case where a person, suffering loss of relatives, loss of wealth, or loss through disease, reflects: 'That's how it is when living together in the world.
That's how it is when gaining a personal identity.
When there is living in the world, when there is the gaining of a personal identity, these eight worldly conditions spin after the world, and the world spins after these eight worldly conditions: gain, loss, status, disgrace, censure, praise, pleasure, & pain.' Suffering loss of relatives, loss of wealth, or loss through disease, he does not sorrow, grieve, or lament, does not beat his breast or become distraught.
“'It's through adversity that a person's endurance may be known, and then only after a long period, not a short period; by one who is attentive, not by one who is inattentive; by one who is discerning, not by one who is not discerning': Thus was it said.
And in reference to this was it said.
Now at that time the dear and beloved only son of a certain lay follower had died.
So a large number of lay followers — their clothes wet, their hair wet — went to the Blessed One in the middle of the day and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side.
As they were sitting there the Blessed One said to them: “Why have you come here — your clothes wet, your hair wet — in the middle of the day?
When this was said, the lay follower said to the Blessed One, “My dear and beloved only son has died.
This is why we have come here — our clothes wet, our hair wet — in the middle of the day.
Then, on realizing the significance of that, the Blessed One on that occasion exclaimed:
I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Savatthi at Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's monastery.
Now at that time a certain householder's dear & beloved little son, his only child, had died.
Because of his death, the father had no desire to work or to eat.
He kept going to the cemetery and crying out, “Where have you gone, my only little child?
Where have you gone, my only little child?
Then he went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side.
As he was sitting there the Blessed One said to him, “Householder, your faculties are not those of one who is steady in his own mind.
There is an aberration in your faculties.
“Lord, how could there not be an aberration in my faculties?
My dear & beloved little son, my only child, has died.
Because of his death, I have no desire to work or to eat.
I keep going to the cemetery and crying out, 'Where have you gone, my only little child?
Where have you gone, my only little child?' “That's the way it is, householder.
That's the way it is — for sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear.
“But lord, who would ever think that sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear?
Happiness & joy are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear.” So the householder, not delighting in the Blessed One's words, rejecting the Blessed One's words, got up from his seat and left.
Now at that time a large number of gamblers were playing dice not far from the Blessed One.
So the householder went to them and, on arrival, said to them, “Just now, venerable sirs, I went to Gotama the contemplative and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side.
As I was sitting there, Gotama the contemplative said to me, 'Householder, your faculties are not those of one who is steady in his own mind.
There is an aberration in your faculties.'
“When this was said, I said to him, 'Lord, how could there not be an aberration in my faculties?
My dear & beloved little son, my only child, has died.
Because of his death, I have no desire to work or to eat.
I keep going to the cemetery and crying out, “Where have you gone, my only little child?
Where have you gone, my only little child?”'
“'That's the way it is, householder.
That's the way it is — for sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear.'
“'But, lord, who would ever think that sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear?
Happiness & joy are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear.' So, not delighting in the words of Gotama the contemplative, rejecting them, I got up from my seat and left.
“That's the way it is, householder.
That's the way it is.
Happiness & joy are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear.
So the householder left, thinking, “I agree with the gamblers.
Eventually, word of this conversation made its way into the king's inner chambers.
Then King Pasenadi Kosala addressed Queen Mallika, “Mallika, your contemplative, Gotama, has said this: 'Sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear.' “If that was said by the Blessed One, great king, then that's the way it is.
“No matter what Gotama the contemplative says, Mallika endorses it: 'If that was said by the Blessed One, great king, then that's the way it is.' Just as, no matter what his teacher says, a pupil endorses it: 'That's the way it is, teacher.
That's the way is.' In the same way, no matter what Gotama the contemplative says, Mallika endorses it: 'If that was said by the Blessed One, great king, then that's the way it is.' Go away, Mallika!
Out of my sight!
Then Queen Mallika called for the brahman Nalijangha: “Come, brahman.
Go to the Blessed One and, on arrival, showing reverence with your head to his feet in my name, ask whether he is free from illness & affliction, is carefree, strong, & living in comfort, saying: 'Queen Mallika, lord, shows reverence with her head to your feet and asks whether you are free from illness & affliction, are carefree, strong, & living in comfort.' And then say: 'Lord, did the Blessed One say that sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear?' Whatever the Blessed One says, remember it well and tell it to me.
For Tathagatas do not speak what is untrue.
“Yes, madam,” the brahman Nalijangha responded to Queen Mallika.
Going to the Blessed One, on arrival he exchanged courteous greetings with the Blessed One.
After an exchange of friendly greetings & courtesies, he sat to one side.
As he was sitting there he said to the Blessed One: “Master Gotama, Queen Mallika shows reverence with her head to your feet and asks whether you are free from illness & affliction, are carefree, strong, & living in comfort.
And she says further: 'Lord, did the Blessed One say that sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear?' “That's the way it is, brahman.
That's the way it is.
Sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear.
And it's through this sequence of events that it may be understood how sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear.
“Once in this same Savatthi there was a woman whose mother died.
Owing to her mother's death she went mad, out of her mind, and wandering from street to street, crossroads to crossroads, would say, 'Have you seen my mother?
Have you seen my mother?' It's through this sequence of events that it may be understood how sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear.
“Once in this same Savatthi there was a woman whose father died… whose brother died… whose sister died… whose son died… whose daughter died… whose husband died.
Owing to his death she went mad, out of her mind, and wandering from street to street, crossroads to crossroads, would say, 'Have you seen my husband?
Have you seen my husband?' It's through this sequence of events that it may be understood how sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear.
“Once in this same Savatthi there was a man whose mother died.
Owing to her death he went mad, out of his mind, and wandering from street to street, crossroads to crossroads, would say, 'Have you seen my mother?
Have you seen my mother?' It's through this sequence of events that it may be understood how sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear.
“Once in this same Savatthi there was a man whose father died… whose brother died… whose sister died… whose son died… whose daughter died… whose wife died.
Owing to her death he went mad, out of his mind, and wandering from street to street, crossroads to crossroads, would say, 'Have you seen my wife?
Have you seen my wife?' It's through this sequence of events that it may be understood how sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear.
“Once in this same Savatthi there was a wife who went to her relatives' home.
Her relatives, having separated her from her husband, wanted to give her to another against her will.
So she said to her husband, 'These relatives of mine, having separated us, want to give me to another against my will,' whereupon he cut her in two and slashed himself open, thinking, 'Dead we will be together.' It's through this sequence of events that it may be understood how sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear.
Then the brahman Nalijangha, delighting in & approving of the Blessed One's words, got up from his seat and went to Queen Mallika.
On arrival, he told her all that had been said in his conversation with the Blessed One.
Then Queen Mallika went to King Pasenadi Kosala and on arrival said to him, “What do you think, great king: Is Princess Vajiri dear to you?
“Yes, Mallika, Princess Vajiri is dear to me.
“And what do you think: would sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair arise in you from any change & aberration in Princess Vajiri?
“Mallika, any change & aberration in Princess Vajiri would mean an aberration of my very life.
How could sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair not arise in me?
“Great king, it was in connection with this that the Blessed One — the One who knows, the One who sees, worthy, & rightly self-awakened — said, 'Sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear.'
“Now what do you think, great king: Is the noble Queen Vasabha dear to you?… Is General Vidudabha dear to you?… Am I dear to you?
“Yes, Mallika, you are dear to me.
“And what do you think: would sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair arise in you from any change & aberration in me?
“Mallika, any change & aberration in you would mean an aberration of my very life.
How could sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair not arise in me?
“Great king, it was in connection with this that the Blessed One — the One who knows, the One who sees, worthy, & rightly self-awakened — said, 'Sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear.'
“Now what do you think, great king: Are the Kasis & Kosalans dear to you?
“Yes, Mallika, the Kasis & Kosalans are dear to me.
It is through the might of the Kasis & Kosalans that we use Kasi sandalwood and wear garlands, scents, & ointments.
“And what do you think: would sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair arise in you from any change & aberration in the Kasis & Kosalans?
“Mallika, any change & aberration in the Kasis & Kosalans would mean an aberration of my very life.
How could sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair not arise in me?
“Great king, it was in connection with this that the Blessed One — the One who knows, the One who sees, worthy, & rightly self-awakened — said, 'Sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair are born from one who is dear, come springing from one who is dear.' “It's amazing, Mallika.
It's astounding: how deeply the Blessed One sees, having pierced through, as it were, with discernment.
Come Mallika: Give me the ablution water.” Then King Pasenadi Kosala, rising from his seat and arranging his upper robe over one shoulder, paid homage in the direction of the Blessed One with his hands palm-to-palm in front of his heart, and exclaimed three times:
This was said by the Blessed One, said by the arahant, so I have heard: “I am a brahman, responsive to requests, open-handed, bearing my last body, an unsurpassed doctor & surgeon.
You are my children, my sons, born from my mouth, born of the Dhamma, created by the Dhamma, heirs to the Dhamma, not heirs in material things.
“Both formerly & now, it is only stress that I describe, and the cessation of stress.
Once the Blessed One was staying at Kosambi in the Simsapa forest.
Then, picking up a few Simsapa leaves with his hand, he asked the monks, “What do you think, monks: Which are more numerous, the few Simsapa leaves in my hand or those overhead in the Simsapa forest?
'The leaves in the hand of the Blessed One are few in number, lord.
Those overhead in the forest are far more numerous.
“In the same way, monks, those things that I have known with direct knowledge but have not taught are far more numerous.
And why haven't I taught them?
Because they are not connected with the goal, do not relate to the rudiments of the holy life, and do not lead to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to calm, to direct knowledge, to self-awakening, to Unbinding.
That is why I have not taught them.
“And what have I taught?
'This is stress… This is the origination of stress… This is the cessation of stress… This is the path of practice leading to the cessation of stress': This is what I have taught.
And why have I taught these things?
Because they are connected with the goal, relate to the rudiments of the holy life, and lead to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to calm, to direct knowledge, to self-awakening, to Unbinding.
This is why I have taught them.
“Therefore your duty is the contemplation, 'This is stress… This is the origination of stress… This is the cessation of stress.' Your duty is the contemplation, 'This is the path of practice leading to the cessation of stress.'
Then the monks went to Ven.
Sariputta.
On arrival, they exchanged courteous greetings with him.
After an exchange of friendly greetings & courtesies, they sat to one side.
As they were sitting there, they said to Ven.
Sariputta, “Friend Sariputta, we want to go to the countryside of the outlying districts and to take up residence there.
We have already informed the Teacher.
“Friends, in foreign lands there are wise nobles & brahmans, householders & contemplatives — for the people there are wise & discriminating — who will question a monk: 'What is your teacher's doctrine?
What does he teach?' Have you listened well to the teachings — grasped them well, attended to them well, considered them well, penetrated them well by means of discernment — so that in answering you will speak in line with what the Blessed One has said, will not misrepresent the Blessed One with what is unfactual, will answer in line with the Dhamma, and no one whose thinking is in line with the Dhamma will have grounds for criticizing you?
“We would come from a long way away to hear the explication of these words in Ven.
Sariputta's presence.
It would be good if Ven.
Sariputta himself would enlighten us as to their meaning.
“Then in that case, friends, listen & pay close attention.
I will speak.
“As you say, friend,” the monks responded.
Ven.
Sariputta said: “Friends, in foreign lands there are wise nobles & brahmans, householders & contemplatives — for the people there are wise & discriminating — who will question a monk: 'What is your teacher's doctrine?
What does he teach?' Thus asked, you should answer, 'Our teacher teaches the subduing of passion & desire.'
“Having thus been answered, there may be wise nobles & brahmans, householders & contemplatives… who will question you further, 'And your teacher teaches the subduing of passion & desire for what?' Thus asked, you should answer, 'Our teacher teaches the subduing of passion & desire for form… for feeling… for perception… for fabrications.
Our teacher teaches the subduing of passion & desire for consciousness.'
“Having thus been answered, there may be wise nobles & brahmans, householders & contemplatives… who will question you further, 'And seeing what danger does your teacher teach the subduing of passion & desire for form… for feeling… for perception… for fabrications.
Seeing what danger does your teacher teach the subduing of passion & desire for consciousness?'
Thus asked, you should answer, 'When one is not free from passion, desire, love, thirst, fever, & craving for form, then from any change & alteration in that form, there arises sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, & despair.
When one is not free from passion… for feeling… for perception… for fabrications… When one is not free from passion, desire, love, thirst, fever, & craving for consciousness, then from any change & alteration in that consciousness, there arise sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, & despair.
Seeing this danger, our teacher teaches the subduing of passion & desire for form… for feeling… for perception… for fabrications.
Seeing this danger our teacher teaches the subduing of passion & desire for consciousness.'
“Having thus been answered, there may be wise nobles & brahmans, householders & contemplatives… who will question you further, 'And seeing what benefit does your teacher teach the subduing of passion & desire for form… for feeling… for perception… for fabrications.
Seeing what benefit does your teacher teach the subduing of passion & desire for consciousness?'
Thus asked, you should answer, 'When one is free from passion, desire, love, thirst, fever, & craving for form, then with any change & alteration in that form, there does not arise any sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, or despair.
When one is free from passion… for feeling… for perception… for fabrications… When one is free from passion, desire, love, thirst, fever, & craving for consciousness, then with any change & alteration in that consciousness, there does not arise any sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, or despair.
Seeing this benefit, our teacher teaches the subduing of passion & desire for form… for feeling… for perception… for fabrications.
Seeing this benefit our teacher teaches the subduing of passion & desire for consciousness.'
“Friends, if one who entered & remained in unskillful mental qualities were to have a pleasant abiding in the here & now — unthreatened, undespairing, unfeverish — and on the break-up of the body, after death, could expect a good destination, then the Blessed One would not advocate the abandoning of unskillful mental qualities.
But because one who enters & remains in unskillful mental qualities has a stressful abiding in the here & now — threatened, despairing, & feverish — and on the break-up of the body, after death, can expect a bad destination, that is why the Blessed One advocates the abandoning of unskillful mental qualities.
“If one who entered & remained in skillful mental qualities were to have a stressful abiding in the here & now — threatened, despairing, & feverish — and on the break-up of the body, after death, could expect a bad destination, then the Blessed One would not advocate entering into skillful mental qualities.
But because one who enters & remains in skillful mental qualities has a pleasant abiding in the here & now — unthreatened, undespairing, unfeverish — and on the break-up of the body, after death, can expect a good destination, that is why the Blessed One advocates entering into skillful mental qualities.
“Monks, doctors give a purgative for warding off diseases caused by bile, diseases caused by phlegm, diseases caused by the internal wind property.
There is a purging there; I don't say that there's not, but it sometimes succeeds and sometimes fails.
So I will teach you the noble purgative that always succeeds and never fails, a purgative whereby beings subject to birth are freed from birth; beings subject to aging are freed from aging; beings subject to death are freed from death; beings subject to sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress & despair are freed from sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress & despair.
Listen & pay close attention.
I will speak.
“As you say, lord,” the monks responded.
The Blessed One said: “Now, what is the noble purgative that always succeeds and never fails, a purgative whereby beings subject to birth are freed from birth; beings subject to aging are freed from aging; beings subject to death are freed from death; beings subject to sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress & despair are freed from sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress & despair?
“In one who has right view, wrong view is purged away, and the many evil, unskillful mental qualities that come into play in dependence on wrong view are purged away as well, while the many skillful mental qualities that depend on right view go to the culmination of their development.
“In one who has right resolve, wrong resolve is purged away…
“In one who has right speech, wrong speech is purged away…
“In one who has right action, wrong action is purged away…
“In one who has right livelihood, wrong livelihood is purged away…
“In one who has right effort, wrong effort is purged away…
“In one who has right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is purged away…
“In one who has right concentration, wrong concentration is purged away…
“In one who has right knowledge, wrong knowledge is purged away…
“In one who has right release, wrong release is purged away, and the many evil, unskillful mental qualities that come into play in dependence on wrong release are purged away as well, while the many skillful mental qualities that depend on right release go to the culmination of their development.
“This, monks, is the noble purgative that always succeeds and never fails, a purgative whereby beings subject to birth are freed from birth; beings subject to aging are freed from aging; beings subject to death are freed from death; beings subject to sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress & despair are freed from sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress & despair.
“There are these three types of sick people to be found existing in the world.
Which three?
“There is the case of the sick person who — regardless of whether he does or does not receive amenable food, regardless of whether he does or does not receive amenable medicine, regardless of whether he does or does not receive proper nursing — will not recover from that illness.
There is the case of the sick person who — regardless of whether he does or does not receive amenable food, regardless of whether he does or does not receive amenable medicine, regardless of whether he does or does not receive proper nursing — will recover from that illness.
There is the case of the sick person who will recover from that illness if he receives amenable food, amenable medicine, & proper nursing, but not if he doesn't.
“Now, it is because of the sick person who will recover from that illness if he receives amenable food, amenable medicine, & proper nursing — but not if he doesn't — that food for the sick has been allowed, medicine for the sick has been allowed, nursing for the sick has been allowed.
And it is because there is this sort of sick person that the other sorts of sick persons are to be nursed as well.
“These are the three types of sick people to be found existing in the world.
“In the same way, these three types of people, like the three types of sick people, are to be found existing in the world.
Which three?
“There is the case of the person who — regardless of whether he does or doesn't get to see the Tathagata, regardless of whether he does or doesn't get to hear the Dhamma & Discipline proclaimed by the Tathagatha — will not alight on the lawfulness, the rightness of skillful mental qualities.
There is the case of the person who — regardless of whether he does or doesn't get to see the Tathagata, regardless of whether he does or doesn't get to hear the Dhamma & Discipline proclaimed by the Tathagatha — will alight on the lawfulness, the rightness of skillful mental qualities.
There is the case of the person who will alight on the lawfulness, the rightness of skillful mental qualities if he gets to see the Tathagata and gets to hear the Dhamma & Discipline proclaimed by the Tathagatha, but not if he doesn't.
“Now, it is because of the person who will alight on the lawfulness, the rightness of skillful mental qualities if he gets to see the Tathagata and gets to hear the Dhamma & Discipline proclaimed by the Tathagata — but not if he doesn't — that the teaching of the Dhamma has been allowed.
And it is because there is this sort of person that the other sorts of persons are to be taught the Dhamma as well.
“These are the three types of people, like the three types of sick people, to be found existing in the world.
Then at that moment the Blessed One exclaimed,
When this was said, Magandiya the wanderer said to the Blessed One, “It's amazing, master Gotama.
It's astounding, how this, too, is well-stated by master Gotama: 'Freedom from disease: the foremost good fortune.
Unbinding: the foremost ease.' We have also heard this said by earlier wanderers in the lineage of our teachers: 'Freedom from disease: the foremost good fortune.
Unbinding: the foremost ease.' This agrees with that.
“But as for what you have heard said by earlier wanderers in the lineage of your teachers, Magandiya — 'Freedom from disease: the foremost good fortune.
Unbinding: the foremost ease' — which freedom from disease is that, which Unbinding?
When this was said, Magandiya the wanderer rubbed his own limbs with his hand.
“This is that freedom from disease, master Gotama,” he said.
“This is that Unbinding.
For I am now free from disease, happy, and nothing afflicts me.
“Magandiya, it's just as if there were a man blind from birth who couldn't see black objects… white… blue… yellow… red… or pink objects; who couldn't see even or uneven places, the stars, the sun, or the moon.
He would hear a man with good eyesight saying, 'How wonderful, good sirs, is a white cloth — beautiful, spotless, & clean.' He would go in search of something white.
Then another man would fool him with a grimy, oil-stained rag: 'Here, my good man, is a white cloth — beautiful, spotless, & clean.' The blind man would take it and put it on.
Having put it on, gratified, he would exclaim words of gratification, 'How wonderful, good sirs, is a white cloth — beautiful, spotless, & clean.' Now what do you think, Magandiya?
When that man blind from birth took the grimy, oil-stained rag and put it on; and, having put it on, gratified, exclaimed words of gratification, 'How wonderful, good sirs, is a white cloth — beautiful, spotless, & clean': Did he do so knowing & seeing, or out of faith in the man with good eyesight?
“Of course he did it not knowing & not seeing, master Gotama, but out of faith in the man with good eyesight.
“In the same way, Magandiya, the wanderers of other sects are blind & eyeless.
Without knowing freedom from disease, without seeing Unbinding, they still speak this verse:
“This verse was stated by earlier worthy ones, fully self-awakened:
“But now it has gradually become a verse of run-of-the-mill people.
“This body, Magandiya, is a disease, a cancer, an arrow, painful, an affliction.
And yet you say, with reference to this body, which is a disease, a cancer, an arrow, painful, an affliction: 'This is that freedom from disease, master Gotama.
This is that Unbinding,' for you don't have the noble vision with which you would know freedom from disease and see Unbinding.
“I'm convinced, master Gotama, that you can teach me the Dhamma in such a way that I would know freedom from disease, that I would see Unbinding.
“Magandiya, it's just as if there were a man blind from birth who couldn't see black objects… white… blue… yellow… red… the sun or the moon.
His friends, companions, & relatives would take him to a doctor.
The doctor would concoct medicine for him, but in spite of the medicine his eyesight would not appear or grow clear.
What do you think, Magandiya?
Would that doctor have nothing but his share of weariness & disappointment?
“Yes, master Gotama.
“In the same way, Magandiya, if I were to teach you the Dhamma — 'This is that freedom from disease; this is that Unbinding' — and you on your part did not know freedom from disease or see Unbinding, that would be wearisome for me; that would be troublesome for me.
“I'm convinced, master Gotama, that you can teach me the Dhamma in such a way that I would know freedom from disease, that I would see Unbinding.
“Magandiya, it's just as if there were a man blind from birth who couldn't see black objects… white… blue… yellow… red… the sun or the moon.
Now suppose that a certain man were to take a grimy, oil-stained rag and fool him, saying, 'Here, my good man, is a white cloth — beautiful, spotless, & clean.' The blind man would take it and put it on.
“Then his friends, companions, & relatives would take him to a doctor.
The doctor would concoct medicine for him: purges from above & purges from below, ointments & counter-ointments and treatments through the nose.
And thanks to the medicine his eyesight would appear & grow clear.
Then together with the arising of his eyesight, he would abandon whatever passion & delight he felt for that grimy, oil-stained rag.
And he would regard that man as an enemy & no friend at all, and think that he deserved to be killed.
'My gosh, how long have I been fooled, cheated, & deceived by that man & his grimy, oil-stained rag!
— “Here, my good man, is a white cloth — beautiful, spotless, & clean.”'
“In the same way, Magandiya, if I were to teach you the Dhamma — 'This is that freedom from Disease; this is that Unbinding' — and you on your part were to know that freedom from Disease and see that Unbinding, then together with the arising of your eyesight you would abandon whatever passion & delight you felt with regard for the five clinging-aggregates.
And it would occur to you, 'My gosh, how long have I been fooled, cheated, & deceived by this mind!
For in clinging, it was just form that I was clinging to… it was just feeling… just perception… just fabrications… just consciousness that I was clinging to.
With my clinging as a requisite condition, there arises becoming… birth… aging & death… sorrow, lamentation, pains, distresses, & despairs.
And thus is the origin of this entire mass of stress.' “I'm convinced, master Gotama, that you can teach me the Dhamma in such a way that I might rise up from this seat cured of my blindness.
“In that case, Magandiya, associate with men of integrity.
When you associate with men of integrity, you will hear the true Dhamma.
When you hear the true Dhamma, you will practice the Dhamma in accordance with the Dhamma.
When you practice the Dhamma in accordance with the Dhamma, you will know & see for yourself: 'These things are diseases, cancers, arrows.
And here is where diseases, cancers, & arrows cease without trace.
With the cessation of my clinging comes the cessation of becoming.
With the cessation of becoming comes the cessation of birth.
With the cessation of birth then aging & death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, & despair all cease.
Such is the cessation of this entire mass of suffering & stress.
“Suppose that a man were wounded with an arrow thickly smeared with poison.
His friends & companions, kinsmen & relatives would provide him with a surgeon.
The surgeon would cut around the opening of the wound with a knife and then would probe for the arrow with a probe.
He then would pull out the arrow and extract the poison, leaving no residue behind.
Knowing that no residue was left behind, he would say, 'My good man, your arrow has been pulled out.
The poison has been extracted, with no residue left behind, so it is not enough to do you harm.
Eat suitable food.
Don't eat unsuitable food, or else the wound will fester.
Wash the wound frequently, smear it with an ointment frequently, so that blood & pus don't fill the opening of the wound.
Don't walk around in the wind & sun, or else dust & dirt may contaminate the opening of the wound.
Keep looking after the wound, my good man, and work for its healing.'
“The thought would occur to the man: 'My arrow has been pulled out.
The poison has been extracted with no residue left behind, so it is not enough to do me harm.' He would eat suitable food, so the wound wouldn't fester.
He would wash the wound and smear it with an ointment frequently, so blood & pus wouldn't fill the opening of the wound.
He would not walk around in the wind & sun, so dust & dirt wouldn't contaminate the opening of the wound.
He would keep looking after the wound and would work for its healing.
Now, both because of these suitable actions of his and because of there being no residue of the poison left behind, the wound would heal.
With the healing of the wound and its being covered with skin, he wouldn't incur death or death-like suffering.
“In the same way, there's the possible case where a certain monk thinks, 'Craving is said by the Contemplative to be an arrow.
The poison of ignorance spreads its toxin through desire, passion, & ill will.
I have abandoned the arrow.
I have expelled the poison of ignorance.
I am rightly intent on Unbinding.' Because he is rightly intent on Unbinding, he wouldn't pursue those things that are unsuitable for a person rightly intent on Unbinding.
He wouldn't pursue unsuitable forms & sights with the eye.
He wouldn't pursue unsuitable sounds with the ear… unsuitable aromas with the nose… unsuitable flavors with the tongue… unsuitable tactile sensations with the body.
He wouldn't pursue unsuitable ideas with the intellect.
When he doesn't pursue unsuitable forms & sights with the eye… doesn't pursue unsuitable ideas with the intellect, lust doesn't invade the mind.
With his mind not invaded by lust, he doesn't incur death or death-like suffering.
“I have given this simile to convey a meaning.
The meaning is this: the wound stands for the six internal sense media; the poison, for ignorance; the arrow, for craving; the probe, for mindfulness; the knife, for noble discernment; the surgeon, for the Tathagata, worthy & rightly self-awakened.
Then, when it was evening, Ven.
Malunkyaputta arose from seclusion and went to the Blessed One.
On arrival, having bowed down, he sat to one side.
As he was sitting there he said to the Blessed One, “Lord, just now, as I was alone in seclusion, this train of thought arose in my awareness: 'These positions that are undeclared, set aside, discarded by the Blessed One — 'The cosmos is eternal,' 'The cosmos is not eternal,' 'The cosmos is finite,' 'The cosmos is infinite,' 'The soul & the body are the same,' 'The soul is one thing and the body another,' 'After death a Tathagata exists,' 'After death a Tathagata does not exist,' 'After death a Tathagata both exists & does not exist,' 'After death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not exist' — I don't approve, I don't accept that the Blessed One has not declared them to me.
I'll go ask the Blessed One about this matter.
If he declares to me that “The cosmos is eternal,”… or that “After death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not exist,” then I will live the holy life under him.
If he does not declare to me that “The cosmos is eternal,”… or that “After death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not exist,” then I will renounce the training and return to the lower life.'
“Lord, if the Blessed One knows that 'The cosmos is eternal,' then may he declare to me that 'The cosmos is eternal.' If he knows that 'The cosmos is not eternal,' then may he declare to me that 'The cosmos is not eternal.' But if he doesn't know or see whether the cosmos is eternal or not eternal, then, in one who is unknowing & unseeing, the straightforward things is to admit, 'I don't know.
I don't see.'… If he doesn't know or see whether after death a Tathagata exists… does not exist… both exists & does not exist… neither exists nor does not exist,' then, in one who is unknowing & unseeing, the straightforward things is to admit, 'I don't know.
I don't see.' “Malunkyaputta, did I ever say to you, 'Come, Malunkyaputta, live the holy life under me, and I will declare to you that 'The cosmos is eternal,' or 'The cosmos is not eternal,' or 'The cosmos is finite,' or 'The cosmos is infinite,' or 'The soul & the body are the same,' or 'The soul is one thing and the body another,' or 'After death a Tathagata exists,' or 'After death a Tathagata does not exist,' or 'After death a Tathagata both exists & does not exist,' or 'After death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not exist'?
“No, lord.
“And did you ever say to me, 'Lord, I will live the holy life under the Blessed One and he will declare to me that 'The cosmos is eternal,' or 'The cosmos is not eternal,' or 'The cosmos is finite,' or 'The cosmos is infinite,' or 'The soul & the body are the same,' or 'The soul is one thing and the body another,' or 'After death a Tathagata exists,' or 'After death a Tathagata does not exist,' or 'After death a Tathagata both exists & does not exist,' or 'After death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not exist'?
“No, lord.
“Then that being the case, foolish man, who are you to be claiming grievances/making demands of anyone?
“Malunkyaputta, if anyone were to say, 'I won't live the holy life under the Blessed One as long as he does not declare to me that “The cosmos is eternal,”… or that “After death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not exist,”' the man would die and those things would still remain undeclared by the Tathagata.
“It's just as if a man were wounded with an arrow thickly smeared with poison.
His friends & companions, kinsmen & relatives would provide him with a surgeon, and the man would say, 'I won't have this arrow removed until I know whether the man who wounded me was a noble warrior, a brahman, a merchant, or a worker.' He would say, 'I won't have this arrow removed until I know the given name & clan name of the man who wounded me… until I know whether he was tall, medium, or short… until I know whether he was dark, ruddy-brown, or golden-colored… until I know his home village, town, or city… until I know whether the bow with which I was wounded was a long bow or a crossbow… until I know whether the bowstring with which I was wounded was fiber, bamboo threads, sinew, hemp, or bark… until I know whether the shaft with which I was wounded was wild or cultivated… until I know whether the feathers of the shaft with which I was wounded were those of a vulture, a stork, a hawk, a peacock, or another bird… until I know whether the shaft with which I was wounded was bound with the sinew of an ox, a water buffalo, a langur, or a monkey.' He would say, 'I won't have this arrow removed until I know whether the shaft with which I was wounded was that of a common arrow, a curved arrow, a barbed, a calf-toothed, or an oleander arrow.' The man would die and those things would still remain unknown to him.
“In the same way, if anyone were to say, 'I won't live the holy life under the Blessed One as long as he does not declare to me that “The cosmos is eternal,”… or that “After death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not exist,”' the man would die and those things would still remain undeclared by the Tathagata.
“Malunkyaputta, it's not the case that when there is the view, 'The cosmos is eternal,' there is the living of the holy life.
And it's not the case that when there is the view, 'The cosmos is not eternal,' there is the living of the holy life.
When there is the view, 'The cosmos is eternal,' and when there is the view, 'The cosmos is not eternal,' there is still the birth, there is the aging, there is the death, there is the sorrow, lamentation, pain, despair, & distress whose destruction I make known right in the here & now.
“It's not the case that when there is the view, 'The cosmos is finite,' there is the living of the holy life.
And it's not the case that when there is the view, 'The cosmos is infinite,' there is the living of the holy life.
When there is the view, 'The cosmos is finite,' and when there is the view, 'The cosmos is infinite,' there is still the birth, there is the aging, there is the death, there is the sorrow, lamentation, pain, despair, & distress whose destruction I make known right in the here & now.
“It's not the case that when there is the view, 'The soul & the body are the same,' there is the living of the holy life.
And it's not the case that when there is the view, 'The soul is one thing and the body another,' there is the living of the holy life.
When there is the view, 'The soul & the body are the same,' and when there is the view, 'The soul is one thing and the body another,' there is still the birth, there is the aging, there is the death, there is the sorrow, lamentation, pain, despair, & distress whose destruction I make known right in the here & now.
“It's not the case that when there is the view, 'After death a Tathagata exists,' there is the living of the holy life.
And it's not the case that when there is the view, 'After death a Tathagata does not exist,' there is the living of the holy life.
And it's not the case that when there is the view, 'After death a Tathagata both exists & does not exist,' there is the living of the holy life.
And it's not the case that when there is the view, 'After death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not exist' there is the living of the holy life.
When there is the view, 'After death a Tathagata exists'… 'After death a Tathagata does not exist'… 'After death a Tathagata both exists & does not exist'… 'After death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not exist,' there is still the birth, there is the aging, there is the death, there is the sorrow, lamentation, pain, despair, & distress whose destruction I make known right in the here & now.
“So, Malunkyaputta, remember what is undeclared by me as undeclared, and what is declared by me as declared.
And what is undeclared by me?
'The cosmos is eternal,' is undeclared by me.
'The cosmos is not eternal,' is undeclared by me.
'The cosmos is finite'… 'The cosmos is infinite'… 'The soul & the body are the same'… 'The soul is one thing and the body another'… 'After death a Tathagata exists'… 'After death a Tathagata does not exist'… 'After death a Tathagata both exists & does not exist'… 'After death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not exist,' is undeclared by me.
“And why are they undeclared by me?
Because they are not connected with the goal, are not fundamental to the holy life.
They do not lead to disenchantment, dispassion, cessation, calming, direct knowledge, self-awakening, Unbinding.
That's why they are undeclared by me.
“And what is declared by me?
'This is stress,' is declared by me.
'This is the origination of stress,' is declared by me.
'This is the cessation of stress,' is declared by me.
'This is the path of practice leading to the cessation of stress,' is declared by me.
And why are they declared by me?
Because they are connected with the goal, are fundamental to the holy life.
They lead to disenchantment, dispassion, cessation, calming, direct knowledge, self-awakening, Unbinding.
That's why they are declared by me.
“So, Malunkyaputta, remember what is undeclared by me as undeclared, and what is declared by me as declared.
That is what the Blessed One said.
Gratified, Ven.
Malunkyaputta delighted in the Blessed One's words.
For a comparison with ancient Indian medical theory:
From the Caraka Sa.mhitaa,.: “The best physician, one fit to treat a king, is he whose knowledge is fourfold: the cause, symptom, cure, and non-recurrence of diseases.”
In order to accommodate this new section, I'll be reorganizing the Theravada Text Archives over the next few days.
Please let me know if you run into any bad links along the way.
This booklet contains a collection of short passages excerpted from talks printed in a book distributed at Ajaan Khamdee's funeral in.
I expect to release the next update sometime in June,.

Just as the footprints of all legged animals are encompassed by the footprint of the elephant, and the elephant's footprint is reckoned their chief in terms of size; in the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in heedfulness, lie gathered in heedfulness, and heedfulness is reckoned their chief…
Just as all the light of the constellations does not equal one sixteenth of the light of the moon, and the light of the moon is reckoned their chief; in the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in heedfulness, lie gathered in heedfulness, and heedfulness is reckoned their chief.
“And what is heedfulness?
There is the case where a monk guards his mind with regard to fermentations and mental qualities accompanied by fermentations.
When his mind is guarded with regard to fermentations and mental qualities accompanied by fermentations, the faculty of conviction goes to the culmination of its development.
The faculty of persistence… mindfulness… concentration… discernment goes to the culmination of its development.
There are these five facts that one should reflect on often, whether one is a woman or a man, lay or ordained.
Which five?
“I am subject to aging, have not gone beyond aging.” This is the first fact that one should reflect on often…
“I am subject to illness, have not gone beyond illness”…
“I am subject to death, have not gone beyond death”…
“I will grow different, separate from all that is dear and appealing to me”…
“I am the owner of my actions, heir to my actions, born of my actions, related through my actions, and have my actions as my arbitrator.
Whatever I do, for good or for evil, to that will I fall heir”…
These are the five facts that one should reflect on often, whether one is a woman or a man, lay or ordained.
Now, based on what line of reasoning should one often reflect… that “I am subject to aging, have not gone beyond aging”?
There are beings who are intoxicated with a youth's intoxication with youth.
Because of that intoxication with youth, they conduct themselves in a bad way in body… in speech… and in mind.
But when they often reflect on that fact, that youth's intoxication with youth will either be entirely abandoned or grow weaker…
Now, based on what line of reasoning should one often reflect… that “I am subject to illness, have not gone beyond illness”?
There are beings who are intoxicated with a healthy person's intoxication with health.
Because of that intoxication with health, they conduct themselves in a bad way in body… in speech… and in mind.
But when they often reflect on that fact, that healthy person's intoxication with health will either be entirely abandoned or grow weaker…
Now, based on what line of reasoning should one often reflect… that “I am subject to death, have not gone beyond death”?
There are beings who are intoxicated with a living person's intoxication with life.
Because of that intoxication with life, they conduct themselves in a bad way in body… in speech… and in mind.
But when they often reflect on that fact, that living person's intoxication with life will either be entirely abandoned or grow weaker…
Now, based on what line of reasoning should one often reflect… that “I will grow different, separate from all that is dear and appealing to me”?
There are beings who feel desire and passion for the things they find dear and appealing.
Because of that passion, they conduct themselves in a bad way in body… in speech… and in mind.
But when they often reflect on that fact, that desire and passion for the things they find dear and appealing will either be entirely abandoned or grow weaker…
Now, based on what line of reasoning should one often reflect… that “I am the owner of my actions, heir to my actions, born of my actions, related through my actions, and have my actions as my arbitrator.
Whatever I do, for good or for evil, to that will I fall heir”?
There are beings who conduct themselves in a bad way in body… in speech… and in mind.
But when they often reflect on that fact, that bad conduct in body, speech, and mind will either be entirely abandoned or grow weaker…
Now, a disciple of the noble ones considers this: “I am not the only one subject to aging, who has not gone beyond aging.
To the extent that there are beings — past and future, passing away and re-arising — all beings are subject to aging, have not gone beyond aging.” When he/she often reflects on this, the path take birth.
He/she sticks with that path, develops it, cultivates it.
As he/she sticks with that path, develops it and cultivates it, the fetters are abandoned, the obsessions destroyed.
Further, a disciple of the noble ones considers this: “I am not the only one subject to illness, who has not gone beyond illness”… “I am not the only one subject to death, who has not gone beyond death”… “I am not the only one who will grow different, separate from all that is dear and appealing to me”…
A disciple of the noble ones considers this: “I am not the only one who is owner of my actions, heir to my actions, born of my actions, related through my actions, who has my actions as my arbitrator; who — whatever I do, for good or for evil, to that will I fall heir.
To the extent that there are beings — past and future, passing away and re-arising — all beings are the owner of their actions, heir to their actions, born of their actions, related through their actions, and have their actions as their arbitrator.
Whatever they do, for good or for evil, to that will they fall heir.” When he/she often reflects on this, the path take birth.
He/she sticks with that path, develops it, cultivates it.
As he/she sticks with that path, develops it and cultivates it, the fetters are abandoned, the obsessions destroyed.
“Monks, I lived in refinement, utmost refinement, total refinement.
My father even had lotus ponds made in our palace: one where red-lotuses bloomed, one where white lotuses bloomed, one where blue lotuses bloomed, all for my sake.
I used no sandalwood that was not from Varanasi.
My turban was from Varanasi, as were my tunic, my lower garments, & my outer cloak.
A white sunshade was held over me day & night to protect me from cold, heat, dust, dirt, & dew.
“I had three palaces: one for the cold season, one for the hot season, one for the rainy season.
During the four months of the rainy season I was entertained in the rainy-season palace by minstrels without a single man among them, and I did not once come down from the palace.
Whereas the servants, workers, & retainers in other people's homes are fed meals of lentil soup & broken rice, in my father's home the servants, workers, & retainers were fed wheat, rice, and meat.
“Even though I was endowed with such fortune, such total refinement, the thought occurred to me: 'When an untaught, run-of-the-mill person, himself subject to aging, not beyond aging, sees another who is aged, he is horrified, humiliated, & disgusted, oblivious to himself that he too is subject to aging, not beyond aging.
If I — who am subject to aging, not beyond aging — were to be horrified, humiliated, & disgusted on seeing another person who is aged, that would not be fitting for me.' As I noticed this, the young person's intoxication with youth entirely dropped away.
“Even though I was endowed with such fortune, such total refinement, the thought occurred to me: 'When an untaught, run-of-the-mill person, himself subject to illness, not beyond illness, sees another who is ill, he is horrified, humiliated, & disgusted, oblivious to himself that he too is subject to illness, not beyond illness.
And if I — who am subject to illness, not beyond illness — were to be horrified, humiliated, & disgusted on seeing another person who is ill, that would not be fitting for me.' As I noticed this, the healthy person's intoxication with health entirely dropped away.
“Even though I was endowed with such fortune, such total refinement, the thought occurred to me: 'When an untaught, run-of-the-mill person, himself subject to death, not beyond death, sees another who is dead, he is horrified, humiliated, & disgusted, oblivious to himself that he too is subject to death, not beyond death.
And if I — who am subject to death, not beyond death — were to be horrified, humiliated, & disgusted on seeing another person who is dead, that would not be fitting for me.' As I noticed this, the living person's intoxication with life entirely dropped away.
“Monks, there are these three forms of intoxication.
Which three?
Intoxication with youth, intoxication with health, intoxication with life.
“Drunk with the intoxication of youth, an uninstructed, run-of-the-mill person engages in bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, & mental misconduct.
Having engaged in bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, & mental misconduct, he — on the break-up of the body, after death — reappears in the plane of deprivation, the bad destination, the lower realms, in hell.
“Drunk with the intoxication of health, an uninstructed, run-of-the-mill person engages in bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, & mental misconduct.
Having engaged in bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, & mental misconduct, he — on the break-up of the body, after death — reappears in the plane of deprivation, the bad destination, the lower realms, in hell.
“Drunk with the intoxication of life, an uninstructed, run-of-the-mill person engages in bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, & mental misconduct.
Having engaged in bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, & mental misconduct, he — on the break-up of the body, after death — reappears in the plane of deprivation, the bad destination, the lower realms, in hell.
“Drunk with the intoxication of youth, a monk leaves the training and returns to the lower life.
Drunk with the intoxication of health, a monk leaves the training and returns to the lower life.
Drunk with the intoxication of life, a monk leaves the training and returns to the lower life.
King Koravya: “Master Ratthapala, you say, 'The world is swept away.
It does not endure.' How is the meaning of this statement to be understood?
Ven.
Ratthapala: “What do you think, great king: When you were twenty or twenty-five years of age — an expert elephant rider, an expert horseman, an expert charioteer, an expert archer, an expert swordsman — were you strong in arm & strong in thigh, fit, & seasoned in warfare?
King Koravya: “Yes, Master Ratthapala, when I was twenty or twenty-five years old… I was strong in arm & strong in thigh, fit, & seasoned in warfare.
It was as if I had supernormal power.
I do not see anyone who was my equal in strength.
Ven.
Ratthapala: “And what do you think, great king: Are you even now as strong in arm & strong in thigh, as fit, & as seasoned in warfare?
King Koravya: “Not at all, Master Ratthapala.
I'm now a feeble old man, aged, advanced in years, having come to the last stage of life, years old.
Sometimes, thinking, 'I will place my foot here,' I place it somewhere else.
Ven.
Ratthapala: “It was in reference to this, great king, that the Blessed One who knows & sees, worthy & rightly self-awakened, said: 'The world is swept away.
It does not endure.' Having known & seen & heard this, I went forth from the home life into homelessness.
“There is the case where a monk reminds himself of this: 'At present I am young, black-haired, endowed with the blessings of youth in the first stage of life.
The time will come, though, when this body is beset by old age.
When one is overcome with old age & decay, it is not easy to pay attention to the Buddha's teachings.
It is not easy to reside in isolated forest or wilderness dwellings.
Before this unwelcome, disagreeable, displeasing thing happens, let me first make an effort for the attaining of the as-yet-unattained, the reaching of the as-yet-unreached, the realization of the as-yet-unrealized, so that — endowed with that Dhamma — I will live in peace even when old.'
King Koravya: “Now, in this royal court there are elephant troops & cavalry & chariot troops & infantry that will serve to defend us from dangers.
And yet you say, 'The world is without shelter, without protector.' How is the meaning of this statement to be understood?
Ven.
Ratthapala: “What do you think, great king: Do you have any recurring illness?
King Koravya: “Yes, Master Ratthapala, I have a recurring wind-illness.
Sometimes my friends & advisors, relatives & blood-kinsmen, stand around me saying, 'This time King Koravya will die.
This time King Koravya will die.' Ven.
Ratthapala: “And what do you think, great king: Can you say to your friends & advisors, relatives & blood-kinsmen, 'My friends & advisors, relatives & blood-kinsmen are commanded: all of you who are present, share out this pain so that I may feel less pain'?
Or do you have to feel that pain all alone?
King Koravya: “Oh, no, Master Ratthapala, I can't say to my friends & advisors, relatives & blood-kinsmen, 'All of you who are present, share out this pain so that I may feel less pain.' I have to feel that pain all alone.
Ven.
Ratthapala: “It was in reference to this, great king, that the Blessed One who knows & sees, worthy & rightly self-awakened, said: 'The world is without shelter, without protector.' Having known & seen & heard this, I went forth from the home life into homelessness.
“Then there is the case where a monk has recovered from his illness, not long after his recovery.
The thought occurs to him: 'I have recovered from my illness.
It's not long after my recovery.
This body of mine is weak & unsuitable for work.
Why don't I lie down?' So he lies down.
He doesn't make an effort for the attaining of the as-yet-unattained, the reaching of the as-yet-unreached, the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
This is the eighth grounds for laziness…
“Then there is the case where a monk comes down with a slight illness.
The thought occurs to him: 'I have come down with a slight illness.
Now, there's the possibility that it could get worse.
Why don't I make an effort beforehand for the attaining of the as-yet-unattained, the reaching of the as-yet-unreached, the realization of the as-yet-unrealized?' So he makes an effort for the attaining of the as-yet-unattained, the reaching of the as-yet-unreached, the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
This is the seventh grounds for the arousal of energy.
“Then there is the case where a monk has recovered from his illness, not long after his recovery.
The thought occurs to him: 'I have recovered from my illness.
It's not long after my recovery.
Now, there's the possibility that the illness could come back.
Why don't I make an effort beforehand for the attaining of the as-yet-unattained, the reaching of the as-yet-unreached, the realization of the as-yet-unrealized?' So he makes an effort for the attaining of the as-yet-unattained, the reaching of the as-yet-unreached, the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
This is the eighth grounds for the arousal of energy.
Ven.
Ratthapala: “What do you think, great king?
As you now enjoy yourself endowed & replete with the five strings of sensuality, can you say, 'Even in the afterlife I will enjoy myself in the same way, endowed & replete with the very same five strings of sensuality'?
Or will this wealth fall to others, while you pass on in accordance with your kamma?
King Koravya: “Oh, no, Master Ratthapala, I can't say, 'Even in the afterlife I will enjoy myself in the same way, endowed & replete with the very same five strings of sensuality.' This wealth will fall to others, while I pass on in accordance with my kamma.
Ven.
Ratthapala: “It was in reference to this, great king, that the Blessed One who knows & sees, worthy & rightly self-awakened, said: 'The world is without ownership.
One has to pass on, leaving everything behind.' Having known & seen & heard this, I went forth from the home life into homelessness.
Then King Pasenadi of Kosala approached the Blessed One in the middle of the day and, on arrival, having bowed down, sat to one side.
As he was sitting there, the Blessed One said to him: “Well now, great king, where are you coming from in the middle of the day?
“Just now, lord, I was engaged in the sort of royal affairs typical of head-anointed noble-warrior kings intoxicated with the intoxication of sovereignty, obsessed by greed for sensual pleasures, who have attained stable control in their country, and who rule having conquered a great sphere of territory on earth.
“What do you think, great king?
Suppose a man, trustworthy & reliable, were to come to you from the east and on arrival would say: 'If it please your majesty, you should know that I come from the east.
There I saw a great mountain, as high as the clouds, coming this way, crushing all living beings.
Do whatever you think should be done.' Then a second man were to come to you from the west… Then a third man were to come to you from the north… Then a fourth man were to come to you from the south and on arrival would say: 'If it please your majesty, you should know that I come from the south.
There I saw a great mountain, as high as the clouds, coming this way, crushing all living beings.
Do whatever you think should be done.' If, your majesty, such a great peril should arise, such a terrible destruction of human life — the human state being so hard to obtain — what should be done?
“If, lord, such a great peril should arise, such a terrible destruction of human life — the human state being so hard to obtain — what else should be done but Dhamma-conduct, right conduct, skillful deeds, meritorious deeds?
“I inform you, great king, I announce to you, great king: aging & death are rolling in on you.
When aging & death are rolling in on you, what should be done?
“As aging & death are rolling in on me, lord, what else should be done but Dhamma-conduct, right conduct, skillful deeds, meritorious deeds?
“There are, lord, elephant battles head-anointed noble-warrior kings intoxicated with the intoxication of sovereignty, obsessed by greed for sensual pleasures, who have attained stable control in their country, and who rule having conquered a great sphere of territory on earth; but there is no use for those elephant battles, no scope for them, when aging & death are rolling in.
There are cavalry battles… chariot battles… infantry battles… but there is no use for those infantry battles, no scope for them, when aging & death are rolling in.
In this royal court there are counsellors who, when the enemies arrive, are capable of dividing them by their wits; but there is no use for those battles of wits, no scope for them, when aging & death are rolling in.
In this royal court there is abundant bullion & gold stored in vaults & depositories, and with such wealth we are capable of buying off enemies when they come; but there is no use for those battles of wealth, no scope for them, when aging & death are rolling in.
As aging & death are rolling in on me, lord, what else should be done but Dhamma-conduct, right conduct, skillful deeds, meritorious deeds?
“So it is, great king!
So it is, great king!
As aging & death are rolling in on you, what else should be done but Dhamma-conduct, right conduct, skillful deeds, meritorious deeds?
That is what the Blessed One said.
Having said that, the One Well-Gone, the Teacher, further said this:
“Then again there is the case where an excellent thoroughbred horse is not stirred & agitated on seeing the shadow of the goad-stick, but when his hair is pricked he is stirred & agitated, 'I wonder what task the trainer will have me do today?
What should I do in response?' Some excellent thoroughbred horses are like this.
And this is the second type of excellent thoroughbred horse to be found existing in the world.
“Then again there is the case where an excellent thoroughbred horse is not stirred & agitated on seeing the shadow of the goad-stick, or when his hair is pricked, but when his hide is pricked he is stirred & agitated, 'I wonder what task the trainer will have me do today?
What should I do in response?' Some excellent thoroughbred horses are like this.
And this is the third type of excellent thoroughbred horse to be found existing in the world.
“Then again there is the case where an excellent thoroughbred horse is not stirred & agitated on seeing the shadow of the goad-stick, or when his hair is pricked, or when his hide is pricked, but when his bone is pricked he is stirred & agitated, 'I wonder what task the trainer will have me do today?
What should I do in response?' Some excellent thoroughbred horses are like this.
And this is the fourth type of excellent thoroughbred horse to be found existing in the world.
“These are the four types of excellent thoroughbred horse to be found existing in the world.
“Now, there are these four types of excellent thoroughbred persons to be found existing in the world.
Which four?
“There is the case where a certain excellent thoroughbred person hears, 'In that town or village over there a man or woman is in pain or has died.' He is stirred & agitated by that.
Stirred, he becomes appropriately resolute.
Resolute, he both realizes with his body the highest truth and, having penetrated it with discernment, sees.
This type of excellent thoroughbred person, I tell you, is like the excellent thoroughbred horse who, on seeing the shadow of the goad-stick, is stirred & agitated.
Some excellent thoroughbred people are like this.
And this is the first type of excellent thoroughbred person to be found existing in the world.
“Then again there is the case where a certain excellent thoroughbred person does not hear, 'In that town or village over there a man or woman is in pain or has died.' But he himself sees a man or woman in pain or dead.
He is stirred & agitated by that.
Stirred, he becomes appropriately resolute.
Resolute, he both realizes with his body the highest truth and, having penetrated it with discernment, sees.
This type of excellent thoroughbred person, I tell you, is like the excellent thoroughbred horse who, when its coat is pricked with the goad-stick, is stirred & agitated.
Some excellent thoroughbred people are like this.
And this is the second type of excellent thoroughbred person to be found existing in the world.
“Then again there is the case where a certain excellent thoroughbred person does not hear, 'In that town or village over there a man or woman is in pain or has died.' And he himself does not see a man or woman in pain or dead.
But he sees one of his one blood relatives in pain or dead.
He is stirred & agitated by that.
Stirred, he becomes appropriately resolute.
Resolute, he both realizes with his body the highest truth and, having penetrated it with discernment, sees.
This type of excellent thoroughbred person, I tell you, is like the excellent thoroughbred horse who, when its hide is pricked with the goad-stick, is stirred & agitated.
Some excellent thoroughbred people are like this.
And this is the third type of excellent thoroughbred person to be found existing in the world.
“Then again there is the case where a certain excellent thoroughbred person does not hear, 'In that town or village over there a man or woman is in pain or has died.' And he himself does not see a man or woman in pain or dead, nor does he see one of his one blood relatives in pain or dead.
But he himself is touched by bodily feelings that are painful, fierce, sharp, wracking, repellent, disagreeable, life-threatening.
He is stirred & agitated by that.
Stirred, he becomes appropriately resolute.
Resolute, he both realizes with his body the highest truth and, having penetrated it with discernment, sees.
This type of excellent thoroughbred person, I tell you, is like the excellent thoroughbred horse who, when its bone is pricked with the goad-stick, is stirred & agitated.
Some excellent thoroughbred people are like this.
And this is the fourth type of excellent thoroughbred person to be found existing in the world.
“These are the four types of excellent thoroughbred persons to be found existing in the world.
“Monks, mindfulness of death — when developed & pursued — is of great fruit & great benefit.
It gains a footing in the Deathless, has the Deathless as its final end.
And how is mindfulness of death developed & pursued so that it is of great fruit & great benefit, gains a footing in the Deathless, and has the Deathless as its final end?
“There is the case where a monk, as day departs and night returns, reflects: 'Many are the causes of my death.
A snake might bite me, a scorpion might sting me, a centipede might bite me.
That would be how my death would come about.
That would be an obstruction for me.
Stumbling, I might fall; my food, digested, might trouble me; my bile might be provoked, my phlegm… piercing wind forces might be provoked.
That would be how my death would come about.
That would be an obstruction for me.' Then the monk should investigate: 'Are there any evil, unskillful mental qualities unabandoned by me that would be an obstruction for me were I to die in the night?' If, on reflecting, he realizes that there are evil, unskillful mental qualities unabandoned by him that would be an obstruction for him were he to die in the night, then he should put forth extra desire, effort, diligence, endeavor, undivided mindfulness, & alertness for the abandoning of those very same evil, unskillful qualities.
Just as when a person whose turban or head was on fire would put forth extra desire, effort, diligence, endeavor, undivided mindfulness, & alertness to put out the fire on his turban or head, in the same way the monk should put forth extra desire, effort, diligence, endeavor, undivided mindfulness, & alertness for the abandoning of those very same evil, unskillful qualities.
But if, on reflecting, he realizes that there are no evil, unskillful mental qualities unabandoned by him that would be an obstruction for him were he to die in the night, then for that very reason he should dwell in joy & rapture, training himself day & night in skillful qualities.
“Further, there is the case where a monk, as night departs and day returns, reflects: 'Many are the causes of my death.
A snake might bite me, a scorpion might sting me, a centipede might bite me.
That would be how my death would come about.
That would be an obstruction for me.
Stumbling, I might fall; my food, digested, might trouble me; my bile might be provoked, my phlegm… piercing wind forces might be provoked.
That would be how my death would come about.
That would be an obstruction for me.' Then the monk should investigate: 'Are there any evil, unskillful mental qualities unabandoned by me that would be an obstruction for me were I to die during the day?' If, on reflecting, he realizes that there are evil, unskillful mental qualities unabandoned by him that would be an obstruction for him were he to die during the day, then he should put forth extra desire, effort, diligence, endeavor, undivided mindfulness, & alertness for the abandoning of those very same evil, unskillful qualities.
Just as when a person whose turban or head was on fire would put forth extra desire, effort, diligence, endeavor, undivided mindfulness, & alertness to put out the fire on his turban or head, in the same way the monk should put forth extra desire, effort, diligence, endeavor, undivided mindfulness, & alertness for the abandoning of those very same evil, unskillful qualities.
But if, on reflecting, he realizes that there are no evil, unskillful mental qualities unabandoned by him that would be an obstruction for him were he to die during the day, then for that very reason he should dwell in joy & rapture, training himself day & night in skillful qualities.
“This, monks, is how mindfulness of death is developed & pursued so that it is of great fruit & great benefit, gains a footing in the Deathless, and has the Deathless as its final end.
“Monks, mindfulness of death, when developed & pursued, is of great fruit & great benefit.
It gains a footing in the Deathless, has the Deathless as its final end.
Therefore you should develop mindfulness of death.
When this was said, a certain monk addressed the Blessed One, “I already develop mindfulness of death.
“And how do you develop mindfulness of death?
“I think, 'O, that I might live for a day & night, that I might attend to the Blessed One's instructions.
I would have accomplished a great deal.' This is how I develop mindfulness of death.
Then another monk addressed the Blessed One, “I, too, already develop mindfulness of death.
“And how do you develop mindfulness of death?
“I think, 'O, that I might live for a day, that I might attend to the Blessed One's instructions.
I would have accomplished a great deal.' This is how I develop mindfulness of death.
Then another monk addressed the Blessed One, “I, too, develop mindfulness of death… “I think, 'O, that I might live for the interval that it takes to eat a meal, that I might attend to the Blessed One's instructions.
I would have accomplished a great deal'…
Then another monk addressed the Blessed One, “I, too, develop mindfulness of death… “I think, 'O, that I might live for the interval that it takes to swallow having chewed up four morsels of food, that I might attend to the Blessed One's instructions.
I would have accomplished a great deal'…
Then another monk addressed the Blessed One, “I, too, develop mindfulness of death… “I think, 'O, that I might live for the interval that it takes to swallow having chewed up one morsel of food, that I might attend to the Blessed One's instructions.
I would have accomplished a great deal'…
Then another monk addressed the Blessed One, “I, too, develop mindfulness of death… “I think, 'O, that I might live for the interval that it takes to breathe out after breathing in, or to breathe in after breathing out, that I might attend to the Blessed One's instructions.
I would have accomplished a great deal.' This is how I develop mindfulness of death.
When this was said, the Blessed One addressed the monks.
“Whoever develops mindfulness of death, thinking, 'O, that I might live for a day & night… for a day… for the interval that it takes to eat a meal… for the interval that it takes to swallow having chewed up four morsels of food, that I might attend to the Blessed One's instructions.
I would have accomplished a great deal' — they are said to be dwelling heedlessly.
They develop mindfulness of death slowly for the sake of ending the fermentations.
“But whoever develops mindfulness of death, thinking, 'O, that I might live for the interval that it takes to swallow having chewed up one morsel of food… for the interval that it takes to breathe out after breathing in, or to breathe in after breathing out, that I might attend to the Blessed One's instructions.
I would have accomplished a great deal” — they are said to be dwelling heedfully.
They develop mindfulness of death acutely for the sake of ending the fermentations.
“Therefore you should train yourselves: 'We will dwell heedfully.
We will develop mindfulness of death acutely for the sake of ending the fermentations.' That's how you should train yourselves.
That is what the Blessed One said.
Gratified, the monks delighted in the Blessed One's words.
“As if he were to see a corpse cast away in a charnel ground — one day, two days, three days dead — bloated, livid, & festering, the monk applies it to this very body, 'This body, too: Such is its nature, such is its future, such its unavoidable fate'…
“Or again, as if he were to see a corpse cast away in a charnel ground, picked at by crows, vultures, & hawks, by dogs, hyenas, & various other creatures… a skeleton smeared with flesh & blood, connected with tendons… a fleshless skeleton smeared with blood, connected with tendons… a skeleton without flesh or blood, connected with tendons… bones detached from their tendons, scattered in all directions — here a hand bone, there a foot bone, here a shin bone, there a thigh bone, here a hip bone, there a back bone, here a rib, there a chest bone, here a shoulder bone, there a neck bone, here a jaw bone, there a tooth, here a skull… the bones whitened, somewhat like the color of shells… piled up, more than a year old… decomposed into a powder: He applies it to this very body, 'This body, too: Such is its nature, such is its future, such its unavoidable fate.'
“In this way he remains focused internally on the body in & of itself, or externally on the body in & of itself, or both internally & externally on the body in & of itself.
Or he remains focused on the phenomenon of origination with regard to the body, on the phenomenon of passing away with regard to the body, or on the phenomenon of origination & passing away with regard to the body.
Or his mindfulness that 'There is a body' is maintained to the extent of knowledge & remembrance.
And he remains independent, unsustained by anything in the world.
This is how a monk remains focused on the body in & of itself.
§.
§.
I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying in Savatthi, at Jetavana, Anathapindika's monastery.
There he addressed the monks: “Monks!
“Yes, lord,” the monks replied.
The Blessed One said: “Monks, I will teach you the summary & exposition of one who has had an auspicious day.
Listen & pay close attention.
I will speak.
“As you say, lord,” the monks replied.
The Blessed One said:
“And how, monks, does one chase after the past?
One gets carried away with the delight of 'In the past I had such a form '… 'In the past I had such a feeling'… 'In the past I had such a perception'… 'In the past I had such a thought-fabrication'… 'In the past I had such a consciousness.' This is called chasing after the past.
“And how does one not chase after the past?
One does not get carried away with the delight of 'In the past I had such a form '… 'In the past I had such a feeling'… 'In the past I had such a perception'… 'In the past I had such a thought-fabrication'… 'In the past I had such a consciousness.' This is called not chasing after the past.
“And how does one place expectations on the future?
One gets carried away with the delight of 'In the future I might have such a form '… 'In the future I might have such a feeling'… 'In the future I might have such a perception'… 'In the future I might have such a thought-fabrication'… 'In the future I might have such a consciousness.' This is called placing expectations on the future.
“And how does one not place expectations on the future?
One does not get carried away with the delight of 'In the future I might have such a form '… 'In the future I might have such a feeling'… 'In the future I might have such a perception'… 'In the future I might have such a thought-fabrication'… 'In the future I might have such a consciousness.' This is called not placing expectations on the future.
“And how is one vanquished with regard to present qualities?
There is the case where an uninstructed run-of-the-mill person who has not seen the noble ones, is not versed in the teachings of the noble ones, is not trained in the teachings of the noble ones, sees form as self, or self as possessing form, or form as in self, or self as in form.
“He/she sees feeling as self… perception as self… thought-fabrications as self…
“He/she sees consciousness as self, or self as possessing consciousness, or consciousness as in self, or self as in consciousness.
This is called being vanquished with regard to present qualities.
“And how is one not vanquished with regard to present qualities?
There is the case where a disciple of the noble ones who has seen the noble ones, is versed in the teachings of the noble ones, is well-trained in the teachings of the noble ones, does not see form as self, or self as possessing form, or form as in self, or self as in form.
“He/she does not see feeling as self… perception as self… thought-fabrications as self…
He/she does not see consciousness as self, or self as possessing consciousness, or consciousness as in self, or self as in consciousness.
This is called not being vanquished with regard to present qualities.
“From an inconstruable beginning comes transmigration.
A beginning point is not evident, though beings hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving are transmigrating & wandering on.
A being who has not been your mother at one time in the past is not easy to find… A being who has not been your father… your brother… your sister… your son… your daughter at one time in the past is not easy to find.
“Why is that?
From an inconstruable beginning comes transmigration.
A beginning point is not evident, though beings hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving are transmigrating & wandering on.
Long have you thus experienced stress, experienced pain, experienced loss, swelling the cemeteries — enough to become disenchanted with all fabricated things, enough to become dispassionate, enough to be released.
“Which is greater, the tears you have shed while transmigrating & wandering this long, long time — crying & weeping from being joined with what is displeasing, being separated from what is pleasing — or the water in the four great oceans?
“As we understand the Dhamma taught to us by the Blessed One, this is the greater: the tears we have shed while transmigrating & wandering this long, long time — crying & weeping from being joined with what is displeasing, being separated from what is pleasing — not the water in the four great oceans.
“Excellent, monks.
Excellent.
It is excellent that you thus understand the Dhamma taught by me.
“This is the greater: the tears you have shed while transmigrating & wandering this long, long time — crying & weeping from being joined with what is displeasing, being separated from what is pleasing — not the water in the four great oceans.
“Long have you experienced the death of a mother.
The tears you have shed over the death of a mother while transmigrating & wandering this long, long time — crying & weeping from being joined with what is displeasing, being separated from what is pleasing — are greater than the water in the four great oceans.
“Long have you experienced the death of a father… the death of a brother… the death of a sister… the death of a son… the death of a daughter… loss with regard to relatives… loss with regard to wealth… loss with regard to disease.
The tears you have shed over loss with regard to disease while transmigrating & wandering this long, long time — crying & weeping from being joined with what is displeasing, being separated from what is pleasing — are greater than the water in the four great oceans.
“Why is that?
From an inconstruable beginning comes transmigration.
A beginning point is not evident, though beings hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving are transmigrating & wandering on.
Long have you thus experienced stress, experienced pain, experienced loss, swelling the cemeteries — enough to become disenchanted with all fabricated things, enough to become dispassionate, enough to be released.
These four types of kamma have been understood, realized, & made known by me.
Which four?
There is kamma that is dark with dark result; kamma that is bright with bright result; kamma that is dark & bright with dark & bright result; and kamma that is neither dark nor bright with neither dark nor bright result, leading to the ending of kamma.
And what is kamma that is dark with dark result?
There is the case where a certain person fabricates an injurious bodily fabrication… an injurious verbal fabrication… an injurious mental fabrication… He rearises in an injurious world where he is touched by injurious contacts… He experiences feelings that are exclusively painful, like those of the beings in hell.
This is called kamma that is dark with dark result.
And what is kamma that is bright with bright result?
There is the case where a certain person fabricates an uninjurious bodily fabrication… an uninjurious verbal fabrication… an uninjurious mental fabrication… He rearises in an uninjurious world where he is touched by uninjurious contacts… He experiences feelings that are exclusively pleasant, like those of the Ever-radiant Devas.
This is called kamma that is bright with bright result.
And what is kamma that is dark & bright with dark & bright result?
There is the case where a certain person fabricates a bodily fabrication that is injurious & uninjurious… a verbal fabrication that is injurious & uninjurious… a mental fabrication that is injurious & uninjurious… He rearises in an injurious & uninjurious world where he is touched by injurious & uninjurious contacts… He experiences injurious & uninjurious feelings, pleasure mingled with pain, like those of human beings, some devas, and some beings in the lower realms.
This is called kamma that is dark & bright with dark & bright result.
And what is kamma that is neither dark nor bright with neither dark nor bright result, leading to the ending of kamma?
The intention right there to abandon this kamma that is dark with dark result, the intention right there to abandon this kamma that is bright with bright result, the intention right there to abandon this kamma that is dark & bright with dark & bright result.
This is called kamma that is neither dark nor bright with neither dark nor bright result, leading to the ending of kamma.

And what is kamma that is neither dark nor bright with neither dark nor bright result, leading to the ending of kamma?
Right view, right resolve, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration.
I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Rajagaha, at the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels' Feeding Ground.
At that time Ven.
Rahula was staying at the Mango Stone.
Then the Blessed One, arising from his seclusion in the late afternoon, went to where Ven.
Rahula was staying at the Mango Stone.
Ven.
Rahula saw him coming from afar and, on seeing him, set out a seat & water for washing the feet.
The Blessed One sat down on the seat set out and, having sat down, washed his feet.
Ven.
Rahula, bowing down to the Blessed One, sat to one side.
Then the Blessed One, having left a little bit of water in the water dipper, said to Ven.
Rahula, “Rahula, do you see this little bit of left-over water remaining in the water dipper?
“Yes sir.
“That's how little of a contemplative there is in anyone who feels no shame at telling a deliberate lie.
Having tossed away the little bit of left-over water, the Blessed One said to Ven.
Rahula, “Rahula, do you see how this little bit of left-over water is tossed away?
“Yes, sir.
“Whatever there is of a contemplative in anyone who feels no shame at telling a deliberate lie is tossed away just like that.
Having turned the water dipper upside down, the Blessed One said to Ven.
Rahula, “Rahula, do you see how this water dipper is turned upside down?
“Yes, sir.
“Whatever there is of a contemplative in anyone who feels no shame at telling a deliberate lie is turned upside down just like that.
Having turned the water dipper right-side up, the Blessed One said to Ven.
Rahula, “Rahula, do you see how empty & hollow this water dipper is?
“Yes, sir.
“Whatever there is of a contemplative in anyone who feels no shame at telling a deliberate lie is empty & hollow just like that.
“Rahula, it's like a royal elephant: immense, pedigreed, accustomed to battles, its tusks like chariot poles.
Having gone into battle, it uses its forefeet & hindfeet, its forequarters & hindquarters, its head & ears & tusks & tail, but will simply hold back its trunk.
The elephant trainer notices that and thinks, 'This royal elephant has not given up its life to the king.' But when the royal elephant… having gone into battle, uses its forefeet & hindfeet, its forequarters & hindquarters, its head & ears & tusks & tail & his trunk, the trainer notices that and thinks, 'This royal elephant has given up its life to the king.
There is nothing it will not do.'
“The same holds true with anyone who feels no shame in telling a deliberate lie: There is no evil, I tell you, he will not do.
Thus, Rahula, you should train yourself, 'I will not tell a deliberate lie even in jest.'
“What do you think, Rahula: What is a mirror for?
“For reflection, sir.
“In the same way, Rahula, bodily acts, verbal acts, & mental acts are to be done with repeated reflection.
“Whenever you want to perform a bodily act, you should reflect on it: 'This bodily act I want to perform — would it lead to self-affliction, to the affliction of others, or to both?
Is it an unskillful bodily act, with painful consequences, painful results?' If, on reflection, you know that it would lead to self-affliction, to the affliction of others, or to both; it would be an unskillful bodily act with painful consequences, painful results, then any bodily act of that sort is absolutely unfit for you to do.
But if on reflection you know that it would not cause affliction… it would be a skillful bodily action with happy consequences, happy results, then any bodily act of that sort is fit for you to do.
“While you are performing a bodily act, you should reflect on it: 'This bodily act I am doing — is it leading to self-affliction, to the affliction of others, or to both?
Is it an unskillful bodily act, with painful consequences, painful results?' If, on reflection, you know that it is leading to self-affliction, to affliction of others, or both… you should give it up.
But if on reflection you know that it is not… you may continue with it.
“Having performed a bodily act, you should reflect on it… If, on reflection, you know that it led to self-affliction, to the affliction of others, or to both; it was an unskillful bodily act with painful consequences, painful results, then you should confess it, reveal it, lay it open to the Teacher or to a knowledgeable companion in the holy life.
Having confessed it… you should exercise restraint in the future.
But if on reflection you know that it did not lead to affliction… it was a skillful bodily action with happy consequences, happy results, then you should stay mentally refreshed & joyful, training day & night in skillful mental qualities.
“Whenever you want to perform a mental act, you should reflect on it: 'This mental act I want to perform — would it lead to self-affliction, to the affliction of others, or to both?
Is it an unskillful mental act, with painful consequences, painful results?' If, on reflection, you know that it would lead to self-affliction, to the affliction of others, or to both; it would be an unskillful mental act with painful consequences, painful results, then any mental act of that sort is absolutely unfit for you to do.
But if on reflection you know that it would not cause affliction… it would be a skillful mental action with happy consequences, happy results, then any mental act of that sort is fit for you to do.
“While you are performing a mental act, you should reflect on it: 'This mental act I am doing — is it leading to self-affliction, to the affliction of others, or to both?
Is it an unskillful mental act, with painful consequences, painful results?' If, on reflection, you know that it is leading to self-affliction, to the affliction of others, or to both… you should give it up.
But if on reflection you know that it is not… you may continue with it.
“Having performed a mental act, you should reflect on it… If, on reflection, you know that it led to self-affliction, to the affliction of others, or to both; it was an unskillful mental act with painful consequences, painful results, then you should feel distressed, ashamed, & disgusted with it.
Feeling distressed… you should exercise restraint in the future.
But if on reflection you know that it did not lead to affliction… it was a skillful mental action with happy consequences, happy results, then you should stay mentally refreshed & joyful, training day & night in skillful mental qualities.
“Rahula, all those brahmans & contemplatives in the course of the past who purified their bodily acts, verbal acts, & mental acts, did it through repeated reflection on their bodily acts, verbal acts, & mental acts in just this way.
“All those brahmans & contemplatives in the course of the future who will purify their bodily acts, verbal acts, & mental acts, will do it through repeated reflection on their bodily acts, verbal acts, & mental acts in just this way.
“All those brahmans & contemplatives at present who purify their bodily acts, verbal acts, & mental acts, do it through repeated reflection on their bodily acts, verbal acts, & mental acts in just this way.
“Thus, Rahula, you should train yourself: 'I will purify my bodily acts through repeated reflection.
I will purify my verbal acts through repeated reflection.
I will purify my mental acts through repeated reflection.' That's how you should train yourself.
That is what the Blessed One said.
Gratified, Ven.
Rahula delighted in the Blessed One's words.
Then a certain devata, in the far extreme of the night, her extreme radiance lighting up the entirety of Jeta's Grove, went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, stood to one side.
As she was standing there, she recited these verses in the Blessed One's presence:
As he was sitting to one side, King Pasenadi Kosala said to the Blessed One: “Just now, lord, while I was alone in seclusion, this train of thought arose in my awareness: 'Who are dear to themselves, and who are not dear to themselves?' Then it occurred to me: 'Those who engage in bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, & mental misconduct are not dear to themselves.
Even though they may say, “We are dear to ourselves,” still they aren't dear to themselves.
Why is that?
Of their own accord, they act toward themselves as an enemy would act toward an enemy; thus they aren't dear to themselves.
But those who engage in good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct, & good mental conduct are dear to themselves.
Even though they may say, “We aren't dear to ourselves,” still they are dear to themselves.
Why is that?
Of their own accord, they act toward themselves as a dear one would act toward a dear one; thus they are dear to themselves.' “That's the way it is, great king!
That's the way it is!
Those who engage in bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, & mental misconduct are not dear to themselves.
Even though they may say, 'We are dear to ourselves,' still they aren't dear to themselves.
Why is that?
Of their own accord, they act toward themselves as an enemy would act toward an enemy; thus they aren't dear to themselves.
But those who engage in good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct, & good mental conduct are dear to themselves.
Even though they may say, 'We aren't dear to ourselves,' still they are dear to themselves.
Why is that?
Of their own accord, they act toward themselves as a dear one would act toward a dear one; thus they are dear to themselves.
That is what the Blessed One said.
Having said that, the One Well-Gone, the Teacher, said further:
“Monks, there are these eight rewards of merit, rewards of skillfulness, nourishments of happiness, celestial, resulting in happiness, leading to heaven, leading to what is desirable, pleasurable, & appealing, to welfare & happiness.
Which eight?
“There is the case where a disciple of the noble ones has gone to the Buddha for refuge.
This is the first reward of merit…
“Furthermore, the disciple of the noble ones has gone to the Dhamma for refuge.
This is the second reward of merit…
“Furthermore, the disciple of the noble ones has gone to the Sangha for refuge.
This is the third reward of merit…
“Now, there are these five gifts, five great gifts — original, long-standing, traditional, ancient, unadulterated, unadulterated from the beginning — that are not open to suspicion, will never be open to suspicion, and are unfaulted by knowledgeable contemplatives & brahmans.
Which five?
“There is the case where a disciple of the noble ones, abandoning the taking of life, abstains from taking life.
In doing so, he gives freedom from danger, freedom from animosity, freedom from oppression to limitless numbers of beings.
In giving freedom from danger, freedom from animosity, freedom from oppression to limitless numbers of beings, he gains a share in limitless freedom from danger, freedom from animosity, and freedom from oppression.
This is the first gift, the first great gift — original, long-standing, traditional, ancient, unadulterated, unadulterated from the beginning — that is not open to suspicion, will never be open to suspicion, and is unfaulted by knowledgeable contemplatives & brahmans.
And this is the fourth reward of merit…
“Furthermore, abandoning taking what is not given, the disciple of the noble ones abstains from taking what is not given.
In doing so, he gives freedom from danger, freedom from animosity, freedom from oppression to limitless numbers of beings.
In giving freedom from danger, freedom from animosity, freedom from oppression to limitless numbers of beings, he gains a share in limitless freedom from danger, freedom from animosity, and freedom from oppression.
This is the second gift, the second great gift… and this is the fifth reward of merit…
“Furthermore, abandoning illicit sex, the disciple of the noble ones abstains from illicit sex.
In doing so, he gives freedom from danger, freedom from animosity, freedom from oppression to limitless numbers of beings.
In giving freedom from danger, freedom from animosity, freedom from oppression to limitless numbers of beings, he gains a share in limitless freedom from danger, freedom from animosity, and freedom from oppression.
This is the third gift, the third great gift… and this is the sixth reward of merit…
“Furthermore, abandoning lying, the disciple of the noble ones abstains from lying.
In doing so, he gives freedom from danger, freedom from animosity, freedom from oppression to limitless numbers of beings.
In giving freedom from danger, freedom from animosity, freedom from oppression to limitless numbers of beings, he gains a share in limitless freedom from danger, freedom from animosity, and freedom from oppression.
This is the fourth gift, the fourth great gift… and this is the seventh reward of merit…
“Furthermore, abandoning the use of intoxicants, the disciple of the noble ones abstains from taking intoxicants.
In doing so, he gives freedom from danger, freedom from animosity, freedom from oppression to limitless numbers of beings.
In giving freedom from danger, freedom from animosity, freedom from oppression to limitless numbers of beings, he gains a share in limitless freedom from danger, freedom from animosity, and freedom from oppression.
This is the fifth gift, the fifth great gift — original, long-standing, traditional, ancient, unadulterated, unadulterated from the beginning — that is not open to suspicion, will never be open to suspicion, and is unfaulted by knowledgeable contemplatives & brahmans.
And this is the eighth reward of merit, reward of skillfulness, nourishment of happiness, celestial, resulting in happiness, leading to heaven, leading to what is desirable, pleasurable, & appealing; to welfare & to happiness.
“The taking of life — when indulged in, developed, & pursued — is something that leads to hell, leads to rebirth as a common animal, leads to the realm of the hungry shades.
The slightest of all the results coming from the taking of life is that, when one becomes a human being, it leads to a short life span.
“Stealing — when indulged in, developed, & pursued — is something that leads to hell, leads to rebirth as a common animal, leads to the realm of the hungry shades.
The slightest of all the results coming from stealing is that, when one becomes a human being, it leads to the loss of one's wealth.
“Illicit sexual behavior — when indulged in, developed, & pursued — is something that leads to hell, leads to rebirth as a common animal, leads to the realm of the hungry shades.
The slightest of all the results coming from illicit sexual behavior is that, when one becomes a human being, it leads to rivalry & revenge.
“Telling falsehoods — when indulged in, developed, & pursued — is something that leads to hell, leads to rebirth as a common animal, leads to the realm of the hungry shades.
The slightest of all the results coming from telling falsehoods is that, when one becomes a human being, it leads to being falsely accused.
“Malicious tale-bearing — when indulged in, developed, & pursued — is something that leads to hell, leads to rebirth as a common animal, leads to the realm of the hungry shades.
The slightest of all the results coming from malicious tale-bearing is that, when one becomes a human being, it leads to the breaking of one's friendships.
“Harsh speech — when indulged in, developed, & pursued — is something that leads to hell, leads to rebirth as a common animal, leads to the realm of the hungry shades.
The slightest of all the results coming from harsh speech is that, when one becomes a human being, it leads to unappealing sounds.
“Frivolous chattering — when indulged in, developed, & pursued — is something that leads to hell, leads to rebirth as a common animal, leads to the realm of the hungry shades.
The slightest of all the results coming from frivolous chattering is that, when one becomes a human being, it leads to words that aren't worth taking to heart.
“The drinking of fermented & distilled liquors — when indulged in, developed, & pursued — is something that leads to hell, leads to rebirth as a common animal, leads to the realm of the hungry shades.
The slightest of all the results coming from drinking fermented & distilled liquors is that, when one becomes a human being, it leads to mental derangement.
As he was sitting to one side, King Pasenadi Kosala said to the Blessed One: “Just now, lord, while I was alone in seclusion, this train of thought arose in my awareness: 'Few are those people in the world who, when acquiring lavish wealth, don't become intoxicated & heedless, don't become greedy for sensual pleasures, and don't mistreat other beings.
Many more are those who, when acquiring lavish wealth, become intoxicated & heedless, become greedy for sensual pleasures, and mistreat other beings.' “That's the way it is, great king!
That's the way it is!
Few are those people in the world who, when acquiring lavish wealth, don't become intoxicated & heedless, don't become greedy for sensual pleasures, and don't mistreat other beings.
Many more are those who, when acquiring lavish wealth, become intoxicated & heedless, become greedy for sensual pleasures, and mistreat other beings.
That is what the Blessed One said.
Having said that, the One Well-Gone, the Teacher, said further:
As he was sitting to one side, King Pasenadi Kosala said to the Blessed One: “Just now, lord, as I was sitting in judgment, I saw that even affluent nobles, affluent brahmans, & affluent householders — rich, with great wealth & property, with vast amounts of gold & silver, vast amounts of valuables & commodities, vast amounts of wealth & grain — tell deliberate lies with sensual pleasures as the cause, sensual pleasures as the reason, simply for the sake of sensual pleasures.
Then, the thought occurred to me: 'I've had enough of this judging!
Let some other fine fellow be known for his judgments!' “That's the way it is, great king!
That's the way it is!
Even affluent nobles, affluent brahmans, & affluent householders… tell deliberate lies with sensual pleasures as the cause, sensual pleasures as the reason, simply for the sake of sensual pleasures.
That will lead to their long-term harm & pain.
That is what the Blessed One said.
Having said that, the One Well-Gone, the Teacher, said further:
As he was sitting to one side, King Pasenadi Kosala said to the Blessed One: “Is there, lord, any one quality that keeps both kinds of benefits secure — those in the present life and those in the future life?
“There is one quality, great king, that keeps both kinds of benefits secure — those pertaining to the present life and those to the future life.
“But what, lord, is that one quality…?
“Heedfulness, great king.
Just as the footprints of all living beings with legs can be encompassed by the footprint of the elephant, and the elephant's footprint is declared to be supreme among them in terms of its great size; in the same way, heedfulness is the one quality that keeps both kinds of benefits secure — those in the present life and those in the future life.
That is what the Blessed One said.
Having said that, the One Well-Gone, the Teacher, said further:
“There are these four qualities that lead to a lay person's happiness and well-being in lives to come.
Which four?
Being consummate in conviction, being consummate in virtue, being consummate in generosity, being consummate in discernment.
“And what does it mean to be consummate in conviction?
There is the case where a disciple of the noble ones has conviction, is convinced of the Tathagata's Awakening: 'Indeed, the Blessed One is worthy and rightly self-awakened, consummate in knowledge and conduct, well-gone, an expert with regard to the world, unexcelled as a trainer for those people fit to be tamed, the Teacher of divine and human beings, awakened, blessed.' This is called being consummate in conviction.
“And what does it mean to be consummate in virtue?
There is the case where a disciple of the noble ones abstains from taking life, abstains from stealing, abstains from illicit sexual conduct, abstains from lying, abstains from taking intoxicants that cause heedlessness.
This is called being consummate in virtue.
“And what does it mean to be consummate in generosity?
There is the case of a disciple of the noble ones, his awareness cleansed of the stain of miserliness, living at home, freely generous, openhanded, delighting in being magnanimous, responsive to requests, delighting in the distribution of alms.
This is called being consummate in generosity.
“And what does it mean to be consummate in discernment?
There is the case where a disciple of the noble ones is discerning, endowed with discernment of arising and passing away — noble, penetrating, leading to the right ending of stress.
This is called being consummate in discernment.
“These, TigerPaw, are the four qualities that lead to a lay person's happiness and well-being in lives to come.
Then Ugga, the king's chief minister, approached the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down, sat to one side.
As he was sitting there, he said to the Blessed One: “It's amazing, lord, & awesome, how prosperous Migara Rohaneyya is, how great his treasures, how great his resources!
“But what is his property, Ugga?
What are his great treasures & great resources?
“One hundred thousand pieces of gold, lord, to say nothing of his silver.
“That is treasure, Ugga.
I don't say that it's not.
And that treasure is open to fire, floods, kings, thieves, & hateful heirs.
But these seven treasures are not open to fire, flood, kings, thieves, or hateful heirs.
Which seven?
The treasure of conviction, the treasure of virtue, the treasure of conscience, the treasure of concern, the treasure of listening, the treasure of generosity, the treasure of discernment.
These, Ugga, are the seven treasures that are not open to fire, flood, kings, thieves, or hateful heirs.
“There are these seven treasures.
Which seven?
The treasure of conviction, the treasure of virtue, the treasure of conscience, the treasure of concern, the treasure of listening, the treasure of generosity, the treasure of discernment.
“And what is the treasure of conviction?
There is the case where a disciple of the noble ones has conviction, is convinced of the Tathagata's Awakening: 'Indeed, the Blessed One is worthy and rightly self-awakened, consummate in knowledge & conduct, well-gone, an expert with regard to the world, unexcelled as a trainer for those people fit to be tamed, the Teacher of divine & human beings, awakened, blessed.' This is called the treasure of conviction.
“And what is the treasure of virtue?
There is the case where a disciple of the noble ones abstains from taking life, abstains from stealing, abstains from illicit sexual conduct, abstains from lying, abstains from taking intoxicants that cause heedlessness.
This, monks, is called the treasure of virtue.
“And what is the treasure of conscience?
There is the case where a disciple of the noble ones feels shame at bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, mental misconduct.
This is called the treasure of conscience.
“And what is the treasure of concern?
There is the case where a disciple of the noble ones feels concern for bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, mental misconduct.
This is called the treasure of concern.
“And what is the treasure of listening?
There is the case where a disciple of the noble ones has heard much, has retained what he/she has heard, has stored what he/she has heard.
Whatever teachings are admirable in the beginning, admirable in the middle, admirable in the end, that — in their meaning and expression — proclaim the holy life that is entirely complete and pure: those he/she has listened to often, retained, discussed, accumulated, examined with his/her mind, and well-penetrated in terms of his/her views.
This is called the treasure of listening.
“And what is the treasure of generosity?
There is the case of a disciple of the noble ones, his awareness cleansed of the stain of stinginess, living at home, freely generous, openhanded, delighting in being magnanimous, responsive to requests, delighting in the distribution of alms.
This is called the treasure of generosity.
“And what is the treasure of discernment?
There is the case where a disciple of the noble ones is discerning, endowed with discernment of arising & passing away — noble, penetrating, leading to the right ending of stress.
This is called the treasure of discernment.
“These, monks, are the seven treasures.
§.
“Now what, monks, is the Noble Eightfold Path?
Right view, right resolve, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration.
“And what is right view?
Knowledge with regard to stress, knowledge with regard to the origination of stress, knowledge with regard to the stopping of stress, knowledge with regard to the way of practice leading to the stopping of stress: This, monks, is called right view.
“And what is right resolve?
Being resolved on renunciation, on freedom from ill will, on harmlessness: This, monks, is called right resolve.
“And what is right speech?
Abstaining from lying, abstaining from divisive speech, abstaining from abusive speech, abstaining from idle chatter: This, monks, is called right speech.
“And what is right action?
Abstaining from taking life, abstaining from stealing, abstaining from unchastity: This, monks, is called right action.
“And what is right livelihood?
There is the case where a disciple of the noble ones, having abandoned dishonest livelihood, keeps his life going with right livelihood: This, monks, is called right livelihood.
“And what is right effort?
There is the case where a monk generates desire, endeavors, activates persistence, upholds & exerts his intent for the sake of the non-arising of evil, unskillful qualities that have not yet arisen.
He generates desire, endeavors, activates persistence, upholds & exerts his intent for the sake of the abandonment of evil, unskillful qualities that have arisen.
He generates desire, endeavors, activates persistence, upholds & exerts his intent for the sake of the arising of skillful qualities that have not yet arisen.
He generates desire, endeavors, activates persistence, upholds & exerts his intent for the maintenance, non-confusion, increase, plenitude, development, & culmination of skillful qualities that have arisen: This, monks, is called right effort.
“And what is right mindfulness?
There is the case where a monk remains focused on the body in & of itself — ardent, aware, & mindful — putting away greed & distress with reference to the world.
He remains focused on feelings in & of themselves — ardent, aware, & mindful — putting away greed & distress with reference to the world.
He remains focused on the mind in & of itself — ardent, aware, & mindful — putting away greed & distress with reference to the world.
He remains focused on mental qualities in & of themselves — ardent, aware, & mindful — putting away greed & distress with reference to the world.
This, monks, is called right mindfulness.
“And what is right concentration?
There is the case where a monk — quite withdrawn from sensuality, withdrawn from unskillful qualities — enters & remains in the first jhana: rapture & pleasure born from withdrawal, accompanied by directed thought & evaluation.
With the stilling of directed thoughts & evaluations, he enters & remains in the second jhana: rapture & pleasure born of concentration, unification of awareness free from directed thought & evaluation — internal assurance.
With the fading of rapture, he remains equanimous, mindful, & alert, and senses pleasure with the body.
He enters & remains in the third jhana, of which the Noble Ones declare, 'Equanimous & mindful, he has a pleasant abiding.' With the abandoning of pleasure & pain — as with the earlier disappearance of elation & distress — he enters & remains in the fourth jhana: purity of equanimity & mindfulness, neither pleasure nor pain.
This, monks, is called right concentration.
But the time has come for a vacation.
For the next few months I won't be making any significant new additions to the site.
I will, however, continue to make corrections as they are brought to my attention and will continue mailing copies of the Handful of Leaves CD.
I hope the dearth of news in this “What's New” page won't discourage you from exploring the website and reading from the rich collection already available here.
There are some real gems here; I invite you to dig for them.
If you're an old-time Access to Insight visitor in search of something new, you might enjoy looking once again at the “Beginnings” page.
A little “beginner's mind” can go a long way.
'I am subject to aging, have not gone beyond aging.' This is the first fact that one should reflect on often, whether one is a woman or a man, lay or ordained.
'I am subject to illness, have not gone beyond illness'…
'I am subject to death, have not gone beyond death'…
'I will grow different, separate from all that is dear and appealing to me'…
'I am the owner of my actions, heir to my actions, born of my actions, related through my actions, and have my actions as my arbitrator.
Whatever I do, for good or for evil, to that will I fall heir'…
These are the five facts that one should reflect on often, whether one is a woman or a man, lay or ordained.
To make this move, I've temporarily disabled several features of the website, including the search engine and the zip downloads.
I hope to have these back in service within the next week or two.
In the meantime, please be patient as I track down the myriad little bugs and glitches that inevitably result from a move such as this.
If you have any problems, please let me know.
Thanks!
Please note that I have a new e-mail address: “john at access to insight dot oh are gee”.
Finally, please also note that a few months ago I changed my mailing address:
You can always find the most up-to-date contact information on the “Frequently Asked Questions” page.
Note: The previous stream-entry study guide has a new title: Stream-entry, Part: The Way to Stream-entry.
Stay tuned to this “What's New” page in the coming months for more details about the CD.
In the meantime, please do not send me any requests for the CD just yet.
I'll let you know when I'm ready to handle them.
Thanks for your patience!
I am considering putting together another free CD-ROM edition of this website.
To make it even more useful than earlier editions, I would like to include a search engine right on the disk.
Do you have any experience designing search engine software that could work on a CD-ROM?
Requirements for the software include:
If you have any ideas as to where I might find such software, or if you might be interested in writing it, let's talk!
The final section of the Theragatha of the Khuddaka Nikaya contains fifteen poems composed by Venerable Vangisa, the monk whom the Buddha had designated as his foremost disciple in the composition of spontaneous verse.
The subject of these poems ranges widely: from expressions of Vangisa's own inner struggles and setbacks in Dhamma practice, to verses in praise of the Buddha and some of his great discciples, to verses in celebration of Vangisa's final attainment of arahantship.
This book contains a carefully annotated translation of these poems, along with a helpful Introduction that places them in their historical and literary context.
Note: The suttas from this book have also been indexed and added to the website's sutta archive.
Wisdom Publications is pleased to announce its new paperback anthology in the award-winning “Teachings of the Buddha” discourses series:
Initially conceived in response to requests from professors, this collection organizes the wealth of the Pali Nikayas within a single inexpensive volume that is ideal for course adoption.
The ten thematic chapters, each with a clear and thoughtful introduction by Bhikkhu Bodhi, make the vast and ancient discourses accessible as never before.
In the Buddha's Words is now in print.
If you would like to receive a PDF file of the detailed table of contents, prefaces, and introduction, simply email wisdom@wisdompubs.org with the exact words “send pdf” in the subject heading.
The file you will receive can be opened with Adobe Acrobat Reader.
Access to Insight's home page has a new look.
I hope you like it.
Other minor cosmetic changes to the website will be coming in the weeks ahead.
The purpose of these changes is to unify the appearance of the website's many pages and to make it easier for those of you who wish to reprint or redistribute them elsewhere to reformat them to suit your own stylistic preferences.
There are bound to be some glitches during this transition — especially some inconsistencies of font style and other cosmetics.
For these I ask for your patience.
If you discover any other problems, of course, please let me know.
I've reorganized the Other Theravada Sources page and expanded it to include websites that offer Tipitaka translations in languages other than English and audio recordings and streams.
For well over a year now, a small group of longtime friends of ATI has quietly been plugging away at developing Vicaya, a search engine that will accompany the forthcoming CD-ROM edition of Access to Insight.
Vicaya version..
is now ready for general testing.
You can help by downloading Vicaya and trying it out.
If you have any comments, please post them to the Vicaya User List.
The more people we can get testing it now, the less likely it is that there will be problems with it later on.
The sutta translations on this website were provided by several translators, not all of whom used the same edition of the Tipitaka as their Pali source.
Some editions enumerate the suttas slightly differently, which can often lead to confusion.
In May I decided to adopt the PTS as the common reference point for sutta numbers; henceforth all suttas from the Anguttara Nikaya on Access to Insight will be numbered following the PTS system.
To implement this change I renumbered approximately thirty suttas, as summarized in the table below.
This brand-new website offers a library of free audio recordings of English translations of Pali suttas, selected and read aloud by respected Dhamma teachers within the Theravada Buddhist tradition.
The suttas in this library were hand-picked by the teachers themselves, which means that, although the collection may be small, it contains of some of the most important suttas in the entire Pali canon.
Whenever you see the SuttaReadings icon on Access to Insight, you've found a link to the SuttaReadings website.
Clicking on that icon from a sutta page will take you to an audio recording of this sutta being read aloud.
If the icon appears next to an author's name, you can click on the icon to learn what sutta readings by that author are available.
I hope you find this new service valuable.
Listen well.
One of the most deeply rooted deceptions in the mind is its tendency to identify the body as “self.” Recognizing that this seductive but distorted view of reality can be a stubborn impediment to progress in the Dhamma, the Buddha taught his students some practices and reflections specifically designed to undercut this illusion.
This book is a marvelous anthology of many of these teachings, taken from the Pali canon and related texts, plus many more from the author's own writings.
Caution: The readings in this book are very powerful, and are probably not suitable for beginning meditators.
To paraphrase the author's comments in the Introduction: Meditation on the unattractiveness of the body should be practiced with moderation and care, especially if one has no personal contact with a meditation teacher.
I hope you like the cleaner new design.
I've also added a few new features, including:
During the transition to the new design, I've had to temporarily disable a few familiar links and features, including the whole-site download.
But don't worry — they'll be back.
Stay tuned…
Internet Explorer users and mobile device users: I'm still working on getting the search button and the sunshine pop-up menu to work properly for you.
I'm aware of the issue and hope to fix it soon.
Thanks for your patience!
For example, look at the Anattalakkhana Sutta.
Above the sutta's title you'll see its PTS reference number: S iii.
Click on that, scroll down a few lines, and you'll find the sutta in Pali!
An ATI reader has developed a free app that allows you to carry the ATI website on your Windows Phone.

→ See more info about using ATI on other mobile devices.
I’ve been touched by the many good wishes I’ve received from you in the last few months since I announced my retirement from Access to Insight.
It has been a joy and an honor to share this work with such a supportive, attentive, earnest, and grateful audience of readers and practitioners.
Thank you all.
To all of you who have contributed in so many ways over the years to making Access to Insight what it is today, I extend my heartfelt thanks.
And I offer a special ­bow of appreciation to those of you who have been quietly reading these pages, putting the Buddha’s teachings into practice, and discovering for yourselves the truths toward which they point.
Although I am retiring, Access to Insight will remain in its present state at www.accesstoinsight.org into the foreseeable future.
If you are a webmaster, web designer, web developer, or software developer and you are interested in advancing the use of technology in studying the Dhamma, I invite you to read “A Parting Note to ATI Techies”.
I send you all my best wishes for the greatest success in all your wholesome endeavors.
Clearly, Access to Insight's readers enjoy a little randomness in their lives!
By popular request, the “Random Article” link is back.
It, too, will be included in the Legacy Edition and is now available in the offline edition.
Enjoy!
By popular request, the “Random Sutta” link is here to stay and will be included in the forthcoming Legacy Edition.
In fact, it is already available in the offline edition.
Enjoy!
After years of operating and maintaining Access to Insight, the time has come for me to retire from its day-to-day operations so that I can devote my attention to other projects.
Over the remaining months of, I'll be working on streamlining the website so that it can stand on its own, unattended, for long periods of time.

As Access to Insight now enters a new chapter in its long career, I hope you will continue to find it rewarding and helpful in advancing your understanding of Dhamma for a long time to come.
Because he has given a gift without injuring himself or others, wherever the result of that gift is produced, he becomes rich, with great wealth and property, and no damage comes to his property from any source, whether from fire, floods, kings, thieves, or displeasing heirs.
Being easy to correct is to be developed for abandoning being difficult to correct.
Having fulfilled the aggregate of concentration, it is possible for him to fulfill the aggregate of wisdom.”
Having investigated and scrutinized, she is suspicious about a matter that merits suspicion.
He gives what is pure; he gives what is excellent; he gives a timely gift; he gives what is allowable; he gives after investigation; he gives often; while giving he settles his mind in confidence; and having given, he is elated.
He is accomplished in manners and duties; he is learned and an expert in learning; he is given to effacement and delights in seclusion; he is a good speaker with a good delivery; he is wise, intelligent, and astute.
He is not filled with lust toward that which provokes lust; he is not filled with hatred toward that which provokes hatred; he is not deluded by that which deludes; he is not agitated by that which agitates; and he is not intoxicated by that which intoxicates.
He is not miserly with regard to dwellings.
He is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha … he trains in them.
He tries to prevent bhikkhus from acquiring gains; he tries to bring harm to bhikkhus; he tries to prevent bhikkhus from residing; he insults and reviles bhikkhus; he divides bhikkhus from each other; he speaks dispraise of the Buddha; he speaks dispraise of the Dhamma; he speaks dispraise of the Saṅgha.
Here, a bhikkhu develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to desire and activities of striving.
Here, a bhikkhu does not understand as it really is: ‘These are qualities that pertain to deterioration,’ and: ‘These are qualities that pertain to stabilization,’ and: ‘These are qualities that pertain to distinction,’ and: ‘These are qualities that pertain to penetration.’
He does not practice carefully, and he does not do what is suitable.
Here, a bhikkhu is skilled in the attainment of concentration; he is skilled in the duration of concentration; he is skilled in emergence from concentration; he practices carefully; he practices persistently; and he does what is suitable.
Here, one kind of wild colt possesses speed but not beauty or the right proportions.
Here, the noble disciple reflects thus: ‘The result of the destruction of life is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons the destruction of life; he descends from the destruction of life.
His fellow monks, those with whom he dwells, usually behave toward him in agreeable ways by body, speech, and mind, seldom in disagreeable ways.
His mind is well consolidated by mind:‘My mind is without lust.’
His mind is well consolidated by mind: ‘My mind is without hatred.’
His mind is well consolidated by mind: ‘My mind is without delusion.’
His mind is well consolidated by mind: ‘My mind is not subject to lust.’
His mind is well consolidated by mind: ‘My mind is not subject to hatred.’
His mind is well consolidated by mind: ‘My mind is not subject to delusion.’
His mind is well consolidated by mind: ‘My mind is not subject to return to sense-sphere existence.’
His mind is well consolidated by mind: ‘My mind is not subject to return to form-sphere existence.’
His mind is well consolidated by mind: ‘My mind is not subject to return to formless-sphere existence.’
Householder, one who destroys life, with the destruction of life as condition, creates peril and enmity pertaining to the present life and peril and enmity pertaining to future lives, and he also experiences mental pain and dejection.
I am pleasing and agreeable to the armed forces, so why shouldn’t I yearn to be the viceroy?
It is possible that one who possesses a conviction in conformity will enter upon the fixed course of rightness.
Noise is a thorn to the first jhāna.
One abstains from the destruction of life oneself, encourages others to abstain from the destruction of life, and approves of abstaining from the destruction of life … one holds right view oneself, encourages others in right view, and approves of right view.
One commits the offense of going to visit without taking leave.
One has not deprived one’s mother of life; nor deprived one’s father of life; nor deprived an arahant of life; one has not, with a mind of hatred, shed the Tathāgata’s blood; one has not created a schism in the Saṅgha; one is wise, intelligent, astute.
One should disregard the person one resents and pay no attention to him; in this way one should remove the resentment toward that person.
One uses the requisites for maintaining one’s life with an awareness of their purpose.
One who, though not celibate, claims to be celibate; one who slanders a pure celibate leading a pure celibate life with a groundless charge of non-celibacy; and one who holds such a doctrine and view as this: ‘There is no fault in sensual pleasures,’ and then falls into indulgence in sensual pleasures.
sensual thoughts, thoughts of ill will, and thoughts of harming; and he is unwise, stupid, dull.
Some other person gains the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena but not internal serenity of mind.
Some other person has abandoned the lower fetters, but not the fetters for obtaining rebirth or the fetters for obtaining existence.
the next generation follow one’s example.
The unattractive is to be developed for abandoning lust.
The wonder of psychic potency, the wonder of mind-reading, and the wonder of instruction.
There is the speaker who exhausts the meaning but not the phrasing.
They destroy life … … and hold wrong view.
They explain an offense with redress as an offense without redress, and an offense without redress as an offense with redress.
thoughts of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness; and he is wise, not stupid or dull.
unattractiveness should be developed to abandon lust.
unattractiveness should be developed to abandon lust.
We rose from our seats and left,: ‘We shall find out what the Blessed One has to say about this statement.’”
When a bhikkhu enters and dwells in a measureless concentration of mind while using a lodging, one acquires a measureless stream of merit, stream of the wholesome, a nutriment of happiness … that leads … to one’s welfare and happiness.
Without fulfilling the factor of proper conduct, it is impossible for him to fulfill the factor of a trainee.
‘He acted for my harm, but what can be done about it?’ one removes resentment.
‘He acted for my harm,’ one harbors resentment.
‘He acted for the benefit of one displeasing and disagreeable to me,’ one harbors resentment.
‘He acted for the harm of one pleasing and agreeable to me,’ one harbors resentment.
‘He acted for the harm of one who is pleasing and agreeable to me, but what can be done about it?’ one removes resentment.
‘He is acting for my harm, but what can be done about it?’ one removes resentment.
‘He is acting for my harm,’ one harbors resentment.
‘He is acting for the benefit of one displeasing and disagreeable to me,’ one harbors resentment.
‘He is acting for the benefit of one who is displeasing and disagreeable to me, but what can be done about it?’ one removes resentment.
‘He is acting for the harm of one pleasing and agreeable to me,’ one harbors resentment.
‘He is acting for the harm of one who is pleasing and agreeable to me, but what can be done about it?’ one removes resentment.
‘He will act for my harm, but what can be done about it?’ one removes resentment.
‘He will act for my harm,’ one harbors resentment.
‘He will act for the benefit of one displeasing and disagreeable to me,’ one harbors resentment.
‘He will act for the benefit of one who is displeasing and disagreeable to me, but what can be done about it?’ one removes resentment.
‘He will act for the harm of one pleasing and agreeable to me,’ one harbors resentment.
‘He will act for the harm of one who is pleasing and agreeable to me, but what can be done about it?’ one removes resentment  ‘He acted for the benefit of one who is displeasing and disagreeable to me, but what can be done about it?’ one removes resentment.
‘I will give a progressive talk,’ one should teach the Dhamma to others.
‘I will give a talk out of sympathy,’ one should teach the Dhamma to others.
‘I will give a talk that shows reasons,’ one should teach the Dhamma to others.
‘I will give a talk without harming myself or others,’ one should teach the Dhamma to others.
‘I will not give a talk while intent on material gain,’ one should teach the Dhamma to others.
‘I will speak at a proper time, not at an improper time; I will speak truthfully, not falsely; I will speak gently, not harshly; I will speak in a beneficial way, not in a harmful way; I will speak with a mind of loving-kindness, not while harboring hatred.’
A bhikkhu who wishes to reprove another should first establish these five things in himself.
‘They acted for my harm, but what can be done about it?’ one removes resentment.
‘They acted for my harm,’ one harbors resentment.
‘They acted for the benefit of one who is displeasing and disagreeable to me,’ one harbors resentment.
‘They acted for the harm of one who is pleasing and agreeable to me,’ one harbors resentment.
‘They acted …’ … ‘They are acting …’ … ‘They will act for the harm of one who is pleasing and agreeable to me, but what can be done about it?’ one removes resentment  ‘They acted …’ … ‘They are acting …’ … ‘They will act for the benefit of one who is displeasing and disagreeable to me, but what can be done about it?’ one removes resentment.
‘They are acting for my harm, but what can be done about it?’ one removes resentment.
‘They are acting for my harm,’ one harbors resentment.
‘They are acting for the benefit of one who is displeasing and disagreeable to me,’ one harbors resentment.
‘They are acting for the harm of one who is pleasing and agreeable to me,’ one harbors resentment.
‘They will act for my harm, but what can be done about it?’ one removes resentment.
‘They will act for my harm,’ one harbors resentment.
‘They will act for the benefit of one who is displeasing and disagreeable to me,’ one harbors resentment.
‘They will act for the harm of one who is pleasing and agreeable to me,’ one harbors resentment.
“Is it possible, Bhante, in this Dhamma and discipline to describe a bhikkhu as ‘ten-less’ by the mere counting of years?”
… Bhante, let whatever merit I may have gained by this act of giving be dedicated to the happiness of the great king Vessavaṇa.”
… It is in such a way, bhikkhus, that you should train yourselves.’
… On a second occasion, Sīha’s determination to go see the Blessed One subsided.
… The bhikkhu who has reverence for the Teacher, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha, the training, concentration, and heedfulness also has reverence for hospitality.
… Then, Bhante, we approached the Venerable Mahākaccāna and asked him about the meaning.
… “Is it possible, Bhante, in this Dhamma and discipline to describe a bhikkhu as ‘ten-less’ by the mere counting of years?”
***
[“Someone refutes and disproves both a doctrine that accords with the Dhamma and a doctrine contrary to the Dhamma by means of a doctrine that accords with the Dhamma.
A bad person is ungrateful and unthankful.
A bhikkhu accomplished in virtue,a learned bhikkhunī,a male lay follower endowed with faith,a female lay follower endowed with faith:these are the ones that adorn the Saṅgha;these are the Saṅgha’s adornments.
A bhikkhu charged with aggravated misconduct should behave rightly with respect to these eight principles.”
A bhikkhu devoid of faith falls away and is not established in the good Dhamma.
A bhikkhu endowed with faith does not fall away but is established in the good Dhamma.
A bhikkhu has abandoned and well abandoned the unwholesome when he has abandoned it by seeing it with noble wisdom.
A bhikkhu should honor, respect, and dwell in dependence on the Teacher so that he might abandon the unwholesome and develop the wholesome.
A bhikkhu who delights in heedfulness,seeing the danger in heedlessness,is incapable of decline:he is close to nibbāna.
A bhikkhu who has a sense of moral shame … A bhikkhu who has moral dread … An energetic bhikkhu … A wise bhikkhu does not fall away but is established in the good Dhamma.
A bhikkhu who is immoral, of bad character; a bhikkhunī who is immoral, of bad character; a male lay follower who is immoral, of bad character; and a female lay follower who is immoral, of bad character.
A bhikkhu who is polluted,tainted by a stench,is far from nibbānaand reaps only distress.
A bhikkhu who is virtuous, of good character; a bhikkhunī who is virtuous, of good character; a male lay follower who is virtuous, of good character; and a female lay follower who is virtuous, of good character.
A bhikkhu who possesses these four qualities is practicing the unmistakable way and has laid the groundwork for the destruction of the taints.”
A bhikkhu who possesses these four qualities is practicing the unmistakable way and has laid the groundwork for the destruction of the taints.”
A bhikkhu who possesses these ten qualities may be agreed upon to adjudicate.”
A bhikkhu who possesses these ten qualities may give full ordination.” 
A bhikkhu whose taints are destroyed and a lion, king of the beasts.
A bhikkhu whose taints are destroyed and a thoroughbred elephant.
A bhikkhu whose taints are destroyed and a thoroughbred horse.
A bhikkhu with taints destroyed, who has lived the spiritual life and done his task, does not see in himself anything further to be done or any increase what has been done.
A bhikkhu with taints destroyed, who has lived the spiritual life and done his task, does not see in himself anything further to be done or any increase what has been done.
A bhikkhu with taints destroyed, who has lived the spiritual life and done his task, does not see in himself anything further to be done or any increase what has been done.
A bhikkhunī who is competent … A male lay follower who is competent … A female lay follower who is competent, disciplined, self-confident, learned, an expert on the Dhamma, practicing in accordance with the Dhamma, adorns the Saṅgha.
A coarse offense and an offense that is not coarse.
A crow has these ten bad qualities.
A deluded person, immersed in ignorance, destroys life … and he encourages others to do likewise.
A developed and cultivated mind is malleable and wieldy.” 
A developed mind is wieldy.”
A developed mind leads to great good.”
A donor who gives food gives the recipients these five things.”
A friend gives what is hard to give,and he does what is hard to do.He forgives you your harsh wordsand endures what is hard to endure.
A gift given to ascetics and brahmins who possess these eight factors is not of great fruit and benefit, and it is not very brilliant or pervasive.
A gift given to ascetics and brahmins who possess these eight factors is of great fruit and benefit, and it is extraordinarily brilliant and pervasive.”
A good person is grateful and thankful.
A grateful and thankful person is rare in the world.
A grateful and thankful person is rare in the world.
A grateful and thankful person is rare in the world.
A greedy person, full of longing, destroys life, takes what is not given, transgresses with another’s wife, and speaks falsehood; and he encourages others to do likewise.
A guarded mind leads to great good.”
A hair blanket is cold in cold weather, hot in hot weather, ugly, foul-smelling, and uncomfortable.
A householder or a householder’s son approaches him and invites him for the next day’s meal.
A householder or a householder’s son approaches him and invites him for the next day’s meal.
A householder or a householder’s son might have a house with a peaked roof, plastered inside and out, draft-free, with bolts fastened and shutters closed.
A king’s frontier fortress is well provided with this fifth appurtenance for protecting its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders.
A king’s frontier fortress is well provided with this first appurtenance for protecting its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders.
A king’s frontier fortress is well provided with this fourth appurtenance for protecting its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders.
A king’s frontier fortress is well provided with this second appurtenance for protecting its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders.
A king’s frontier fortress is well provided with this seventh appurtenance for protecting its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders.
A king’s frontier fortress is well provided with this sixth appurtenance for protecting its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders.
A king’s frontier fortress is well provided with this third appurtenance for protecting its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders.
A large tree with a mighty trunk,branches, leaves, and fruit,firm roots, and bearing fruit,is a support for many birds.Having flown across the sky,the birds resort to this delightful base:those in need of shade partake of its shade;those needing fruit enjoy its fruit.
A lay follower should not engage in these five trades.”
A light offense and a grave offense.
A lump of almsfood is a trifle among meals, easily gained and blameless.
A man binds a woman by his form … by his smile … by his speech … by singing … by weeping … by his appearance … by a present … by his touch.
A man binds a woman in these eight ways.
A man might arrive, afflicted and oppressed by the heat, weary, thirsty, and parched.
A man might have these seven kinds of wives.
A man standing on the sidelines might think: ‘Truly, this man must have committed an evil deed, reprehensible, punishable by beheading, insofar as the king’s men tied his arms tightly behind his back with a strong rope … and beheaded him south of the city.
A man would close off its inlets and open up its outlets, and sufficient rain would not fall.
A man would open up its inlets and close off its outlets, and sufficient rain would fall.
A material gem and the gem of the Dhamma.
A morally shameless bhikkhu … A morally reckless bhikkhu … A lazy bhikkhu … An unwise bhikkhu falls away and is not established in the good Dhamma.
A noble disciple who desires fame should practice the way conducive to fame.
A noble disciple who desires long life should practice the way conducive to long life.
A noble disciple who desires the heavens should practice the way conducive to heaven.
A noble disciple whose mind is straight gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains joy connected with the Dhamma.
A noble disciple whose mind is straight gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains joy connected with the Dhamma.
A noble disciple whose mind is straight gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains joy connected with the Dhamma.
A noble disciple whose mind is straight gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains joy connected with the Dhamma.
A noble disciple whose mind is straight gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains joy connected with the Dhamma.
A noble disciple whose mind is straight gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains joy connected with the Dhamma.
A noble disciple whose mind is straight gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains joy connected with the Dhamma.
A noble disciple whose mind is straight gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains joy connected with the Dhamma.
A noble disciple whose mind is straight gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains joy connected with the Dhamma.
A noble disciple whose mind is straight gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains joy connected with the Dhamma.
A noble disciple whose mind is straight gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains joy connected with the Dhamma.
A noble disciple whose mind is straight gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains joy connected with the Dhamma.
A noble disciple whose mind is straight gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains joy connected with the Dhamma.
A noble disciple whose mind is straight gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains joy connected with the Dhamma.
A number of male and female householders were also traveling along the same highway.
A person full of hate, with a mind of ill will, destroys life … and he encourages others to do likewise.
A person has been reborn in the central provinces, but he holds wrong view and has a distorted perspective: ‘There is nothing given, nothing sacrificed, nothing offered; there is no fruit or result of good and bad actions; there is no this world, no other world; there is no mother, no father; there are no beings spontaneously reborn; there are in the world no ascetics and brahmins of right conduct and right practice who, having realized this world and the other world for themselves by direct knowledge, make them known to others.’
This is the sixth inopportune moment that is not the right occasion for living the spiritual life.
A person has been reborn in the central provinces, but he is unwise, stupid, obtuse, unable to understand the meaning of what has been well stated and badly stated.
A person hindered by ignorancewho has failed in the good Dhammawill long experience wandering onin birth and death.
A person who behaves rightlytoward his mother and father,toward the enlightened Tathāgata,or toward his disciple,generates much merit.
A person who behaves wronglytoward his mother and father,toward the enlightened Tathāgata,or toward his disciple, generates much demerit.
A person who can teach the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by a Tathāgata is rare in the world.
A person who possesses ten qualities is not successful … is successful … … is not purified … is purified … … does not overcome conceit … overcomes conceit … … does not grow in wisdom … grows in wisdom … … generates much demerit … generates much merit.
A person who possesses these ten qualities generates much merit.”
A person who possesses these ten qualities generates much merit.” 
A person who teaches the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by a Tathāgata is rare in the world.
A person who teaches the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata is rare in the world.
A person will be known by what he himself does.’
His disciples cover up such a teacher with respect to his behavior, and such a teacher expects to be covered up by his disciples with respect to his behavior.
A person will be known by what he himself does.’
His disciples cover up such a teacher with respect to his Dhamma teaching, and such a teacher expects to be covered up by his disciples with respect to his Dhamma teaching.
A person will be known by what he himself does.’
His disciples cover up such a teacher with respect to his explanations, and such a teacher expects to be covered up by his disciples with respect to his explanations.
A person will be known by what he himself does.’
His disciples cover up such a teacher with respect to his knowledge and vision, and such a teacher expects to be covered up by his disciples with respect to his knowledge and vision.
A person will be known by what he himself does.’
His disciples cover up such a teacher with respect to his livelihood, and such a teacher expects to be covered up by his disciples with respect to his livelihood.
A person without greed, without longing, does not destroy life, take what is not given, transgress with another’s wife, or speak falsehood; nor does he encourage others to do likewise.
A person without hate, with a mind of good will, does not destroy life … nor does he encourage others to do likewise.
A person’s bodily behavior and verbal behavior are impure, and he does not gain an opening of the mind, placidity of mind from time to time; one should also remove resentment toward such a person.
A person’s bodily behavior and verbal behavior are impure, but from time to time he gains an opening of the mind, placidity of mind; one should also remove resentment toward such a person.
A person’s bodily behavior and verbal behavior are pure, and from time to time he gains an opening of the mind, placidity of mind; one should also remove resentment toward such a person.
A person’s verbal behavior is impure, but his bodily behavior is pure; one should also remove resentment toward such a person.
A protected mind leads to great good.”
A question about eight, a concise statement about eight, an explanation of eight.
A question about eight, a concise statement about eight, an explanation of eight.
A question about five, a concise statement about five, an explanation of five.
A question about five, a concise statement about five, an explanation of five.
A question about four, a concise statement about four, an explanation of four.
A question about four, a concise statement about four, an explanation of four.
A question about nine, a concise statement about nine, an explanation of nine.
A question about nine, a concise statement about nine, an explanation of nine.
A question about seven, a concise statement about seven, an explanation of seven.
A question about seven, a concise statement about seven, an explanation of seven.
A question about six, a concise statement about six, an explanation of six.
A question about six, a concise statement about six, an explanation of six.
A question about ten, a concise statement about ten, an explanation of ten,’ it is in such a way that I understand in detail the meaning of this statement that the Blessed One spoke in brief.
A question about ten, a concise statement about ten, an explanation of ten.
A question about ten, a concise statement about ten, an explanation of ten.’
How, noble lady, is the meaning of this statement that the Blessed One spoke in brief to be seen in detail?”
A question about three, a concise statement about three, an explanation of three.
A question about three, a concise statement about three, an explanation of three.
A question about two, a concise statement about two, an explanation of two.
A question about two, a concise statement about two, an explanation of two.
A remediable offense and an irremediable offense.
A restrained mind leads to great good.”
A reverential and deferential bhikkhu endowed with faith does not fall away but is established in the good Dhamma.
A reverential and deferential bhikkhu who has a sense of moral shame … A reverential and deferential bhikkhu who has moral dread … A reverential and deferential bhikkhu who is energetic … A reverential and deferential bhikkhu who is wise does not fall away but is established in the good Dhamma.
A reverential and deferential bhikkhu who has a sense of moral shame … A reverential and deferential bhikkhu who has moral dread … … A reverential and deferential bhikkhu who is energetic … A reverential and deferential bhikkhu who is wise is capable of achieving growth, progress, and maturity in this Dhamma and discipline.
A reverential and deferential bhikkhu who is endowed with faith is capable of achieving growth, progress, and maturity in this Dhamma and discipline.
A sage by body, a sage in speech,a sage in mind, without taints:they call the sage, accomplished in sagacity,“one who has abandoned all.” 
A second time the bhikkhu Kokālika said to the Blessed One: “Bhante, although I consider the Blessed One worthy of faith and trust, Sāriputta and Moggallāna have evil desires and have come under the control of evil desires.”
A second time the Blessed One said to the wanderer Sarabha: “Tell me, Sarabha, how have you learned the Dhamma of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan son?
A second time the Venerable Meghiya said to the Blessed One: “Bhante, for the Blessed One there is nothing further to be done and no increase what has been done.
A second time the Venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One: “Bhante, in the presence of the Blessed One I heard this….
A second time the Venerable Ānanda said to the brahmin: “Brahmin, I am not asking you whom you consider worthy of veneration and praise.
A second time … A third time Bharaṇḍu the Kālāma said to Mahānāma: “Say the same, Mahānāma.”
But the Blessed One said to Mahānāma: “Say different, Mahānāma.”
A second time … A third time Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī said to the Blessed One: “Bhante, it would be good if women could obtain the going forth from the household life into homelessness in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata.”
A second time … A third time the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus … And a third time the bhikkhus were silent.
A second time … A third time the Blessed One addressed the Venerable Udāyī: “Udāyī, how many subjects of recollection are there?”
And a third time the Venerable Udāyī was silent.
A second time … A third time the Blessed One addressed the Venerable Ānanda: “Delightful is Vesālī … Delightful is the Udena Shrine … delightful the Cāpāla Shrine.
A second time … A third time the brahmin Uggatasarīra said to the Blessed One: “I have heard, Master Gotama, that the kindling of the sacrificial fire and the raising of the sacrificial post are of great fruit and benefit.”
A second time … A third time the Venerable Candikāputta addressed the bhikkhus: “Friends, Devadatta teaches the Dhamma to the bhikkhus thus: ‘When, friends, a bhikkhu’s mind is consolidated by mind, it is fitting for him to declare: “I understand: Destroyed is birth, the spiritual life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming back to any state of being.”’”
A second time … A third time the Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said to that person: “Get up, friend.
A second time … A third time the Venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One: “Bhante, it would be good if women could obtain the going forth from the household life into homelessness in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata.”
A second time … A third time, the Venerable Sāriputta addressed the bhikkhus: “Here, friends, a bhikkhu accomplished in virtuous behavior … … having been reborn among a certain group of mind-made … might enter and emerge from the cessation of perception and feeling.
A second time … A third time, the Venerable Sāriputta said: “Here, friends, it is possible that a bhikkhu accomplished in virtuous behavior … having been reborn among a certain group of mind-made … might enter and emerge from the cessation of perception and feeling.
A seed sown in a field that possesses these eight factors brings forth abundant fruits, its are delectable, and it yields a profit.
A seed sown in a field that possesses these eight factors does not bring forth abundant fruits, its are not delectable, and it does not yield a profit.
A slave or dependent might think of him: ‘Oh, may this householder or householder’s son not prosper in wealth or grain, in silver or gold!’ Or else an ascetic or brahmin gains robes, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
A snake might bite me … or sharp winds might become agitated in me, and I might die; that would be an obstacle for me.’
A snake might bite me … or wild spirits might attack me, and I might die; that would be an obstacle for me.’
A snake might bite me, or a scorpion or centipede might sting me, and I might die; that would be an obstacle for me.
A snake might bite me, or a scorpion or centipede might sting me, and I might thereby die; that would be an obstacle for me.
A stain graver than this is ignorance, the very worst of stains.
A supervisor of novices who possesses these five qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.”
A supervisor of novices who possesses these five qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
A supervisor of novices who possesses these five qualities maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition.
A supervisor of novices who possesses these five qualities preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured.”
A supervisor of novices who possesses these five qualities should be understood as foolish.
A supervisor of novices who possesses these five qualities should be understood as wise.”
A talk on faith is properly addressed to one endowed with faith; a talk on virtuous behavior is properly addressed to a virtuous person; a talk on learning is properly addressed to a learned person; a talk on generosity is properly addressed to a generous person; a talk on wisdom is properly addressed to a wise person.
A talk on faith is wrongly addressed to one devoid of faith; a talk on virtuous behavior is wrongly addressed to an immoral person; a talk on learning is wrongly addressed to one of little learning; a talk on generosity is wrongly addressed to a miser; a talk on wisdom is wrongly addressed to an unwise person.
A tamed mind leads to great good.”
A third time the bhikkhu Kokālika said to the Blessed One: “Bhante, although I consider the Blessed One worthy of faith and trust, Sāriputta and Moggallāna have evil desires and have come under the control of evil desires.”
A third time the Blessed One said to the wanderer Sarabha: “Tell me, Sarabha, how have you learned the Dhamma of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan son?
A third time the Venerable Meghiya said to the Blessed One: “Bhante, for the Blessed One there is nothing further to be done and no increase what has been done.
A third time the Venerable Sāriputta said to the Venerable Candikāputta: “Friend Candikāputta, it is not in such a way that Devadatta teaches the Dhamma to the bhikkhus.
A third time the Venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One: “Bhante, in the presence of the Blessed One I heard this….
A third time the Venerable Ānanda said to the brahmin: “Brahmin, I am not asking you whom you consider worthy of veneration and praise.
A virtuous person succeeds, not an immoral one.
A wise and mindful person knows themand sees that they are subject to change.Desirable conditions don’t excite his mindnor is he repelled by undesirable conditions.
A woman binds a man by her form … by her smile … by her speech … by singing … by weeping … by her appearance … by a present … by her touch.
A woman binds a man in these eight ways.
A woman intent on a man, a man intent on a woman, a thief intent on theft, a king engaged with his royal duties, and a bhikkhu intent on severing the bonds.
A woman or a man cannot take this body with them when they go.
A woman or a man cannot take this body with them when they go.
A woman or a man, a householder or one gone forth, should often reflect thus: ‘I am subject to old age; I am not exempt from old age.’
A woman or a man, a householder or one gone forth, should often reflect thus: ‘I am subject to illness; I am not exempt from illness.’
A woman or a man, a householder or one gone forth, should often reflect thus: ‘I am subject to death; I am not exempt from death.’
A woman or a man, a householder or one gone forth, should often reflect thus: ‘I must be parted and separated from everyone and everything dear and agreeable to me.’
A woman or a man, a householder or one gone forth, should often reflect thus: ‘I am the owner of my kamma, the heir of my kamma; I have kamma as my origin, kamma as my relative, kamma as my resort; I will be the heir of whatever kamma, good or bad, that I do.’
A woman’s stain is misconduct,miserliness is a donor’s stain;bad unwholesome qualities are stainsin this world and the next.A stain graver than theseis ignorance, the worst of stains.
A woman’s stain is misconduct.
A world that is a thousand times a thousand-to-the-second-power middling world system is called a thousand-to-the-third-power great world system.
A wretch lives together with a wretch; a wretch lives together with a female deva; a deva lives together with a wretch; a deva lives together with a female deva.
A wretch lives together with a wretch; a wretch lives together with a female deva; a deva lives together with a wretch; a deva lives together with a female deva.
Abandon mental misconduct and develop mental good conduct; do not be heedless in this.
Abandon this and enter and dwell in that!’ This is called the wonder of instruction.
Abandon this and enter and dwell in that!’—this wonder appeals to me as the most excellent and sublime of those three wonders.
Abandon this and enter and dwell in that!’”
Abandon this and enter and dwell in that!’”
Abandon verbal misconduct and develop verbal good conduct; do not be heedless in this.
Abandon wrong view and develop right view; do not be heedless in this.
Above, across, and below,as far as the world extends,he is one who scrutinizes the arising and vanishingof such phenomena as the aggregates.
Abstention from the destruction of life … and right view.
Abstention from the destruction of life … and right view.
Abstention from the destruction of life … and right view.
Abstention from the destruction of life, abstention from taking what is not given, abstention from sexual misconduct, abstention from false speech, abstention from divisive speech, abstention from harsh speech, abstention from idle chatter, non-longing, good will, and right view.
Abstention from the destruction of life, abstention from taking what is not given, abstention from sexual misconduct, abstention from false speech, abstention from divisive speech, abstention from harsh speech, abstention from idle chatter, non-longing, good will, and right view.
Accomplished in sixteen aspects,complete in eight factors,such a virtuous female lay followeris reborn in an agreeable deva world.
Accomplishment in activity, accomplishment in livelihood, and accomplishment in view.
Accomplishment in faith, accomplishment in virtuous behavior, accomplishment in generosity, and accomplishment in wisdom.
Accomplishment in faith, accomplishment in virtuous behavior, accomplishment in generosity, and accomplishment in wisdom.
Accomplishment in faith, accomplishment in virtuous behavior, accomplishment in learning, accomplishment in generosity, and accomplishment in wisdom.
Accomplishment in faith, accomplishment in virtuous behavior, accomplishment in learning, accomplishment in generosity, and accomplishment in wisdom.
Accomplishment in initiative, accomplishment in protection, good friendship, and balanced living.
Accomplishment in initiative, accomplishment in protection, good friendship, balanced living, accomplishment in faith, accomplishment in virtuous behavior, accomplishment in generosity, and accomplishment in wisdom.
Accomplishment in initiative, accomplishment in protection, good friendship, balanced living, accomplishment in faith, accomplishment in virtuous behavior, accomplishment in generosity, and accomplishment in wisdom.
Accomplishment in relatives, accomplishment in wealth, accomplishment in health, accomplishment in virtuous behavior, and accomplishment in view.
Accomplishment in virtuous behavior, accomplishment in concentration, accomplishment in wisdom, accomplishment in liberation, and accomplishment in the knowledge and vision of liberation.
Accomplishment in virtuous behavior, accomplishment in mind, and accomplishment in view.
Accomplishment in virtuous behavior, accomplishment in mind, and accomplishment in view.
Accomplishment of faith, accomplishment of virtuous behavior, and accomplishment of wisdom.
Adorning and beautifying oneself are nutriments for beauty.
Affection is born from affection; hatred is born from affection; affection is born from hatred; and hatred is born from hatred.
Afflictive bodily action, afflictive verbal action, afflictive mental action, and afflictive view.
Afflictive bodily action, afflictive verbal action, and afflictive mental action.
After he has risen from his seat, again he attends to that talk at the beginning, in the middle, and at the end.
After he has risen from his seat, again he attends to that talk at the beginning, in the middle, and at the end.
After he has risen from his seat, he still does not attend to that talk at the beginning, in the middle, or at the end.
After he has risen from his seat, he still does not attend to that talk at the beginning, in the middle, or at the end.
After his death, the householder Ugga of Vesālī was reborn among a certain group of mind-made.
After his meal, on returning from his alms round, he approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and reported to him the entire conversation he had had with the householder Ugga of Hatthigāma.
After his meal, on returning from his alms round, he approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and reported to him the entire conversation he had had with the householder Ugga of Vesālī.
After his meal, on returning from his alms round, he approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side,.
After his meal, on returning from his alms round, he resorts to a secluded lodging: the forest, the foot of a tree, a mountain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a jungle highland, the open air, a heap of straw.
After his meal, on returning from his alms round, he went to the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said: “Here, Bhante, in the morning, I dressed, took my bowl and robe, and went to the house of the female lay follower Migasālā …  … When she asked me this, I replied: ‘It was just in this way, sister, that the Blessed One declared it.’”
After his meal, on returning from his alms round, he went to the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said: “Here, Bhante, in the morning, I dressed, took my bowl and robe, and went to the house of the female lay follower Migasālā….
After his meal, when an esteemed bhikkhu has returned from his alms round, washed his feet, and is sitting with his legs crossed, holding his body straight, having established mindfulness before him, his fatigue on account of his walking and his meal has not yet subsided.
After I learned their Dhamma, I left that Dhamma and discipline.’
It would be good, Bhante, if the Blessed One would go to the wanderers’ park on the bank of the Sappinikā and, out of compassion, approach the wanderer Sarabha.”
The Blessed One consented by silence.
After I learned their Dhamma, I left that Dhamma and discipline.”
After I learned their Dhamma, I left that Dhamma and discipline’?”
When this was said, the wanderer Sarabha was silent.
After paying homage to him, they sat down to one side and said to the Blessed One: “Bhante, the Blessed One taught this synopsis …  … Then, Bhante, we approached the Venerable Ānanda and asked him about the meaning.
After paying homage to him, they sat down to one side and said to the Blessed One: “Bhante, the Blessed One taught this synopsis….
After rising, in the last watch of the night, while walking back and forth and sitting, he purifies his mind of obstructive qualities.
After rising, in the last watch of the night, while walking back and forth and sitting, he purifies his mind of obstructive qualities.
After rising, in the last watch of the night, while walking back and forth and sitting, he purifies his mind of obstructive qualities.
After six months less six days the chariotmaker had finished one wheel.
After the meal, when I have returned from the alms round, I enter a grove.
After the meal, when I have returned from the alms round, I enter a grove.
After the meal, when I have returned from the alms round, I enter a grove.
After you are gone, householder, I will be even keener to see the Blessed One and the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
After you are gone, I’ll be able to support the children and maintain the household.
Afterward it won’t be hard for me to explain my view.”
Again, a wheel-turning monarch, a righteous king who rules by the Dhamma … provides righteous protection, shelter, and guard for his khattiya vassals; for his army; for brahmins and householders; for the people of town and countryside; for ascetics and brahmins; for the animals and birds.
Again, a wheel-turning monarch, a righteous king who rules by the Dhamma, relying just on the Dhamma, honoring, respecting, and venerating the Dhamma, taking the Dhamma as his standard, banner, and authority, provides righteous protection, shelter, and guard for his khattiya vassals, his army, brahmins and householders, the people of town and countryside, ascetics and brahmins, and the animals and birds.
Again, he says: ‘You lied to me, friend, you spoke falsely when you told me to dig there.’
The other says: ‘I didn’t lie to you, friend, I didn’t speak falsely.
All beings exist through nutriment.
All beings exist through nutriment.
All beings that come and go, that pass away and undergo rebirth, are owners of their kamma, heirs of their kamma; all have kamma as their origin, kamma as their relative, kamma as their resort; all will be heirs of whatever kamma, good or bad, that they do.’
As he often reflects on this theme, the path is generated.
All beings that come and go, that pass away and undergo rebirth, are subject to death; none are exempt from death.’
As he often reflects on this theme, the path is generated.
All beings that come and go, that pass away and undergo rebirth, are subject to illness; none are exempt from illness.’
As he often reflects on this theme, the path is generated.
All beings that come and go, that pass away and undergo rebirth, are subject to old age; none are exempt from old age.’
As he often reflects on this theme, the path is generated.
All beings that come and go, that pass away and undergo rebirth, must be parted and separated from everyone and everything dear and agreeable.’
As he often reflects on this theme, the path is generated.
All these are not worth a sixteenth partof a well-developed loving mind,just as the hosts of stars cannot matcha sixteenth part of the moon’s radiance.
All those in the future who will decline in wholesome qualities will decline because of these six qualities.
All those in the future who will not decline in wholesome qualities will not decline because of these six qualities.
All those in the future who will sustain a large retinue will do so by these same four means of sustaining a favorable relationship.
All we know is ‘brahmins.’
Please, let Master Gotama teach me the Dhamma in such a way that I might know these five kinds of brahmins.”
Almsfood too, I say, is twofold: that to be used and that not to be used.
Almsfood … Lodgings, too, should be understood to be twofold: those to be used and those not to be used.
Also, one’s children and wives, and one’s slaves, servants, and workers, do not want to listen to one, do not lend an ear, and do not apply their minds to understand.
Also, one’s children and wives, and one’s slaves, servants, and workers, want to listen to one, lend an ear, and apply their minds to understand.
Also, those ascetics and brahmins whose bodily, verbal, and mental behavior are impure, and whose livelihood is impure, are incapable of knowledge and vision, of unsurpassed enlightenment.
Also, those ascetics and brahmins whose bodily, verbal, and mental behavior are impure, and whose livelihood is impure, are incapable of knowledge and vision, of unsurpassed enlightenment.
Also, those ascetics and brahmins whose bodily, verbal, and mental behavior are pure, and whose livelihood is pure, are capable of knowledge and vision, of unsurpassed enlightenment.
Also, those ascetics and brahmins whose bodily, verbal, and mental behavior are pure, and whose livelihood is pure, are capable of knowledge and vision, of unsurpassed enlightenment.
Although I know this is not allowable for the Blessed One, this sandalwood plank of mine is worth over a thousand.
Altruistic joy is to be developed for abandoning discontent.
Am I often angry or without anger?
Am I often calm?
Am I often free from doubt?
Am I often free from dullness and drowsiness?
Am I often given to ill will or without ill will?
Am I often lazy or energetic?
Am I often overcome by dullness and drowsiness or free from dullness and drowsiness?
Am I often plagued by doubt or free from doubt?
Am I often restless or calm?
Am I often unconcentrated or concentrated?’
Am I often without anger?
Am I often without ill will?
Amid those who are self-constrained, the Stable Onewould not posit as categorically true or falseanything seen, heard, or sensed,clung to and considered truth by others.
Among cattle of any sort,whether black, white, red, or golden,mottled, uniform, or pigeon-colored,the tamed bull is born,the one that can bear the load,possessing strength, advancing with good speed.They yoke the burden just to him;they are not concerned about his color.
Among cattle of any sort,whether black, white, red, or golden,mottled, uniform, or pigeon-colored,the tamed bull is born,the one that can bear the load,possessing strength, advancing with good speed.They yoke the burden just to him;they are not concerned about his color.So too, among human beingsit is in any kind of birth—among khattiyas, brahmins, vessas,suddas, caṇḍālas, or scavengers—among people of any sortthat the tamed person of good manners is born:one firm in Dhamma, virtuous in conduct,truthful in speech, endowed with moral shame;one who has abandoned birth and death,consummate in the spiritual life,with the burden dropped, detached,who has done his task, free of taints;who has gone beyond all things and by non-clinging has reached nibbāna:an offering is truly vastwhen planted in that spotless field.
Among gifts, the best is the gift of the Dhamma.
Among the latter three persons, one is not subject to decline, one is subject to decline, and one is bound to attain nibbāna.” 
Among these five powers, the power of wisdom is foremost, the one that holds all in place, the one that unifies them.
Among these five trainee’s powers, the power of wisdom is foremost, the one that holds all the others in place, the one that unifies them.
Among these, one should approach in such a way … one should remain silent in such a way’—he is called ‘one who knows the assembly.’
Thus he is one who knows the Dhamma, one who knows the meaning, one who knows himself, one who knows moderation, one who knows the proper time, and one who knows the assembly.
Among these, one should approach in such a way … one should remain silent in such a way’—he would not be called ‘one who knows the assembly.’
But because he knows the assembly—’This is an assembly of khattiyas … of ascetics.
Among these, one should approach in such a way; one should stop in such a way; one should act in such a way; one should sit down in such a way; one should speak in such a way; one should remain silent in such a way.’
If a bhikkhu did not know the assembly: ‘This is an assembly of khattiyas … of ascetics.
Among types of beneficent conduct, the best is when one encourages, settles, and establishes a person without faith in the accomplishment of faith, an immoral person in the accomplishment of virtuous behavior, a miserly person in the accomplishment of generosity, and an unwise person in the accomplishment of wisdom.
Among types of endearing speech, the best is repeatedly teaching the Dhamma to one who is interested in it and listens with eager ears.
Among types of impartiality, the best is that a stream-enterer is equal to a stream-enterer, a once-returner is equal to a once-returner, a non-returner is equal to a non-returner, and an arahant is equal to an arahant.
An abundance of lust, an abundance of hatred, an abundance of delusion, and his wisdom eye does not tread in the deep matters of what is possible and impossible.
An angry person slays his father;an angry person slays his own mother;an angry person slays a brahmin;an angry person slays a worldling.
An arising is seen, a vanishing is seen, and its alteration while it persists is seen.
An assembly of khattiyas, an assembly of brahmins, an assembly of householders, an assembly of ascetics, an assembly of the devas the four great kings, an assembly of the Tāvatiṃsa devas, an assembly of Māra, an assembly of Brahmā.
An assigner of meals who possesses these five qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.”
An assigner of meals who possesses these five qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
An assigner of meals who possesses these five qualities maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition.
An assigner of meals who possesses these five qualities preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured.”
An assigner of meals who possesses these five qualities should be understood as foolish.
An assigner of meals who possesses these five qualities should be understood as wise.”
An earnest, capable bhikkhu abandons, dispels, terminates, and obliterates them.
An earnest, capable bhikkhu abandons, dispels, terminates, and obliterates them.
An earnest, capable bhikkhu abandons, dispels, terminates, and obliterates them.
An elder bhikkhu is speaking on the Dhamma and the discipline.’
Those words of his should be preserved, just as they deposit a cloth from Kāsi in a fragrant casket.
An elder is of long-standing, long gone forth.
An enemy does not delight in an enemy having friends.
An enemy does not delight in an enemy’s going to a good destination.
An enemy does not delight in the beauty of an enemy.
An enemy does not delight in the fame of an enemy.
An enemy does not delight in the success of an enemy.
An enemy does not delight in the wealth of an enemy.
An enemy does not delight when an enemy sleeps well.
An energetic person succeeds, not one who is lazy.
An energetic person succeeds, not one who is lazy.
An evil bhikkhu has these ten bad qualities.” 
An inspiration has come to me, Fortunate One!”
An instructed noble disciple also meets gain and loss, disrepute and fame, blame and praise, and pleasure and pain.
An irreverent and undeferential bhikkhu devoid of faith falls away and is not established in the good Dhamma.
An irreverent and undeferential bhikkhu devoid of faith is not capable of achieving growth, progress, and maturity in this Dhamma and discipline.
An irreverent and undeferential bhikkhu who is morally shameless … An irreverent and undeferential bhikkhu who is morally reckless … An irreverent and undeferential bhikkhu who is lazy … An irreverent and undeferential bhikkhu who is unwise is not capable of achieving growth, progress, and maturity in this Dhamma and discipline.
An irreverent and undeferential morally shameless bhikkhu … An irreverent and undeferential morally reckless bhikkhu … An irreverent and undeferential lazy bhikkhu … An irreverent and undeferential unwise bhikkhu falls away and is not established in the good Dhamma.
An oil lamp would be burning and his four wives would serve him in extremely agreeable ways.
An undeluded person, who has arrived at true knowledge, does not destroy life … nor does he encourage others to do likewise.
An undeveloped mind is unwieldy.”
An undeveloped mind leads to great harm.”
An unguarded mind leads to great harm.”
An uninstructed worldling, intoxicated with health, engages in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
An uninstructed worldling, intoxicated with life, engages in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
An uninstructed worldling, intoxicated with youth, engages in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
An unprotected mind leads to great harm.”
An unrestrained mind leads to great harm.”
An unsuitable show is a thorn to one guarding the doors of the sense faculties.
An untamed mind leads to great harm.”
An unwise person might be afraid of a bad destination; a lazy person might be afraid of a bad destination; a person who engages in blamable bodily, verbal, and mental action might be afraid of a bad destination; a person who does not sustain favorable relationships might be afraid of a bad destination.’
An unwise person might be afraid on account of his livelihood; a lazy person might be afraid on account of his livelihood; a person who engages in blamable bodily, verbal, and mental action might be afraid on account of his livelihood; a person who does not sustain favorable relationships might be afraid on account of his livelihood.
And a master of the threefold knowledge according to the brahmins is not worth a sixteenth part of a master of the threefold knowledge in the Noble One’s discipline.
And a master of the threefold knowledge according to the brahmins is not worth a sixteenth part of a master of the threefold knowledge in the Noble One’s discipline.
And a person has been reborn in the central provinces, and he is wise, intelligent, astute, able to understand the meaning of what has been well stated and badly stated.
And all those at present who are declining in wholesome qualities are declining because of these six qualities.”
And all those at present who are not declining in wholesome qualities are not declining because of these six qualities.”
And all those at present who sustain a large retinue do so by these same four means of sustaining a favorable relationship.”
And as he is being cooked there in a swirl of foam, he is swept now up, now down, and now across.
And as he meditates in such a way, the devas along with Indra, Brahmā, and Pajāpati worship the excellent thoroughbred person from afar, saying:
And could it be the case that a gift given by someone here is of great fruit and benefit?”
And Gavesī taught and guided five hundred lay followers who had not fulfilled virtuous behavior.
And having learned those teachings, they do not interrogate each other about them or examine them thoroughly,: ‘How is this?
And having learned those teachings, they interrogate each other about them and examine them thoroughly,: ‘How is this?
And having seen with wisdom, his taints are utterly destroyed.
And he does not gain robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
And he does not gain robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
And he does not gain robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
And he gains robes … and provisions for the sick.
And he gains robes … and provisions for the sick.
And he gains robes … and provisions for the sick.
And he gains robes … and provisions for the sick.
And he gains robes … and provisions for the sick.
And he gains robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
And he had a dwelling worth five hundred built for the Venerable Ānanda.
And he has listened … and he attains temporary liberation.
And he has listened … and he attains temporary liberation.
And he has listened … he attains temporary liberation.
And he has listened, become learned, and penetrated by view, and he attains temporary liberation.
And he has listened, become learned, penetrated by view, and he attains temporary liberation.
And he has listened, become learned, penetrated by view, and he attains temporary liberation.
And he has not listened … he does not attain temporary liberation.
And he has not listened … he does not attain temporary liberation.
And he has not listened … he does not attain temporary liberation.
And he has not listened … he does not attain temporary liberation.
And he has not listened, become learned, and penetrated by view, and he does not attain temporary liberation.
And he has not listened, become learned, and penetrated by view, and he does not attain temporary liberation.
And he has not listened, become learned, penetrated by view, and he does not attain temporary liberation.
And he is freed from those taints, distressful and feverish, that arise with form as condition.
And he is freed from those taints, distressful and feverish, that arise with harming as condition.
And he is freed from those taints, distressful and feverish, that arise with ill will as condition.
And he is freed from those taints, distressful and feverish, that arise with personal existence as condition.
And he is freed from those taints, distressful and feverish, that arise with sensual pleasures as condition.
And he is not skilled in hiding.
And he is skilled in hiding.
And he might be a once-returner, a non-returner, or surely a stream-enterer.
And he might be a once-returner, a non-returner, or surely a stream-enterer.
And he might be a once-returner, a non-returner, or surely a stream-enterer.
And he might be a once-returner, a non-returner, or surely a stream-enterer.
And he might be a once-returner, a non-returner, or surely a stream-enterer.
And he might be a once-returner, a non-returner, or surely a stream-enterer.
And he uses his wealth without being tied to it, infatuated with it, and blindly absorbed in it, seeing the danger in it and understanding the escape.
And his wife is also one who abstains from the destruction of life … she does not insult or revile ascetics and brahmins.
And his wife is also one who destroys life … she insults and reviles ascetics and brahmins.
And how are you known by your fellow monks?”
And how does a bhikkhu pass his time in such a way that he dies with regret?
And how does a bhikkhu pass his time in such a way that he dies without regret?
And how does a bhikkhu pass his time in such a way that he does not have a good death?
And how does a bhikkhu pass his time in such a way that he has a good death?
And how does a wild colt meditate?
And how does disengagement come about?
And how does this Dhamma offer a means of avoidance and not lack a means of avoidance?
And how is an offering possessed of six factors?
And how is it that in dependence on the right course, there is success, not failure?
And how is it that in dependence on the wrong course there is failure, not success?
And how is the defiled mind cleansed by exertion?
And how is the defiled mind cleansed by exertion?
And how is the defiled mind cleansed by exertion?
And how is the defiled mind cleansed by exertion?
And how is the defiled mind cleansed by exertion?
And how is the defiled mind cleansed by exertion?
And how is the defiled mind cleansed by exertion?
And how is the defiled mind cleansed by exertion?
And how is the defiled mind cleansed by exertion?
And how is the defiled mind cleansed by exertion?
And how is the uposatha observed complete in eight factors, so that it is of great fruit and benefit, extraordinarily brilliant and pervasive?
And how is the uposatha observed complete in eight factors, so that it is of great fruit and benefit, extraordinarily brilliant and pervasive?
And how is the uposatha observed complete in eight factors, so that it is of great fruit and benefit, extraordinarily brilliant and pervasive?”
And how is the uposatha observed complete in eight factors, so that it is of great fruit and benefit, extraordinarily brilliant and pervasive?”
And how is the uposatha observed complete in nine factors, so that it is of great fruit and benefit, extraordinarily brilliant and pervasive?
And how is there the bond of existence?
And how is there the bond of ignorance?
And how is there the bond of views?
And how is there the severance of the bond of existence?
And how is there the severance of the bond of ignorance?
And how is there the severance of the bond of views?
And how is this so?
And how is this so?
And I suppose that in some earlier life I was without envy, not one who envied, resented, and begrudged the gain, honor, respect, esteem, homage, and worship given to others.
And I will come to possess supreme asceticism.’
And I will give things to ascetics or brahmins: food and drink; clothing and vehicles; garlands, scents, and unguents; bedding, dwellings, and lighting.
And I will have clearly seen causally arisen phenomena.’
And I will have served the Teacher with loving-kindness.’ 
And I will not be envious, one who envies, resents, and begrudges the gain, honor, respect, esteem, homage, and worship given to others.
And I will teach you what is good and what is better than that good.
And if Purāṇa had possessed the same kind of wisdom that Isidatta had, Isidatta could not have even known his destination.
And if Purāṇa had possessed the same kind of wisdom that Isidatta had, Isidatta could not have even known his destination.
And if you do not perceive any such root of dispute either in yourselves or in others, you should practice so that this evil root of dispute does not emerge in the future.
And if you do not perceive any such root of dispute either in yourselves or others, you should practice so that this evil root of dispute does not emerge in the future.
And in the evening she dwells at home with a mind obsessed by sensual lust.
And in what does he train?
And is one who has abandoned five factors and possesses five factors.
And it could be the case that a gift given by someone here is of great fruit and benefit.”
And it was with reference to this that I said in the Pārāyana, in ‘The Questions of Puṇṇaka’:
And it was with reference to this that I said in the Pārāyana, in ‘The Questions of Puṇṇaka’:
And it was with reference to this that I said in the Pārāyana, in ‘The Questions of Udaya’:
And Jotipāla Govindathe chaplain of seven:these were harmless ones in the past,six teachers possessed of fame.
And let this too be your guest’s gift to me: Tomorrow, before they have eaten breakfast, the Saṅgha of bhikkhus headed by Sāriputta and Moggallāna will come to Veḷukaṇṭaka.
And now that the Saṅgha has acquired greatness, I have respect for the Saṅgha, too.” 
And now, Master Gotama, we must be going.
And one becomes angry without a reason.
And one does not become angry without a reason.
And she gives things to ascetics or brahmins….
And she is envious, one who envies, resents, and begrudges the gain, honor, respect, esteem, homage, and worship given to others.
And she is envious, one who envies, resents, and begrudges the gain, honor, respect, esteem, homage, and worship given to others.
And she is without envy, one who does not envy, resent, or begrudge the gain, honor, respect, esteem, homage, and worship given to others.
And she is without envy, one who does not envy, resent, or begrudge the gain, honor, respect, esteem, homage, and worship given to others.
And since he gave an ascetic or a brahmin food and drink … he there gains the five objects of celestial sensual pleasure.
And since he gave an ascetic or a brahmin food and drink … he there gains the five objects of human sensual pleasure.
And so it is with you.
And so it is with you.
And someone of the white class produces nibbāna, which is neither black nor white.
And still another gains both internal serenity of mind and the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena.
And still another gains both internal serenity of mind and the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena.
And still another gains both internal serenity of mind and the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena.
And still another kind of person does not torment himself or pursue the practice of torturing himself, and does not torment others or pursue the practice of torturing others.
And still another kind of person who is like a wild colt possesses speed, beauty, and the right proportions.
And still another kind of person who is like a wild colt possesses speed, beauty, and the right proportions.
And still another kind of wild colt possesses speed, beauty, and the right proportions.
And still another kind of wild colt possesses speed, beauty, and the right proportions.
And still another person attains nibbāna without exertion with the breakup of the body.
And still another person fulfills virtuous behavior, concentration, and wisdom.
And still another person has abandoned the lower fetters, the fetters for obtaining rebirth, and the fetters for obtaining existence.
And still another person speaks dispraise of someone who deserves dispraise, and the dispraise is accurate, truthful, and timely; and he also speaks praise of someone who deserves praise, and the praise is accurate, truthful, and timely.
And still another person will enter upon the fixed course rightness in wholesome qualities only if he gets to see the Tathāgata, not if he fails to see him; only if he gets to hear the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, not if he fails to hear it.
And the paccorohaṇī festival of the brahmins is not worth a sixteenth part of the paccorohaṇī festival in the Noble One’s discipline.
And the paccorohaṇī festival of the brahmins is not worth a sixteenth part of the paccorohaṇī festival in the Noble One’s discipline.
And the third is the place where, having triumphed in battle, he emerged victorious and settled at the head of the battlefield.
And then he occasionally irrigates and drains the field.
And then he swiftly irrigates and drains the field.
And then those visiting bhikkhus left.
And there is an acquisition of individuality in which neither one’s own volition nor the volition of others operates.
And there is the speaker who does not exhaust either the meaning or the phrasing.
And they dwell having attained their own goal.
And this includes the taking of mother’s milk and the obstacles to meals.
And this is the reason why a gift given by someone here is of great fruit and benefit.”
And those beings who engage in good conduct by body, speech, and mind in the evening have a good evening.”
And those gifts are given to bhikkhus who are arahants or on the path to arahantship, those who are forest dwellers, almsfood collectors, and wearers of rag-robes.”
And we consider Master Gotama as one who possesses these four qualities.
And we consider the Venerable Ānanda to be one who possesses these six qualities: For the Venerable Ānanda has learned the Dhamma: the discourses, mixed prose and verse, expositions, verses, inspired utterances, quotations, birth stories, amazing accounts, and questions-and-answers.
And we immediately acquire whatever voice we want.
And what are the five higher fetters?
And what are the five lower fetters?
And what are the four kinds of food that it readily gains, without trouble or difficulty?
And what are the species of creeping animals?
And what are the things to be realized by memory?
And what are the things to be realized by the eye?
And what are the things to be realized by wisdom?
And what are the three kinds of conceit that are to be abandoned?
And what are the three things about which he is irreproachable?
And what are the ‘flies’?”
And what is evil desire?
And what is evil envy?
And what is harmful and what is beneficial?
And what is harmful and what is beneficial?
And what is harmful and what is beneficial?
And what is harmful and what is beneficial?
And what is the confinement there?
And what is the confinement there?
And what is the confinement there?
And what is the confinement there?
And what is the confinement there?
And what is the confinement there?
And what is the confinement there?
And what is the confinement there?
And what is the Dhamma taught by me that is unrefuted, undefiled, irreproachable, and uncensured by wise ascetics and brahmins?
And what is the nutriment for careful attention?
And what is the nutriment for careless attention?
And what is the nutriment for craving for existence?
And what is the nutriment for faith?
And what is the nutriment for hearing the good Dhamma?
And what is the nutriment for hearing the good Dhamma?
And what is the nutriment for ignorance?
And what is the nutriment for ignorance?
And what is the nutriment for lack of faith?
And what is the nutriment for lack of mindfulness and clear comprehension?
And what is the nutriment for mindfulness and clear comprehension?
And what is the nutriment for non-restraint of the sense faculties?
And what is the nutriment for not hearing the good Dhamma?
And what is the nutriment for restraint of the sense faculties?
And what is the nutriment for the five hindrances?
And what is the nutriment for the four establishments of mindfulness?
And what is the nutriment for the seven factors of enlightenment?
And what is the nutriment for the three kinds of good conduct?
And what is the nutriment for the three kinds of misconduct?
And what is the nutriment for true knowledge and liberation?
And what is the nutriment for true knowledge and liberation?
And what is the path and way?
And what is the seamstress?”
And what was the conversation of yours that was underway?”
And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of disenchantment?”
And what, bhikkhus, is the attainment of the nine progressive dwellings?
And what, bhikkhus, is the ignoble path?
And what, Doṇa, is the Dhamma in that case?
And what, Doṇa, is the Dhamma in that case?
And what, Doṇa, is the Dhamma in that case?
And what, Doṇa, is the Dhamma in that case?
And when asked a question pertaining to the Dhamma and the discipline, he answers and does not falter.
And when asked a question pertaining to the Dhamma and the discipline, he answers and does not falter.
And when asked a question pertaining to the Dhamma or the discipline, he answers and does not falter.
And when asked a question pertaining to the Dhamma or the discipline, he answers and does not falter.
And when asked a question pertaining to the Dhamma or the discipline, he answers and does not falter.
And when asked a question pertaining to the Dhamma or the discipline, he answers and does not falter.
And when asked a question pertaining to the Dhamma or the discipline, he answers and does not falter.
And when asked a question pertaining to the Dhamma or the discipline, he answers and does not falter.
And when asked a question pertaining to the Dhamma or the discipline, he answers and does not falter.
And when living for a hundred years, one lives just for three hundred seasons: a hundred winters, a hundred summers, and a hundred rains.
And when living for, nights, one eats just, meals:, meals in winter,, in summer, and, in the rains.
And when the Blessed One had let go his vital force, a great earthquake occurred, frightening and terrifying, and peals of thunder shook the sky.
And where is the power of concentration to be seen?
And where is the power of energy to be seen?
And where is the power of mindfulness to be seen?
And where is the power of wisdom to be seen?
And while this discourse was being spoken, the thousandfold world system shook.
And who are those that dwell having thoroughly ended perceptions of forms?
And who are those that dwell having thoroughly ended rapture?
And who are those that dwell having thoroughly ended sensual pleasures?
And who are those that dwell having thoroughly ended the perception of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception?
And who are those that dwell having thoroughly ended the perception of the base of nothingness?
And who are those that dwell having thoroughly ended the perception of the base of the infinity of consciousness?
And who are those that dwell having thoroughly ended the perception of the base of the infinity of space?
And who are those that dwell having thoroughly ended the pleasure equanimity?
And who are those that dwell having thoroughly ended thought and examination?
And who are those the knowledge of other persons as superior and inferior?
And who are those the knowledge of other persons as superior and inferior?
And who are those the knowledge of other persons as superior and inferior?
And who are those the knowledge of other persons as superior and inferior?
And why doesn’t he couple with a woman who is nursing?
And why is it that for still another the same kind of business surpasses his expectations?”
And why is it that some are beautiful, attractive, and graceful, possessing supreme beauty of complexion; rich, with great wealth and property; and influential?”
And why is it that some are ugly, ill formed, and unsightly; but rich, with great wealth and property; and influential?
And why is it that some women here are beautiful, attractive, and graceful, possessing supreme beauty of complexion; but poor, destitute, and indigent; and lacking in influence?
And why is such a person called one who speaks at an improper time … who speaks non-discipline?
And why is such a person called one who speaks at the proper time … who speaks discipline?
And why?
And wrong views flourish when concealed, not when exposed.
And yet I say that without having reached the end of the world there is no making an end of suffering.
And, I say, there is no other knowledge higher or more excellent than this.
And, I say, there is no stable one more excellent or sublime than that stable one.”
And, Ānanda, I say there is no other way of dwelling at ease more excellent or sublime than this.”
Anger and hostility … Denigration and insolence … Envy and miserliness … Deceitfulness and craftiness … Moral shamelessness and moral recklessness.
Anger and hostility … Denigration and insolence … Envy and miserliness … Deceitfulness and craftiness … Moral shamelessness and moral recklessness.
Anger and hostility … Denigration and insolence … Envy and miserliness … Deceitfulness and craftiness … Moral shamelessness and moral recklessness.
Anger and hostility … Denigration and insolence … Envy and miserliness … Deceitfulness and craftiness … Moral shamelessness and moral recklessness.
Anger and hostility … Denigration and insolence … Envy and miserliness … Deceitfulness and craftiness … Moral shamelessness and moral recklessness.
Anger and hostility … Denigration and insolence … Envy and miserliness … Deceitfulness and craftiness … Moral shamelessness and moral recklessness.
Anger and hostility … Denigration and insolence … Envy and miserliness … Deceitfulness and craftiness … Moral shamelessness and moral recklessness.
Anger and hostility … Denigration and insolence … Envy and miserliness … Deceitfulness and craftiness … Moral shamelessness and moral recklessness.
Anger and hostility … Denigration and insolence … Envy and miserliness … Deceitfulness and craftiness … Moral shamelessness and moral recklessness.
Anger and hostility … Denigrationand insolence … Envy and miserliness … Deceitfulness and craftiness … Moral shamelessness and moral recklessness.
Anger and hostility.
Another ascetic or brahmin might think of him: ‘Oh, may this venerable one not gain robes, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick!’ This is called evil envy.
Another bhikkhu said to the Blessed One: “I too, Bhante, develop mindfulness of death.”
Another bhikkhu said to the Blessed One: “I too, Bhante, develop mindfulness of death.”
Another kind of good horse possesses speed and beauty but not the right proportions.
Another kind of person who is like a good horse possesses speed and beauty but not the right proportions.
Another kind of person who is like a wild colt possesses speed and beauty but not the right proportions.
Another kind of person who is like a wild colt possesses speed and beauty but not the right proportions.
Another kind of wild colt possesses speed and beauty but not the right proportions.
Another kind of wild colt possesses speed and beauty but not the right proportions.
Another man traveling along the highway might see him and arouse sheer compassion, sympathy, and tender concern for him, thinking: ‘Oh, may this man obtain suitable food, suitable medicine, and a qualified attendant!
Another patient will recover from his illness whether or not he gets suitable food, suitable medicine, and a competent attendant.
Another person attains nibbāna through exertion with the breakup of the body.
Another person fulfills virtuous behavior but does not fulfill concentration and wisdom.
Another teacher prescribes the full understanding of sensual pleasures and forms, but not of feelings.
Answer as you see fit.
Answer as you see fit.
Any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī who observes these four things inwardly can come to the conclusion: ‘I am declining in wholesome qualities.
Any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī who observes these four things inwardly can come to the conclusion: ‘I am not declining in wholesome qualities.
Any bhikkhu who is skillful in this, diligent, clearly comprehending and ever mindful, is said to be standing in an ancient, primal noble lineage.
Any bhikkhu who is skillful in this, diligent, clearly comprehending and ever mindful, is said to be standing in an ancient, primal noble lineage.
Any bhikkhu who is skillful in this, diligent, clearly comprehending and ever mindful, is said to be standing in an ancient, primal noble lineage.
Any bhikkhu who is skillful in this, diligent, clearly comprehending and ever mindful, is said to be standing in an ancient, primal noble lineage.
Any pleasure or joy that arises in dependence on these five objects of sensual pleasure is called sensual pleasure.
anyone who is perplexed or uncertain me with a question; I with my answer.
anyone who is perplexed or uncertain me with a question; I with my answer.
anyone who is perplexed or uncertain me with a question; I with my answer.
anyone who is perplexed or uncertain me with a question; I with my answer.
Applying oneself and reflection are nutriments for good qualities.
Approach it quietly.
Approaching families there, he obtains gains.
Ardor should be exercised for enduring arisen bodily feelings that are painful, racking, sharp, piercing, harrowing, disagreeable, sapping one’s vitality.
Ardor should be exercised for the arising of unarisen wholesome qualities.
Ardor should be exercised for the non-arising of unarisen bad unwholesome qualities.
Are these things wholesome or unwholesome?” – “Unwholesome, Bhante.” – “Blameworthy or blameless?” – “Blameworthy, Bhante.” – “Censured or praised by the wise?” – “Censured by the wise, Bhante.” – “Accepted and undertaken, do they lead to harm and suffering or not, or how do you take it?” – “Accepted and undertaken, these things lead to harm and suffering.
Are these things wholesome or unwholesome?” – “Unwholesome, Bhante.” – “Blameworthy or blameless?” – “Blameworthy, Bhante.” – “Censured or praised by the wise?” – “Censured by the wise, Bhante.” – “Accepted and undertaken, do they lead to harm and suffering or not, or how do you take it?” – “Accepted and undertaken, these things lead to harm and suffering.
Are these things wholesome or unwholesome?” – “Unwholesome, Bhante.” – “Blameworthy or blameless?” – “Blameworthy, Bhante.” – “Censured or praised by the wise?” – “Censured by the wise, Bhante.” – “Accepted and undertaken, do they lead to harm and suffering or not, or how do you take it?” – “Accepted and undertaken, these things lead to harm and suffering.
Are these things wholesome or unwholesome?” – “Wholesome, Bhante.” – “Blameworthy or blameless?” – “Blameless, Bhante.” – “Censured or praised by the wise?” – “Praised by the wise, Bhante.” – “Accepted and undertaken, do they lead to welfare and happiness or not, or how do you take it?” – “Accepted and undertaken, these things lead to welfare and happiness.
Are these things wholesome or unwholesome?” – “Wholesome, Bhante.” – “Blameworthy or blameless?” – “Blameless, Bhante.” – “Censured or praised by the wise?” – “Praised by the wise, Bhante.” – “Accepted and undertaken, do they lead to welfare and happiness or not, or how do you take it?” – “Accepted and undertaken, these things lead to welfare and happiness.
Are these things wholesome or unwholesome?” – “Wholesome, Bhante.” – “Blameworthy or blameless?” – “Blameless, Bhante.” – “Censured or praised by the wise?” – “Praised by the wise, Bhante.” – “Accepted and undertaken, do they lead to welfare and happiness or not, or how do you take it?” – “Accepted and undertaken, these things lead to welfare and happiness.
Are those practicing for the abandoning of lust, hatred, and delusion practicing the good way in the world or not, or how do you take it?”
Are those who have abandoned lust, hatred, and delusion, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them so that they are no more subject to future arising fortunate ones in the world or not, or how do you take it?”
Are you dozing, Moggallāna?”
Arisen bad unwholesome states will not obsess my mind.’
Thus should you train yourself.
As a consequence he is reborn in a non-afflictive world.
As a consequence he is reborn in a world that is both afflictive and non-afflictive.
As a consequence, for seven eons of world-dissolution and evolution he did not come back to this world.
As a consequence, for seven eons of world-dissolution and evolution I did not come back to this world.
As a consequence, he is reborn in a world that is both afflictive and non-afflictive.
As a consequence, he is reborn in an afflictive world.
As a consequence, still overcome by anger, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
As a consequence, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
As a consequence, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
As a result, there is a famine, a scarcity of grain; the crops become blighted and turn to straw.
As a result, they take up weapons and slay one another.
As a stone mountain, one solid mass,is not stirred by the wind,so no forms and tastes, sounds,odors, and tactile objects,and phenomena desirable or undesirablestir the stable one’s mind.His mind is steady and freed,and he observes its vanishing.
As before, so after;as after, so before;as below, so above;as above, so below; as by day, so at night;as at night, so by day,having overcome all quarters,with measureless concentration.They call him a trainee on the path,whose conduct has been well purified.They call him enlightened in the world,a wise one who has fulfilled the practice.
As far as the range of proliferation extends, just so far extends the range of the six bases for contact.
As far as the sun and moon revolve,shedding light, so beautiful to gaze upon,dispellers of darkness, moving through the firmament,they shine in the sky, brightening up the quarters.
As far as the sun and moon revolve,shedding light, so beautiful to gaze upon,dispellers of darkness, moving through the firmament,they shine in the sky, brightening up the quarters.
As far, bhikkhus, as this thousandfold world system extends, Mahābrahmā there ranks as the foremost.
As he bonds with them and becomes intimate with them, as he loosens up and engages in talk with them, lust invades his mind.
As he bonds with them and becomes intimate with them, as he loosens up and talks with them, lust invades his mind.
As he bonds with them and becomes intimate with them, as he loosens up and talks with them, lust invades his mind.
As he bonds with them and becomes intimate with them, as he loosens up and talks with them, lust invades his mind.
As he bonds with them and becomes intimate with them, as he loosens up and talks with them, lust invades his mind.
As he bonds with them and becomes intimate with them, as he loosens up and talks with them, lust invades his mind.
As he does so, his mind is liberated from the five lower fetters.
As he does so, his mind is liberated in the unsurpassed extinction of the acquisitions.
As he does so, joy arises in him.
As he does so, joy arises in him.
As he does so, joy arises in him.
As he does so, joy arises in him.
As he does so, joy arises in him.
As he does so, the fetters are entirely abandoned and the underlying tendencies are uprooted.
As he does so, the fetters are entirely abandoned and the underlying tendencies are uprooted.
As he does so, the fetters are entirely abandoned and the underlying tendencies are uprooted.
As he does so, the fetters are entirely abandoned and the underlying tendencies are uprooted.
As he does so, the fetters are entirely abandoned and the underlying tendencies are uprooted.
As he dwells contemplating impermanence … fading away … cessation … relinquishment in those feelings, he does not cling to anything in the world.
As he is developing insight preceded by serenity, the path is generated.
As he is developing serenity and insight in conjunction, the path is generated.
As he is developing serenity preceded by insight, the path is generated.
As he is doing so, his mind does not launch out toward it, acquire confidence, become steady, and focus on it.
As he is doing so, his mind does not launch out toward it, acquire confidence, become steady, and focus on it.
As he is doing so, his mind launches out toward it, acquires confidence, becomes steady, and focuses on it.
As he is doing so, his mind launches out toward it, acquires confidence, becomes steady, and focuses on it.
As he is doing so, his mind launches out toward it, acquires confidence, becomes steady, and focuses on it.
As he is pursuing, developing, and cultivating this path, the fetters are abandoned and the underlying tendencies are uprooted.
As he is pursuing, developing, and cultivating this path, the fetters are abandoned and the underlying tendencies are uprooted.
As he is pursuing, developing, and cultivating this path, the fetters are abandoned and the underlying tendencies are uprooted.
As he is pursuing, developing, and cultivating this path, the fetters are abandoned and the underlying tendencies are uprooted.
As he trained in them, he abandoned lust, hatred, and delusion.
As he was walking and wandering around for exercise along the bank of the Kimikālā River, the Venerable Meghiya saw a lovely and delightful mango grove.
As its own fruit destroys the plantain,as its fruit destroys the bamboo and reed,as its embryo destroys the mule,so does honor destroy the vile man.
As long as his body stands devas and humans will see him, but with the breakup of the body devas and humans will see him no more.’
It is in this way, too, that those devas know one who has a residue remaining….
As long as his body stands devas and humans will see him, but with the breakup of the body, devas and humans will see him no more.’
It is in this way that those devas know one who has a residue remaining as ‘one with a residue remaining’ and one who has no residue remaining as ‘one without residue remaining.’
As long as I saw even a mere fraction of a hair’s tip of a bright quality in Devadatta, I did not declare of him: ‘Devadatta is bound for the plane of misery, bound for hell, and he will remain there for an eon, unredeemable.’
It was, Ānanda, only when I did not see even a mere fraction of a hair’s tip of a bright quality in Devadatta that I declared this of him.
As long as its head has not come forth, its roots would be just like those of the other, the good barley; its stem would be just like that of the other, the good barley; its leaves would be just like those of the other, the good barley.
As long as the bhikkhus develop the enlightenment factor of mindfulness, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
As long as the bhikkhus develop the perception of impermanence, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
As long as the bhikkhus do not delight in talk … … do not delight in sleep … … do not delight in company … … do not have evil desires and come under the control of evil desires … … do not associate with bad friends, bad companions, bad comrades … … do not come to a stop midway on account of some minor achievement of distinction, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
As long as these seven principles of non-decline continue among the Vajjis, and the Vajjis are seen in them, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.”
As long as they develop the enlightenment factor of discrimination of phenomena … … the enlightenment factor of energy … … the enlightenment factor of rapture … … the enlightenment factor of tranquility … … the enlightenment factor of concentration … … the enlightenment factor of equanimity, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
As long as they develop the perception of non-self … … the perception of unattractiveness … … the perception of danger … … the perception of abandoning … … the perception of dispassion … … the perception of cessation, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
As long as they have a sense of moral shame … … have moral dread … … are learned … … are energetic … … are mindful … … are wise, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
As one does so, desire arises.
As one does so, desire arises.
As one does so, desire arises.
As one who has entered the stream of the Dhamma, he develops recollection of generosity.
As one who has entered the stream of the Dhamma, he develops recollection of generosity.
As one who has entered the stream of the Dhamma, he develops recollection of the Buddha.
As one who has entered the stream of the Dhamma, he develops recollection of the Buddha.
As one who has entered the stream of the Dhamma, he develops recollection of the deities.
As one who has entered the stream of the Dhamma, he develops recollection of the deities.”
As one who has entered the stream of the Dhamma, he develops recollection of the Dhamma.
As one who has entered the stream of the Dhamma, he develops recollection of the Dhamma.
As one who has entered the stream of the Dhamma, he develops recollection of the Saṅgha.
As one who has entered the stream of the Dhamma, he develops recollection of the Saṅgha.
As one who has entered the stream of the Dhamma, he develops recollection of virtuous behavior.
As one who has entered the stream of the Dhamma, he develops recollection of virtuous behavior.
As one who has gone forth from the household life into homelessness in this well-expounded Dhamma and discipline, it would be improper for me to be lazy and heedless.’
He then reflects thus: ‘Energy will be aroused in me without slackening; mindfulness will be established without confusion; my body will be tranquil without disturbance; my mind will be concentrated and one-pointed.’
Having taken the Dhamma as his authority, he abandons the unwholesome and develops the wholesome; he abandons what is blameworthy and develops what is blameless; he maintains himself in purity.
As Sineru is blazing and burning, as it is undergoing destruction and being overcome by a great mass of heat, mountain peaks of a hundred yojanas disintegrate; mountain peaks of two hundred yojanas … three hundred yojanas … four hundred yojanas … five hundred yojanas disintegrate.
As soon as I saw him my mind acquired confidence in him and my drunkenness vanished.
As the Blessed One answers you, so should you retain it in mind.”
As the Blessed One explains it to us, so should we retain it in mind.”
As the great earth and Sineru are blazing and burning, the flame, cast up by the wind, rises even to the brahmā world.
As the night advanced, when the last watch passed, when dawn arrived and a rosy tint appeared on the horizon, the Venerable Ānanda rose from his seat a third time, arranged his upper robe over one shoulder, reverently saluted the Blessed One, and said to him: “Bhante, the night has advanced; the last watch has passed; dawn has arrived and a rosy tint has appeared on the horizon; the Saṅgha of bhikkhus has been sitting for a long time.
As the night advanced, when the middle watch passed, the Venerable Ānanda rose from his seat a second time, arranged his upper robe over one shoulder, reverently saluted the Blessed One, and said to him: “Bhante, the night has advanced; the middle watch has passed; the Saṅgha of bhikkhus has been sitting for a long time.
As the trainee trainsalong the straight path,the knowledge of destruction arises firstimmediately followed by final knowledge.
As the woman is smiling at him, chatting with him, laughing at him, and teasing him, he sinks, founders, does not brace himself, and cannot maintain the spiritual life.
As you train in them, you will abandon lust, hatred, and delusion.
Ascetics and brahmins who eat once a day and refrain from eating at night, abstaining from meals outside the proper time, are not served on time.
Ascetics and brahmins who eat once a day and refrain from eating at night, abstaining from meals outside the proper time, are served on time.
ascetics and brahmins,and the deities;he is one who gives rise to joywhile living a righteous life at home.
Assistance with material goods and assistance with the Dhamma.
Association with good persons, hearing the good Dhamma, careful attention, and practice in accordance with the Dhamma.
Association with good persons, hearing the good Dhamma, careful attention, and practice in accordance with the Dhamma.
At midday she dwells at home with a mind obsessed by envy.
At my father’s residence lotus ponds were made just for my enjoyment: in one of them blue lotuses bloomed, in another red lotuses, and in a third white lotuses.
At Sāvatthī.
At Sāvatthī.
At that time brahmins and householders, too, are at ease when reentering, and when going out, and when attending to work outside.
At that time brahmins and householders, too, are not at ease when re-entering, or when going out, or when attending to work outside.
At that time the evil bhikkhus sit silently in the midst of the Saṅgha or they depart for other regions.
At that time the king is at ease when re-entering, and when going out, and when touring the outlying provinces.
At that time the king is not at ease when re-entering, or when going out, or when touring the outlying provinces.
At that time the well-behaved bhikkhus sit silently in the midst of the Saṅgha or they resort to the outlying provinces.
At that time, in the presence of the Blessed One, I heard and learned this: ‘Sutavā, a bhikkhu who is an arahant—one whose taints are destroyed, who has lived the spiritual life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached his own goal, utterly destroyed the fetters of existence, one completely liberated through final knowledge—is incapable of transgression in five cases.
At that time, people had but six afflictions: cold, heat, hunger, thirst, excrement, and urine.
At the end of every hundred years a man would remove one seed from it.
At the proper time, those wise, charitable, and generous folk give a timely gift to the noble ones, who are stable and upright; given with a clear mind, one’s offering is vast.
At the time of his death he does not get to see the Tathāgata or a disciple of the Tathāgata, but he ponders, examines, and mentally inspects the Dhamma as he has heard it and learned it.
At the time of his death he does not get to see the Tathāgata or a disciple of the Tathāgata, but he ponders, examines, and mentally inspects the Dhamma as he has heard it and learned it.
At the time of his death he does not get to see the Tathāgata, but he gets to see a disciple of the Tathāgata.
At the time of his death he does not get to see the Tathāgata, but he gets to see a disciple of the Tathāgata.
At the time of his death he gets to see the Tathāgata.
At the time of his death, his faculties were serene.
At the time of his death, his faculties were serene.”
Attend to this and not to that!
Attend to this and not to that!
Attend to this and not to that!
Attend to this and not to that!
Attending upon one’s mother and father is prescribed by the wise, prescribed by good people.
Bad friendship is an obstruction to virtuous behavior.
Bad unwholesome qualities are stains in this world and the next.
Badly set down words and phrases and badly interpreted meaning.
Based on the Himalayas, the king of mountains, great sal trees grow in these five ways.
Based on the Himalayas, the king of mountains, great sal trees grow in these three ways.
Beauty … Happiness … Fame … The heavens are wished for, desired, agreeable, and rarely gained in the world.
Beauty … Health … Virtuous behavior … Celibacy … Friends … Learning … Wisdom … Good qualities … The heavens are wished for, desired, agreeable, and rarely gained in the world.
Because although that sal sapling has been thoroughly prepared externally, it has not been purified within.
Because arahants and those who have entered the path to arahantship attend a nonviolent sacrifice.”
Because arahants and those who have entered the path to arahantship do not attend a violent sacrifice.
Because he did not understand and penetrate four things.
Because he does not perceive that faith in himself and obtain rapture and joy based upon it.
Because he does not perceive that generosity in himself and obtain rapture and joy based upon it.
Because he does not perceive that learning in himself and obtain rapture and joy based upon it.
Because he does not perceive that virtuous behavior in himself and obtain rapture and joy based upon it.
Because he does not perceive that wisdom in himself and obtain rapture and joy based upon it.
Because he expressed his displeasure to me, I became displeased.
Because he has given a gift respectfully, wherever the result of that gift is produced, he becomes rich, with great wealth and property, and his sons and wives, slaves, servants, and workers are obedient, lend an ear, and apply their minds to understand.
Because he has given a gift unreservedly, wherever the result of that gift is produced, he becomes rich, with great wealth and property, and his mind inclines to the enjoyment of the five kinds of fine sensual pleasures.
Because he has given a timely gift, wherever the result of that gift is produced, he becomes rich, with great wealth and property, and timely benefits come to him in abundance.
Because he has strong desires, undergoes distress, and is not content with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick, he submits to evil desire for recognition and for gain, honor, and praise.
Because he is a steadfast one who vanquishes discontent and delight.”
Because he is without the underlying tendencies toward delight in sensual pleasures, delight in ill will, delight in harming, delight in form, and delight in personal existence, he is called a bhikkhu devoid of underlying tendencies.
Because he lacks development.
Because he lacks development.
Because he looks on cruelly at the captive deer as they are brought for slaughter.
Because he looks on cruelly at the captive fish as they are brought for slaughter.
Because he perceives that faith in himself and obtains rapture and joy based upon it.
Because he perceives that generosity in himself and obtains rapture and joy based upon it.
Because he perceives that learning in himself and obtains rapture and joy based upon it.
Because he perceives that virtuous behavior in himself and obtains rapture and joy based upon it.
Because he perceives that wisdom in himself and obtains rapture and joy based upon it.
Because he was over come and obsessed by eight bad conditions, Devadatta is bound for the plane of misery, bound for hell, and he will remain there for an eon, unredeemable.
Because he was overcome and obsessed by loss … … by fame … … by disrepute … … by honor … … by lack of honor … … by evil desires … … by bad friendship, Devadatta is bound for the plane of misery, bound for hell, and he will remain there for an eon, unredeemable.
Because he was overcome and obsessed by these eight bad conditions, Devadatta is bound for the plane of misery, bound for hell, and he will remain there for an eon, unredeemable.
Because his brahmin wife does not serve for sensual pleasure, amusement, and sensual delight, but only for procreation.
Because his large body finds a footing in the depths.
Because his mind is cloudy.”
Because his mind is corrupted.
Because his mind is limpid.”
Because his mind is placid.
Because his past expectation of anointment subsided when he was anointed.
Because his past expectation of liberation subsided when he was liberated.
Because his wise fellow monks see that he has abandoned those bad unwholesome qualities.
Because his wise fellow monks see that he has abandoned those bad unwholesome qualities.”
Because his wise fellow monks see that he has not abandoned those bad unwholesome qualities.
Because his wise fellow monks see that he has not abandoned those bad unwholesome qualities.
Because human kingship is poor compared to celestial happiness.
Because human kingship is poor compared to celestial happiness.
Because I expressed my displeasure to him, he became displeased.
Because I have not said that he is incapable of this.
Because I have not said that he is incapable of this.
Because I have not said that he is incapable of this.
Because I have not said that he is incapable of this.
Because I have not said that he is incapable of this.
Because I have not said that he is incapable of this.
Because I have not said that he is incapable of this.
Because I have not said that he is incapable of this.
Because it is from them that one has originated and come to be.
Because its small body does not find a footing in the depths.
Because of accomplishment in mind … Because of accomplishment in view, with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
Because of accomplishment in mind … Because of accomplishment in view, with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
Because of failure in mind … Because of failure in view, with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
Because of failure in mind … Because of failure in view, with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
Because of his development.
Because of his development.
Because of that I might die, which would be an obstacle for me.
Because of that I might die, which would be an obstacle for me.
Because of that I would die, which would be an obstacle for me.
Because of that I would die, which would be an obstacle for me.
Because of that I would die, which would be an obstacle for me.
Because of that righteous conducttoward mother and father,the wise praise one in this worldand after death one rejoices in heaven.
Because of that serviceto mother and father,the wise praise one in this worldand after death one rejoices in heaven.
Because of that unrighteous conducttoward mother and father,the wise criticize one here in this worldand after death one goes to the plane of misery.
Because of the Blessed One’s virtuous behavior and wisdom.”
Because of the Blessed One’s virtuous behavior and wisdom.”
Because of the Blessed One’s virtuous behavior and wisdom.”
Because of the sounds of the elephants, horses, charioteers, and infantry, and the sound and uproar of drums, kettledrums, conches, and tom-toms, the sound of the crickets would disappear.
Because of the work, my body has become tired.
Because of this serviceto mother and father,the wise praise one in this worldand after death one rejoices in heaven.
Because of this, the clouds that have arisen are scattered.
Because of this, the clouds that have arisen are scattered.
Because on that account he might undergo death or deadly pain, but for that reason he would not, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
Because on that account he might undergo death or deadly pain, but for that reason he would not, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
Because on that account he might undergo death or deadly pain, but for that reason he would not, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
Because on that account he might undergo death or deadly pain, but for that reason he would not, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
Because on that account he might undergo death or deadly pain, but for that reason he would not, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
Because on that account he might undergo death or deadly pain, but for that reason he would not, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
Because on that account he might undergo death or deadly pain, but for that reason he would not, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
Because other bhikkhus,: ‘The Teacher speaks praise of him,’ might associate with him, and those who associate with him might follow his example.
Because other bhikkhus,: ‘The Teacher speaks praise of him,’ might associate with him, and those who associate with him might follow his example.
Because other bhikkhus,: ‘The Teacher speaks praise of him,’ might associate with him, and those who associate with him might follow his example.
Because other bhikkhus,: ‘The Teacher speaks praise of him,’ might associate with him, and those who associate with him might follow his example.
Because Sakka, ruler of the devas, is not devoid of lust, hatred, and delusion.
Because Sakka, ruler of the devas, is not free from birth, old age and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish; he is not free from suffering, I say.
Because sensual pleasures are impermanent, empty, false, and deceptive.”
Because that bhikkhu is devoid of lust, hatred, and delusion.”
Because that bhikkhu is free from birth, old age and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish; he is free from suffering, I say.”
Because that Dhamma is badly expounded.”
Because that Dhamma is badly expounded.”
Because that Dhamma is badly expounded.”
Because that Dhamma is badly expounded.”
Because that Dhamma is well expounded.”
Because that Dhamma is well expounded.”
Because that Dhamma is well expounded.”
Because that Dhamma is well expounded.”
Because that mountain-dwelling cow was foolish, incompetent, inexperienced, and unskilled in walking on rough mountains.
Because that mountain-dwelling cow was wise, competent, experienced, and skilled in walking on rough mountains.
Because that sal sapling has been thoroughly prepared externally, well purified within, made into a boat, and equipped with oars and a rudder.
Because that would not be within their domain.
Because the bhikkhu is heedful.”
Because the bhikkhu is heedless.
Because the Dhamma-stream carries him along.
Because the Dhamma-stream carries him along.
Because the Dhamma-stream carries him along.
Because the Dhamma-stream carries him along.
Because the earth element exists in that block of wood.
Because the element of beauty … the element of the unattractive exists in that block of wood.
Because the hen had not properly covered, incubated, and nurtured her eggs.
Because the hen had properly covered, incubated, and nurtured her eggs.
Because the mind is misdirected.”
Because the mind is well directed.”
Because the person accomplished in view has clearly seen causation and causally arisen phenomena.
Because the river Ganges contains a large volume of water, thus that lump of salt would not make it salty and undrinkable.”
Because the seed is bad.
Because the seed is bad.
Because the seed is good.
Because the seed is good.
Because the spike is misdirected.
Because the spike is well directed.
Because the stone pillar is deep in the ground and is securely planted.
Because the Tathāgata has respect for the Dhamma, reverence for the Dhamma.”
Because the view is bad.
Because the view is bad.
Because the view is bad.
Because the view is bad.”
Because the view is good.
Because the view is good.
Because the view is good.”
Because the view is good.” 
Because the water element … the fire element … the air element exists in that block of wood.
Because the water in the bowl is limited, thus that lump of salt would make it salty and undrinkable.”
Because the water is cloudy.
Because the water is limpid.
Because these five faculties are feeble in him, he sluggishly attains the immediacy condition for the destruction of the taints.
Because these five faculties are feeble in him, he sluggishly attains the immediacy condition for the destruction of the taints.
Because these five faculties are feeble, he attains nibbāna through exertion with the breakup of the body.
Because these five faculties are feeble, he attains nibbāna without exertion with the breakup of the body.
Because these five faculties are feeble, he sluggishly attains the immediacy condition for the destruction of the taints.
Because these five faculties are feeble, he sluggishly attains the immediacy condition for the destruction of the taints.
Because these five faculties are prominent in him, he quickly attains the immediacy condition for the destruction of the taints.
Because these five faculties are prominent in him, he quickly attains the immediacy condition for the destruction of the taints.
Because these five faculties are prominent, he attains nibbāna through exertion in this very life.
Because these five faculties are prominent, he attains nibbāna without exertion in this very life.
Because these five faculties are prominent, he quickly attains the immediacy condition for the destruction of the taints.
Because these five faculties are prominent, he quickly attains the immediacy condition for the destruction of the taints.
Because these ten courses of unwholesome kamma are themselves impure and defiling.
Because these ten courses of wholesome kamma are themselves pure and purifying.
Because they often saw one another, a bond was formed; because a bond formed, intimacy arose; because there was intimacy, lust found an opening.
Because this is how it is for the victorious ones.
Because this is how it is for those who are liberated in mind.”
Because this person’s faculty of concentration is predominant.”
Because this person’s faculty of faith is predominant.”
Because this person’s faculty of wisdom is predominant.”
Because what excels, Master Gotama, is equanimity.”
Because what excels, Master Gotama, is knowledge of the proper time to speak in any particular case.
Because what excels, Potaliya, is knowledge of the proper time to speak in any particular case.”
Because when a wild colt is tied up by the feeding trough, he does not ask himself: ‘Now what task will my trainer set for me today?
Because when an excellent thoroughbred horse is tied up by the feeding trough, he asks himself: ‘Now what task will my trainer set for me today?
Because when he wants to buy something, he can pay with money, grain, silver, or gold.
Because when he wants to buy something, he cannot pay with money, grain, silver, or gold.
Because wise people see that he has abandoned his tricks, ploys, gambits, and wiles.
Because wise people see that he has not abandoned his tricks, ploys, gambits, and wiles.
Because, friends, these persons are astounding and rare in the world who dwell having touched the deathless element with the body.
Because, friends, these persons are astounding and rare in the world who see a deep and pithy matter after piercing it through with wisdom.”
Because, if he were to couple with a pregnant woman, the little boy or girl would be born in excessive filth; therefore he does not couple with a pregnant woman.
Because, if he were to couple with a woman who is nursing, the little boy or girl would drink back the foul substance; therefore he does not couple with a woman who is nursing.
Before that unwished for, undesirable, disagreeable condition comes upon me, let me in advance arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
Before that unwished for, undesirable, disagreeable condition comes upon me, let me in advance arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
Before that unwished for, undesirable, disagreeable condition comes upon me, let me in advance arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
Before that unwished for, undesirable, disagreeable condition comes upon me, let me in advance arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
Before that unwished for, undesirable, disagreeable condition comes upon me, let me in advance arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
Behaving rightly toward his father … Behaving rightly toward the Tathāgata … Behaving rightly toward a disciple of the Tathāgata … Behaving rightly toward these four persons, the wise, competent, good person preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured; he is blameless and beyond reproach by the wise; and he generates much merit.”
Behaving rightly toward his mother, the wise, competent, good person preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured; he is blameless and beyond reproach by the wise; and he generates much merit.
Behaving rightly toward these two persons, the wise, competent, good person preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured; he is blameless and beyond reproach by the wise; and he generates much merit.”
Behaving rightly toward these two persons, the wise, competent, good person preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured; he is blameless and beyond reproach by the wise; and he generates much merit.”
Behaving wrongly toward his father … Behaving wrongly toward the Tathāgata … Behaving wrongly toward a disciple of the Tathāgata … Behaving wrongly toward these four persons, the foolish, incompetent, bad person maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition; he is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise; and he generates much demerit.
Behaving wrongly toward his mother, the foolish, incompetent, bad person maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition; he is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise; and he generates much demerit.
Behaving wrongly toward these two persons, the foolish, incompetent, bad person maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition; he is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise; and he generates much demerit.
Behaving wrongly toward these two persons, the foolish, incompetent, bad person maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition; he is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise; and he generates much demerit.
Being difficult to correct, bad friendship, and mental distraction.
Being displeased, he expressed his displeasure to me.
Being displeased, he informed others.
Being displeased, I expressed my displeasure to him.
Being displeased, I informed others.
Being happy, they experience very peaceful happiness: this is the foremost happiness.
Being heedful, the wise personsecures both kinds of good:the good in this life,and the good of the future life.By attaining the good, the steadfast oneis called one of wisdom.
Being honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated, they have compassion on him with a good heart, thinking: ‘May you live long!’ When a clansman’s wife and children, slaves, workers, and servants have compassion for him, only growth is to be expected for him, not decline.
Being honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated, they have compassion on him with a good heart, thinking: ‘May you live long!’ When ascetics and brahmins have compassion for a clansman, only growth is to be expected for him, not decline.
Being honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated, they have compassion on him with a good heart, thinking: ‘May you live long!’ When the oblational deities have compassion for a clansman, only growth is to be expected for him, not decline.
Being honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated, they have compassion on him with a good heart, thinking: ‘May you live long!’ When the owners of the neighboring fields and those with whom he does business have compassion for a clansman, only growth is to be expected for him, not decline.
Being intelligent and astute is rare in the world.
Being touched by afflictive contacts, he feels afflictive feelings, exclusively painful, as in the case of hell beings.
Being touched by afflictive contacts, he feels afflictive feelings, exclusively painful, as in the case of hell-beings.
Being touched by both afflictive and unafflictive contacts, he feels both afflictive and unafflictive feelings, mingled pleasure and pain, as in the case of human beings, some devas, and some beings in the lower worlds.
Being touched by contacts that are both afflictive and non-afflictive, he feels feelings that are both afflictive and non-afflictive, mingled pleasure and pain, as in the case of human beings and some devas and some beings in the lower worlds.
Being touched by contacts that are both afflictive and non-afflictive, he feels feelings that are both afflictive and non-afflictive, mingled pleasure and pain, as in the case of human beings and some devas and some beings in the lower worlds.
Being touched by non-afflictive contacts, he feels non-afflictive feelings, exclusively pleasant, as in the case of the devas of refulgent glory.
Being touched by unafflictive contacts, he feels unafflictive feelings, exclusively pleasant, as in the case of the devas of refulgent glory.
Being unagitated, he personally attains nibbāna.
Beings enamored of tantalizing things,seeking delight in whatever is pleasing,low beings bound by delusion,increase their bondage.
Beings have desire and lust in regard to those people and things that are dear and agreeable, and excited by this lust, they engage in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
Beings who are delighted with their femininity enter upon union with men.
Beings who are delighted with their masculinity enter upon union with women.
Beings who are lustful for the form of a woman—ravenous, tied to it, infatuated, and blindly absorbed in it—sorrow for a long time under the control of a woman’s form.
Beings who are lustful for the touch of a woman—ravenous, tied to it, infatuated, and blindly absorbed in it—sorrow for a long time under the control of a woman’s touch.
Beings who are not delighted with their femininity become disengaged from men.
Beings who are not delighted with their masculinity become disengaged from women.
Beneficial to the king and the devas,beneficial to his relatives and friends,indeed, beneficial to all,well established in the good Dhamma,he has removed the stain of miserlinessand fares on to an auspicious world.
Bhante Ānanda, I now go for refuge to the Blessed One, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
Bhante Ānanda, what did the Blessed One say this concentration has as its fruit?’
Bhante, I am King Pasenadi of Kosala!”
Bhante, it would be good if women could obtain the going forth from the household life into homelessness in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata.”
Bhante, learn this exposition of the Dhamma, master this exposition of the Dhamma, and retain this exposition of the Dhamma in mind.
Bhante, let the Blessed One now attain final nibbāna!
Bhante, let the Blessed One now attain final nibbāna!
Bhante, let the Blessed One now attain final nibbāna!
Bhante, let the Blessed One recite the Pātimokkha to the bhikkhus.”
A second time the Blessed One was silent.
Bhante, may Master Ānanda accept my transgression seen as a transgression for the sake of future restraint.”
Bhante, may the Blessed One accept my transgression seen as a transgression for the sake of future restraint.”
Bhante, these members of other sects seek a fee for their teachers, so why shouldn’t I make an offering to the Venerable Ānanda?”
Bhante, those who were the Arahants, the Perfectly Enlightened Ones in the past—those Blessed Ones, too, honored, respected, and dwelled in dependence only on the Dhamma.
Bhante, when that boy was arrested or was being put under arrest, when he was in prison or was being imprisoned, when he was dead or was being killed, I don’t recall any alteration of my mind.”
Bhante, whenever a noble disciple enters and dwells in the rapture of solitude, on that occasion five things do not occur in him.
Bhante, whenever a noble disciple enters and dwells in the rapture of solitude, on that occasion these five things do not occur in him.”
Bhikkhus who value anger and denigration,who value gain and honor,are like rotten seeds in a fertile field:they do not grow in the good Dhamma.
Bhikkhus who value anger and denigration,who value gain and honor,do not grow in the good Dhammataught by the Perfectly Enlightened One.
Bhikkhus, beings are the owners of their kamma, the heirs of their kamma; they have kamma as their origin, kamma as their relative, kamma as their resort; whatever kamma they do, good or bad, they are its heirs.
Bhikkhus, eject this person!
Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other form that is as tantalizing, sensuous, intoxicating, captivating, infatuating, and as much of an obstacle to achieving the unsurpassed security from bondage as the form of a woman.
Bhikkhus, just as it is not easy to measure the water in the great ocean thus: ‘There are so many gallons of water,’ or ‘There are so many hundreds of gallons of water,’ or ‘There are so many thousands of gallons of water,’ or ‘There are so many hundreds of thousands of gallons of water,’ but rather it is reckoned simply as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of water; so too, it is not easy to measure the merit of such an offering … rather, it is reckoned simply as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit.”
Bhikkhus, one thing, when developed and cultivated, leads to a strong sense of urgency … leads to great good … leads to great security from bondage … leads to mindfulness and clear comprehension … leads to the attainment of knowledge and vision … leads to a pleasant dwelling in this very life … leads to realization of the fruit of knowledge and liberation.
Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities may be appointed a dispenser of small accessories … he knows which have been dispensed and which have not been dispensed….”
Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities may be appointed a distributor of cakes … he knows which have been distributed and which have not been distributed….”
Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities may be appointed a distributor of fruit … he knows which has been distributed and which has not been distributed….”
Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities may be appointed a distributor of rice porridge … he knows which has been distributed and which has not been distributed….”
Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities may be appointed a distributor of robe-material … he knows which has been distributed and which has not been distributed….”
Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities may be appointed a guardian of the storeroom … he knows which are being protected and which are not being protected….”
Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities may be appointed a receiver of robe-material … he knows which has been received and which has not been received….”
Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities may be appointed a supervisor of monastery attendants … he knows which has been supervised and which has not been supervised….”
Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities may be appointed an allocator of bowls … he knows which have been allocated and which have not been allocated….”
Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities may be appointed an allocator of lodgings … he knows which has been allocated and which has not been allocated….”
Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities may be appointed an allocator of rains cloth … he knows which has been allocated and which has not been allocated….”
Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities may be appointed an appointer of lodgings.
Bhikkhus, saying ‘a heap of the unwholesome,’ it is about these five hindrances that one could rightly say this.
Bhikkhus, whenever virtuous monastics come to a home, the people there generate much merit on these five grounds.”
Birth is suffering, old age is suffering, illness is suffering, death is suffering; sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish are suffering; not to get what one wants is suffering; in brief, the five aggregates subject to clinging are suffering.
Birth, old age, and death.
Blame does not obsess his mind, and praise does not obsess his mind.
Blame obsesses his mind, and praise obsesses his mind.
Blameless bodily action, blameless verbal action, and blameless mental action.
Blameless bodily action, blameless verbal action, and blameless mental action.
Blameless bodily action, blameless verbal action, blameless mental action, and blameless view.
Blameless bodily action, blameless verbal action, blameless mental action, and blameless view.
Blameworthy bodily action, blameworthy verbal action, and blameworthy mental action.
Blameworthy bodily action, blameworthy verbal action, and blameworthy mental action.
Blameworthy bodily action, blameworthy verbal action, blameworthy mental action, and blameworthy view.
Blameworthy bodily action, blameworthy verbal action, blameworthy mental action, and blameworthy view.
Bodily good conduct is to be developed for abandoning bodily misconduct.
Bodily good conduct, verbal good conduct, and mental good conduct.
Bodily good conduct, verbal good conduct, and mental good conduct.
Bodily good conduct, verbal good conduct, and mental good conduct.
Bodily good conduct, verbal good conduct, mental good conduct, and gratitude or thankfulness.
Bodily good conduct, verbal good conduct, mental good conduct, and gratitude or thankfulness.
Bodily good conduct, verbal good conduct, mental good conduct, and right view.
Bodily good conduct, verbal good conduct, mental good conduct, and right view.
Bodily happiness and mental happiness.
Bodily illness and mental illness.
Bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct.
Bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct.
Bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct.
Bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct.
Bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, mental misconduct, and ingratitude or non-thankfulness.
Bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, mental misconduct, and ingratitude or non-thankfulness.
Bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, mental misconduct, and wrong view.
Bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, mental misconduct, and wrong view.
Bodily purity, verbal purity, and mental purity.
Bodily purity, verbal purity, and mental purity.
Bodily sagacity, verbal sagacity, and mental sagacity.
Both by thievish cheatful actsand by means of false speechthe man indulging in sensual pleasuresis skilled in amassing wealth.Having gone from here to hell,the one-eyed person is tormented.
Both husband and wife are endowed with faith,charitable and self-controlled,living their lives righteously,addressing each other with pleasant words, Then many benefits accrue to themand they dwell at ease.Their enemies are saddenedwhen both are the same in virtue.
Both husband and wife are endowed with faith,charitable and self-controlled,living their lives righteously,addressing each other with pleasant words.
Both Pātimokkhas have been well transmitted to him in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well determined in terms of the rules and their detailed explication.
Both Pātimokkhas have been well transmitted to him in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well determined in terms of the rules and their detailed explication.
Both Pātimokkhas have been well transmitted to him in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well determined in terms of the rules and their detailed explication.
Both Pātimokkhas have been well transmitted to him in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well determined in terms of the rules and their detailed explication.
Both the one who teaches the Dhamma and the one who hears the Dhamma experience the meaning and the Dhamma.
Brahmins say to him: ‘Why, sir, while claiming to be a brahmin, do you earn your living by all kinds of work?’
He answers them: ‘Just as fire burns pure things and impure things yet is not thereby defiled, so too, sirs, if a brahmin earns his living by all kinds of work, he is not thereby defiled.’
Since he earns his living by all kinds of work, this brahmin is called a caṇḍāla of a brahmin.
But a person has been reborn in a certain order of long-lived devas.
But a person has been reborn in hell.
But a person has been reborn in the animal realm.
But a person has been reborn in the central provinces, and he is wise, intelligent, astute, able to understand the meaning of what has been well stated and badly stated.
But a person has been reborn in the outlying provinces among the uncouth foreigners, to which bhikkhus, bhikkhunīs, male lay followers, and female lay followers do not travel.
But a person has been reborn in the sphere of afflicted spirits.
But a second time the brahmin Saṅgārava replied: “I consider Master Gotama and Master Ānanda worthy of veneration and praise.”
But a third time the brahmin Saṅgārava replied: “I consider Master Gotama and Master Ānanda worthy of veneration and praise.” 
But after he has risen from his seat, he does not attend to that talk at the beginning, in the middle, or at the end.
But after he has risen from his seat, he does not attend to that talk at the beginning, in the middle, or at the end.
But after some time, as a result of living together and intimacy with them, he says even to his teacher and his preceptor: ‘Go away!
But after some time, as a result of living together and intimacy with them, she says to her mother-in-law, her father-in-law, and her husband: ‘Go away!
But again, though the Venerable Ānanda was given such an obvious signal by the Blessed One, though he was given such an obvious hint, he was unable to pick up the hint….
But another kind of person torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others.
But apart from those whose taints have been destroyed, it is hard to find people in the world who can claim to enjoy mental health even for a moment.
But because he committed a particular unwholesome misdeed with the body, I saw him doing so.
But because I committed a particular unwholesome misdeed with the body, he saw me doing so.
But because of this patient, the other patients should also be served.
But because of this person, the Dhamma should also be taught to the others.
But because the abandoning of the unwholesome leads to welfare and happiness, I say: ‘Bhikkhus, abandon the unwholesome!’
But because the developing of the wholesome leads to welfare and happiness, I say: ‘Bhikkhus, develop the wholesome!’”
But because the fool thinks badly, speaks badly, and acts badly, wise people know of him: ‘This fellow is a fool, a bad person.’
These are the fool’s three characteristics of a fool, marks of a fool, manifestations of a fool.
But because the wise person thinks well, speaks well, and acts well, wise people know of him: ‘This fellow is wise, a good person.’
These are the wise person’s three characteristics of a wise person, marks of a wise person, manifestations of a wise person.
But because these five qualities are found in an elder bhikkhu, his fellow monks honor, respect, esteem, and venerate him.”
But because these ten qualities exist in the world, unrighteous conduct, conduct contrary to the Dhamma, and righteous conduct, conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, are seen.”
But because these three things are found in the world, the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One arises in the world, and the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by him shines in the world.
But because these two bright qualities protect the world, there is seen here one’s mother, aunts, or the wives of one’s teachers and respected people.”
But Bharaṇḍu the Kālāma, formerly the Blessed One’s fellow monk,.
But by prescribing the desistance from all kamma, he advocates the annihilation of the world.
But do the bhikkhus take delight in this Dhamma and discipline?”
But do you, bhikkhus, develop mindfulness of death?”
But do you, bhikkhus, develop mindfulness of death?”
But even farther apart, they say,are the teachings of the good and the bad.The company of the good is constant;so long as it endures, it is just the same.But the company of the bad is fickle;thus the teaching of the goodis far from the bad.
But even for beings who are percipient in such a way there is alteration; there is change.
But even for beings who are percipient in such a way there is alteration; there is change.
But even for beings who hold such a view there is alteration; there is change.
But even for beings who perceive in such a way there is alteration; there is change.
But even for beings who practice in such a way there is alteration; there is change.
But even for King Pasenadi there is alteration; there is change.
But even for Mahābrahmā there is alteration; there is change.
But even for these devas there is alteration; there is change.
But even for those who assert thus, there is alteration; there is change.
But even though someone is young, a youth with dark black hair, endowed with the blessing of youth, in the prime of life, if he does not enjoy sensual pleasures, does not dwell in sensual pleasures, does not burn with a fever for sensual pleasures, is not consumed with thoughts of sensual pleasures, is not eager in the quest for sensual pleasures, then he is reckoned as a wise elder.”
But even when this has been done, the gold is not yet settled and the dross has not yet been entirely removed.
But even while giving away my young wife, I don’t recall that any alteration took place in my mind.
But first explain your own views.
But for one with a crooked destination and rebirth, I say, there is one of two destinations: either the exclusively painful hells or a species of creeping animal.
But for one with a straight destination and rebirth, I say, there is one of two destinations: either the exclusively pleasant heavens or eminent families, such as those of affluent khattiyas, affluent brahmins, or affluent householders, rich, with great wealth and property, abundant gold and silver, abundant treasures and belongings, abundant wealth and grain.
But having entirely understoodsense pleasures and the bond of existence,having uprooted the bond of viewsand dissolved ignorance,the sages have severed all bonds;they have gone beyond bondage.
But having heard that Dhamma, those bhikkhus who are arahants, whose taints are destroyed, who have lived the spiritual life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached their own goal, utterly destroyed the fetters of existence, and are completely liberated through final knowledge, are devoted simply to a pleasant dwelling in this very life.
But he can be sure that all those who have been emancipated, or who are being emancipated, or who will be emancipated from the world first abandon the five hindrances, corruptions of the mind that weaken wisdom, and then, with their minds well established in the four establishments of mindfulness, develop correctly the seven factors of enlightenment.
But he consents to being rubbed, massaged, bathed, and kneaded by them.
But he disentangles himself, frees himself, and goes off wherever he wants.
But he does not gain robes … and provisions for the sick.
But he does not gain robes … and provisions for the sick.
But he does not gain robes … and provisions for the sick.
But he has listened, become learned, and penetrated by view, and he attains temporary liberation.
But he has listened, become learned, and penetrated by view, and he attains temporary liberation.
But he has not listened, become learned, and penetrated by view, and he does not attain temporary liberation.
But he is a good speaker with a good delivery … expressive of the meaning; and he is one who instructs, encourages, inspires, and gladdens his fellow monks.
But he is not a good speaker with a good delivery … expressive of the meaning; and he is not one who instructs, encourages, inspires, and gladdens his fellow monks.
But he is not a good speaker with a good delivery … … expressive of the meaning; and he is not one who instructs, encourages, inspires, and gladdens his fellow monks.
But he jokes with women, plays with them, and amuses himself with them….
But he uses his wealth while being tied to it, infatuated with it, and blindly absorbed in it, not seeing the danger in it and understanding the escape.
But his wife is one who abstains from the destruction of life, from taking what is not given, from sexual misconduct, from false speech, and from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness; she is virtuous, of good character; she dwells at home with a heart free from the stain of miserliness; she does not insult or revile ascetics and brahmins.
But his wife is one who destroys life … she insults and reviles ascetics and brahmins.
But I describe someone who possesses these four qualities as a great man with great wisdom.”
But I do not say that there is making an end of suffering so long as one has not experienced volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated.
But I do not say that there is making an end of suffering so long as one has not experienced volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated.
But I do not say that there is making an end of suffering so long as one has not experienced volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated.
But I do not say that there is making an end of suffering so long as one has not experienced volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated.
But I do not say that there is making an end of suffering so long as one has not experienced volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated.
But I do not say that there is making an end of suffering so long as one has not experienced volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated.”
But I do not say that there is making an end of suffering so long as one has not experienced volitional kammas that have been done and accumulated.”
But I don’t know what eight astounding and amazing qualities the Blessed One declared that I possess.”
But I don’t know what eight astounding and amazing qualities the Blessed One declared that I possess.”
But I suppose that in some earlier life I gave things to ascetics or brahmins … bedding, dwellings, and lighting.
But I, Ānanda, describe six classes.
But if a bhikkhu who accepts invitations to meals is not restless … with restrained sense faculties, then in this respect he is praiseworthy.
But if a bhikkhu who dwells on the outskirts of a village is not restless … with restrained sense faculties, then in this respect he is praiseworthy.
But if a bhikkhu who is a forest-dweller is not restless, puffed up, and vain, is not talkative and rambling in his talk, but has mindfulness established, clearly comprehends, is concentrated, with a one-pointed mind, with restrained sense faculties, then in this respect he is praiseworthy.
But if a bhikkhu who is an almsfood collector is not restless … with restrained sense faculties, then in this respect he is praiseworthy.
But if a bhikkhu who wears rag-robes is not restless … with restrained sense faculties, then in this respect he is praiseworthy.
But if a bhikkhu who wears robes given by householders is not restless … with restrained sense faculties, then in this respect he is praiseworthy.
But if a noble disciple’s wealth increases when he has utilized it in these five ways, he thinks: ‘I have utilized wealth in these five ways and my wealth has increased.’
Thus, either way, he has no regret.”
But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints because of that lust for the Dhamma, because of that delight in the Dhamma, then, with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, he becomes one of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without ever returning from that world.
But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints because of that lust for the Dhamma, because of that delight in the Dhamma, then, with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, he becomes one of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without ever returning from that world.
But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints because of that lust for the Dhamma, because of that delight in the Dhamma, then, with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, he becomes one of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without ever returning from that world.
But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints because of that lust for the Dhamma, because of that delight in the Dhamma, then, with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, he becomes one of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without ever returning from that world.
But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints because of that lust for the Dhamma, because of that delight in the Dhamma, then, with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, he becomes one of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without ever returning from that world.
But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints because of that lust for the Dhamma, because of that delight in the Dhamma, then, with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, he becomes one of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without ever returning from that world.
But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints because of that lust for the Dhamma, because of that delight in the Dhamma, then, with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, he becomes one of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without ever returning from that world.
But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints because of that lust for the Dhamma, because of that delight in the Dhamma, then, with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, he becomes one of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without ever returning from that world.
But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints … he becomes one of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without ever returning from that world.
But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints … he becomes one of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without ever returning from that world.
But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints … he becomes one of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without ever returning from that world.
But if he does not reach final knowledge in this very life, having been reborn among a certain group of mind-made that transcend the company of devas that subsist on edible food, he might enter and emerge from the cessation of perception and feeling.
But if it didn’t see land, it returned to the ship.
But if one knows of a country or region: ‘When I resort to this country or region, unwholesome qualities decline in me and wholesome qualities increase,’ one should resort to such a country or region.
But if one knows of a country or region: ‘When I resort to this country or region, unwholesome qualities decline in me and wholesome qualities increase,’ one should resort to such a country or region.
But if one knows of a lodging: ‘When I use this lodging, unwholesome qualities decline in me and wholesome qualities increase,’ one should use such a lodging.
But if one knows of a lodging: ‘When I use this lodging, unwholesome qualities decline in me and wholesome qualities increase,’ one should use such a lodging.
But if one knows of a person: ‘When I associate with this person, unwholesome qualities decline in me and wholesome qualities increase,’ one should associate with such a person.
But if one knows of a robe: ‘When I use this robe, unwholesome qualities decline in me and wholesome qualities increase,’ one should use such a robe.
But if one knows of a robe: ‘When I use this robe, unwholesome qualities decline in me and wholesome qualities increase,’ one should use such a robe.
But if one knows of a village or town: ‘When I resort to this village or town, unwholesome qualities decline in me and wholesome qualities increase,’ one should resort to such a village or town.
But if one knows of a village or town: ‘When I resort to this village or town, unwholesome qualities decline in me and wholesome qualities increase,’ one should resort to such a village or town.
But if one knows of some almsfood: ‘When I use this almsfood, unwholesome qualities decline in me and wholesome qualities increase,’ one should use such almsfood.
But if one knows of some almsfood: ‘When I use this almsfood, unwholesome qualities decline in me and wholesome qualities increase,’ one should use such almsfood.
But if one were to say thus: ‘When a person creates kamma that is to be experienced in a particular way, he experiences its result precisely in that way,’ in such a case the living of the spiritual life is possible and an opportunity is seen for completely making an end of suffering.
But if one were to say thus: ‘When a person creates kamma that is to be experienced in a particular way, he experiences its result precisely in that way,’ in such a case the living of the spiritual life is possible and an opportunity is seen for completely making an end of suffering.”
But if the bhikkhu who has committed an offense and the bhikkhu who reproves him each thoroughly reflect upon themselves, it can be expected that this disciplinary issue will not lead to acrimony and animosity for a long time and the bhikkhus will dwell at ease.
But if the bhikkhu who has committed an offense and the bhikkhu who reproves him thoroughly reflect upon themselves, it can be expected that this disciplinary issue will not lead to acrimony and animosity for a long time and the bhikkhus will dwell at ease.”
But if the goldsmith or his apprentice from time to time blows on it, from time to time sprinkles water over it, and from time to time just looks on, the gold would become malleable, wieldy, and luminous, pliant and properly fit for work.
But if these five qualities are not found in an elder bhikkhu, why should his fellow monks honor, respect, esteem, and venerate him?
But if they do not see any dust or blemish there, they will be glad about it, and their wish fulfilled, they will think, ‘How fortunate for me that I’m clean!’
But if they do not see any dust or blemish there, they will be glad about it; and their wish fulfilled, they will think, ‘How fortunate for me that I’m clean!’ So too, self-examination is very helpful for a bhikkhu in wholesome qualities.
But if they do not see any dust or blemish there, they will be glad about it; and their wish fulfilled, they will think, ‘How fortunate that I’m clean!’ So too, self-examination is very helpful for a bhikkhu in wholesome qualities.
But if unwholesome qualities decline and wholesome qualities increase, then such behavior and observances, lifestyle, and spiritual life, set up as the essence, are fruitful.”
But if you have learned it completely, he will rejoice.”
When this was said, the wanderer Sarabha sat silenced, disconcerted, hunched over, downcast, glum, and speechless.
But if you have learned it completely, I will rejoice.”
But a second time the wanderer Sarabha was silent.
But if you have learned it completely, I will rejoice.”
But a third time the wanderer Sarabha was silent.
But if you wish, approach the Blessed One and ask him about this matter.
But if, when he often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of death, his mind shrinks away from attachment to life … and either equanimity or revulsion becomes settled in him, he should understand: ‘I have developed the perception of death; there is a distinction between my earlier condition and my present one; I have attained the fruit of development.’
Thus he clearly comprehends this.
But if, when he often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of impermanence, his mind shrinks away from gain, honor, and praise … and either equanimity or revulsion becomes settled in him, he should understand: ‘I have developed the perception of impermanence; there is a distinction between my earlier condition and my present one; I have attained the fruit of development.’
Thus he clearly comprehends this.
But if, when he often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of non-delight in the entire world, his mind shrinks away from the world’s beautiful things … and either equanimity or revulsion becomes settled in him, he should understand: ‘I have developed the perception of nondelight in the entire world; there is a distinction between my earlier condition and my present one; I have attained the fruit of development.’
Thus he clearly comprehends this.
But if, when he often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of non-self in what is suffering, his mind is devoid of I-making, mine-making, and conceit regarding this conscious body and all external objects, and if it has transcended discrimination and become peaceful and well liberated, he should understand: ‘I have developed the perception of non-self in what is suffering; there is a distinction between my earlier condition and my present one; I have attained the fruit of development.’
Thus he clearly comprehends this.
But if, when he often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of suffering in the impermanent, a keen perception of danger becomes settled in him toward indolence, laziness, slackness, heedlessness, lack of effort, and unreflectiveness, just as toward a murderer with drawn sword, he should understand: ‘I have developed the perception of suffering in the impermanent; there is a distinction between my earlier condition and my present one; I have attained the fruit of development.’
Thus he clearly comprehends this.
But if, when he often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of the repulsiveness of food, his mind shrinks away from craving for tastes … and either equanimity or revulsion becomes settled in him, he should understand: ‘I have developed the perception of the repulsiveness of food; there is a distinction between my earlier condition and my present one; I have attained the fruit of development.’
Thus he clearly comprehends this.
But if, when he often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of unattractiveness, his mind shrinks away from sexual intercourse … and either equanimity or revulsion becomes settled in him, he should understand: ‘I have developed the perception of unattractiveness; there is a distinction between my earlier condition and my present one; I have attained the fruit of development.’
Thus he clearly comprehends this.
But if, when one attains a particular liberation, unwholesome qualities decline and wholesome qualities increase, then, I say, one should attain such a liberation.”
But if, when one practices a particular austerity, unwholesome qualities decline and wholesome qualities increase, then, I say, one should practice such austerity.
But if, when one relinquishes something, unwholesome qualities decline and wholesome qualities increase, then, I say, one should make such a relinquishment.
But if, when one speaks about what one has cognized, unwholesome qualities decline and wholesome qualities increase, I say that one should speak about what one has cognized.”
But if, when one speaks about what one has heard, unwholesome qualities decline and wholesome qualities increase, I say that one should speak about what one has heard.
But if, when one speaks about what one has seen, unwholesome qualities decline and wholesome qualities increase, I say that one should speak about what one has seen.
But if, when one speaks about what one has sensed, unwholesome qualities decline and wholesome qualities increase, I say that one should speak about what one has sensed.
But if, when one strives in a particular way, unwholesome qualities decline and wholesome qualities increase, then, I say, one should strive in such a way.
But if, when one undertakes a particular observance, unwholesome qualities decline and wholesome qualities increase, then, I say, one should undertake such an observance.
But if, with a mind of hatred, one reviles and abuses a single person accomplished in view, one generates even more demerit.
But if, with a mind of hatred, one reviles and insults a single person accomplished in view, one generates even more demerit.
But in regard to those training rules that are fundamental to the spiritual life, in conformity with the spiritual life, his behavior is constant and steadfast.
But in regard to those training rules that are fundamental to the spiritual life, in conformity with the spiritual life, his behavior is constant and steadfast.
But in regard to those training rules that are fundamental to the spiritual life, in conformity with the spiritual life, his behavior is constant and steadfast.
But in regard to those training rules that are fundamental to the spiritual life, in conformity with the spiritual life, his behavior is constant and steadfast.
But in regard to those training rules that are fundamental to the spiritual life, in conformity with the spiritual life, his behavior is constant and steadfast.
But in regard to those training rules that are fundamental to the spiritual life, in conformity with the spiritual life, his behavior is constant and steadfast.
But in regard to those training rules that are fundamental to the spiritual life, in conformity with the spiritual life, his behavior is constant and steadfast.
But in regard to those training rules that are fundamental to the spiritual life, in conformity with the spiritual life, his behavior is constant and steadfast.
But in the case of a bhikkhu who is an arahant—one whose taints are destroyed … one completely liberated through final knowledge—it is fitting for him to say:
But in the case of a bhikkhu who is an arahant—one whose taints are destroyed, who has lived the spiritual life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached his own goal, utterly destroyed the fetters of existence, one completely liberated through final knowledge—it is fitting for him to say:
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, bad friendship is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, being difficult to correct is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, being difficult to support is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, coming to a stop along the way is a case of decline.’
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, coming to a stop along the way is a case of decline.’
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, deceitfulness is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, delight in company is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, delight in sleep is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, delight in talk is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, delight in work is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, immorality is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, lack of faith is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, lack of wisdom is a case of decline.’
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, lack of wisdom is a case of decline.’
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, laziness is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, little learning is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, muddlemindedness is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, obsession by anger is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, obsession by craftiness is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, obsession by deceitfulness is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, obsession by denigration is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, obsession by desire is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, obsession by doubt is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, obsession by dullness and drowsiness is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, obsession by envy is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, obsession by hostility is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, obsession by ill will is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, obsession by insolence is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, obsession by longing is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, obsession by miserliness is a case of decline.
But in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, obsession by restlessness is a case of decline.
But in the evening, when an esteemed bhikkhu has emerged from seclusion and is sitting in the shade of his dwelling with his legs crossed, holding his body straight, having established mindfulness before him: that is the proper occasion for going to see him.”
But in the forest there are wild spirits, and they might take my life.
But it is possible for a bhikkhu who has abandoned these ten things to achieve growth, progress, and maturity in this Dhamma and discipline.”
But it is possible for a bhikkhu who has abandoned these ten things to achieve growth, progress, and maturity in this Dhamma and discipline.”
But it is possible for a bhikkhu who has abandoned these ten things to achieve growth, progress, and maturity in this Dhamma and discipline.”
But it is possible that a man could occupy the position of Brahmā; there is such a possibility.”
But it is possible that a person engaging in mental good conduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world; there is such a possibility.”
But it is possible that a person engaging in mental misconduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell; there is such a possibility.”
But it is possible that a wished for, desired, agreeable result could be produced from mental good conduct; there is such a possibility.”
But it is possible that a worldling could acknowledge someone other as teacher; there is such a possibility.”
But it is possible that a worldling might consider some conditioned phenomenon as permanent; there is such a possibility.”
But it is possible that a worldling might consider some conditioned phenomenon as pleasurable; there is such a possibility.”
But it is possible that a worldling might consider something as a self; there is such a possibility.”
But it is possible that an unwished for, undesired, disagreeable result might be produced from mental misconduct; there is such a possibility.”
But it is possible that one arahant who is a perfectly enlightened Buddha might arise in one world system; there is such a possibility.”
But it is possible that one wheel-turning monarch might arise in one world system; there is such a possibility.”
But now brahmins buy and sell brahmin women, and they initiate cohabitation both through mutual affection and without mutual affection, doing so for the sake of family continuity.
But now brahmins couple with both brahmin women and non-brahmin women.
But now brahmins couple with brahmin women both when they are in season and out of season.
But now brahmins eat as much as they want until their bellies are full, and then leave taking the leftovers away.
But now brahmins store up wealth, grain, silver, and gold.
But now I am the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One, skilled in crookedness, faults, and defects of the body; skilled in crookedness, faults, and defects of speech; and skilled in crookedness, faults, and defects of mind.
But now I dwell alone, withdrawn from the herd.
But now there are more bhikkhus, but fewer who display superhuman wonders of psychic potency.’
This was the conversation that arose today among the king’s retinue.”
But now these, who are young enough to be my sons or grandsons, presume to exhort and instruct me.’
Being angry and displeased, he gives up the training and reverts to the lower life.
But now when faithful householders give us delicious things to consume and eat during the day outside the proper time, these seem to put a gag over our mouths.’
Being angry and displeased, he gives up the training and reverts to the lower life.
But of those who did not understand his teaching completely, some were reborn in companionship with the devas who control what is created by others; some in companionship with the devas who delight in creation; some in companionship with the Tusita devas; some in companionship with the Yāma devas; some in companionship with the Tāvatiṃsa devas; some in companionship with the devas the four great kings.
But one accomplished in virtue,learned and discerning,self-controlled in the factors of firmness,who clearly sees the meaning with wisdom;gone beyond all phenomena,not barren, discerning; who has abandoned birth and death,consummate in the spiritual life,in whom there are no taints—he is the one I call an elder.With the destruction of the taintsa bhikkhu is called an elder.
But one who has abandoned proliferation,who finds delight in non-proliferation,has attained nibbāna,the unsurpassed security from bondage.
But one who leaves his family and goes forth from the household life into homelessness tames only himself, calms only himself, and leads to nibbāna only himself.
But one who understands the insideand who clearly sees the outside,seeing without hindrances,is not carried away by speech.
But one who, whether walking,standing, sitting, or lying down,has calmed his thoughtsand delights in the stilling of thought:a bhikkhu such as this can reachthe highest enlightenment.
But rather it is when they inform kings of his evil deed, saying: ‘This man has committed misconduct with someone else’s women and girls,’ that kings have him arrested on the charge of sexual misconduct and then execute him, imprison him, banish him, or do with him as the occasion demands.
But rather it is when they inform kings of his evil deed, saying: ‘This person has ruined a householder or a householder’s son with false speech,’ that kings have him arrested on the charge of false speech and then execute him, imprison him, banish him, or do with him as the occasion demands.
But rather it is when they inform kings of his evil deed, saying: ‘This person has stolen something from the village or forest,’ that kings have him arrested on the charge of stealing and then execute him, imprison him, banish him, or do with him as the occasion demands.
But rather it is when they inform kings of his evil deed, saying: ‘This person has taken the life of a woman or a man,’ that kings have him arrested on the charge of taking life and then execute him, imprison him, banish him, or do with him as the occasion demands.
But rather it is when they inform kings of his evil deed, saying: ‘This person, under the influence of liquor, wine, and intoxicants, has taken the life of a woman or a man; or he has stolen something from a village or a forest; or he has committed misconduct with someone else’s women and girls; or he has ruined a householder or a householder’s son with false speech,’ that kings have him arrested on the charge of using liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness, and then execute him, imprison him, banish him, or do with him as the occasion demands.
But she does not give things to ascetics or brahmins….
But she gives things to ascetics or brahmins….
But since he gave an ascetic or a brahmin food and drink … he there gains food and drink, garlands and various ornaments.
But since he gave an ascetic or a brahmin food and drink … he there gains food and drink, garlands and various ornaments.
But since there exist these meansof sustaining a favorable relationship,wise people respect them;thus they attain to greatnessand are highly praised.
But since you see your transgression as a transgression and make amends for it in accordance with the Dhamma, we accept it.
But since you see your transgression as a transgression and make amends for it in accordance with the Dhamma, we accept it.
But someone here has done deeds of bodily good conduct, not deeds of bodily misconduct; he has done deeds of verbal good conduct, not deeds of verbal misconduct; he has done deeds of mental good conduct, not deeds of mental misconduct.
But that kind of wealth can be taken away by fire, water, kings, thieves, and displeasing heirs.
But the abode of the world is vast.
But the Blessed One has called affliction suffering.
But the Blessed One has called affliction suffering.
But the Blessed One has called affliction suffering.
But the Blessed One’s disciple remains there all his life, and when he has completed the entire life span of those devas, he attains final nibbāna in that very same state of existence.
But the Blessed One’s disciple remains there all his life, and when he has completed the entire life span of those devas, he attains final nibbāna in that very same state of existence.
But the Blessed One’s disciple remains there all his life, and when he has completed the entire life span of those devas, he attains final nibbāna in that very same state of existence.
But the Blessed One’s disciple remains there all his life, and when he has completed the entire life span of those devas, he attains final nibbāna in that very same state of existence.
But the Blessed One’s disciple remains there all his life, and when he has completed the entire life span of those devas, he attains final nibbāna in that very same state of existence.
But the Blessed One’s disciple remains there all his life, and when he has completed the entire life span of those devas, he attains final nibbāna in that very same state of existence.
But the Blessed One’s disciple remains there all his life, and when he has completed the entire life span of those devas, he attains final nibbāna in that very same state of existence.
But the Blessed One’s disciple remains there all his life, and when he has completed the entire life span of those devas, he attains final nibbāna in that very same state of existence.
But the Blessed One’s disciple remains there all his life, and when he has completed the entire life span of those devas, he attains final nibbāna in that very same state of existence.
But the Blessed One’s disciple remains there all his life, and when he has completed the entire life span of those devas, he attains final nibbāna in that very same state of existence.
But the Blessed One’s disciple remains there all his life, and when he has completed the entire life span of those devas, he attains final nibbāna in that very same state of existence.
But the man who, with thoughts of hatred,reviles a disciple of the Buddha,a bhikkhu accomplished in view,generates even more demerit.
But the wheel that took six months less six days to finish has a rim without crookedness, faults, and defects; it has spokes without crookedness, faults, and defects; and it has a nave that is without crookedness, faults, and defects.
But the wheel that took six months less six days to finish rolled as far as the impetus carried it and then stood still as if fixed on an axle.
But the wise person does reflect thus: ‘Although this deed is agreeable to do, still it will prove harmful.’
So he does not do that deed, and his refraining from it proves beneficial.
But the wise person does reflect thus: ‘Although this deed is disagreeable to do, still it will prove beneficial.’
So he does that deed, and it proves beneficial.
But then some other ascetics and brahmins come to Kesaputta, and they too explain and elucidate their own doctrines, but disparage, denigrate, deride, and denounce the doctrines of others.
But there are some foolish men here who, it seems, declare final knowledge as a joke.
But there comes an occasion when his mind becomes internally steady, composed, unified, and concentrated.
But there is a man in the worldwho does not destroy life,speak falsely, take what is not given,go to the wives of others, or indulge in liquor and wine.
But there will come a time of famine, a poor harvest, when almsfood is hard to obtain and one cannot easily subsist by means of gleaning.
But there will come a time of peril, of turbulence in the wilderness, when the people of the countryside, mounted on their vehicles, flee on all sides.
But there will come a time when illness assails this body.
But there will come a time when old age assails this body.
But there will come a time when there will be a schism in the Saṅgha.
But these two bases—the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception and the cessation of perception and feeling—I say are to be described by meditative bhikkhus skilled in attainments and skilled in emerging from attainments after they have attained them and emerged from them.”
But they still haven’t attained their own goal.
But they still haven’t attained their own goal.
But they still haven’t attained their own goal.
But they still haven’t attained their own goal.
But they still haven’t attained their own goal.
But they still haven’t attained their own goal.
But they still haven’t attained their own goal.
But they still haven’t attained their own goal.
But this gain is low, common, worldly, ignoble, and unbeneficial; it does not lead to disenchantment, dispassion, cessation, peace, direct knowledge, enlightenment, and nibbāna.
But this hearing is low, common, worldly, ignoble, and unbeneficial; it does not lead to disenchantment, dispassion, cessation, peace, direct knowledge, enlightenment, and nibbāna.
But this kind of recollection is low, common, worldly, ignoble, and unbeneficial; it does not lead to disenchantment, dispassion, cessation, peace, direct knowledge, enlightenment, and nibbāna.
But this kind of service is low, common, worldly, ignoble, and unbeneficial; it does not lead to disenchantment, dispassion, cessation, peace, direct knowledge, enlightenment, and nibbāna.
But this seeing is low, common, worldly, ignoble, and unbeneficial; it does not lead to disenchantment, dispassion, cessation, peace, direct knowledge, enlightenment, and nibbāna.
But this training is low, common, worldly, ignoble, and unbeneficial; it does not lead to disenchantment, dispassion, cessation, peace, direct knowledge, enlightenment, and nibbāna.
But those accomplished in virtuous behaviorwho delight in wisdom and peace,those peaceful ones live happily,having destroyed the flies.
But those ascetics and brahmins who advocate austerity and disgust, who regard austerity and disgust as the essence, and who adhere to austerity and disgust are incapable of crossing the flood.
But those bhikkhus who are honest, sincere, steadfast, compliant, and well concentrated are bhikkhus of mine.
But those bhikkhus who were newly ordained, who had not long gone forth and had just recently come to this Dhamma and discipline, slept, snoring away until sunrise.
But those good people here who,when warned by the divine messengers,never become heedlessin regard to the noble Dhamma;who, having seen the peril in clingingas the origin of birth and death,are liberated by non-clingingin the extinction of birth and death:those happy ones have attained security;they have reached nibbāna in this very life.Having overcome all enmity and peril,they have transcended all suffering.
But those who are honest and sincere,steadfast, compliant, and well concentrated,make progress in the Dhammathat the Perfectly Enlightened One has taught.
But those who gain the human statewhen the good Dhamma is well proclaimed,have accomplished the Teacher’s word,or will do so, or are doing so now.
But those who have fully understood sense pleasureslive without fear from any quarter.Having attained the destruction of the taints,while in the world, they have gone beyond.
But those who possess unwavering confidence in the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha, and who have the virtuous behavior loved by the noble ones, know: ‘I am a stream-enterer, no longer subject to the lower world, fixed in destiny, heading for enlightenment.’”
But those who possess unwavering confidence in the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha, and who have the virtuous behavior loved by the noble ones, know: ‘I am a stream-enterer, no longer subject to the lower world, fixed in destiny, heading for enlightenment.’”
But those who value the good Dhamma,who dwelled thus in the past and dwell thus now,are like moistened medicinal plants:they grow in the Dhamma.
But those who value the good Dhamma,who dwelled thus in the past and dwell thus now,truly grow in the Dhammataught by the Perfectly Enlightened One.
But though the Venerable Ānanda was given such an obvious signal by the Blessed One, though he was given such an obvious hint, he was unable to pick up the hint.
But though the world is burning with old age, illness, and death, when one has departed, bodily, verbal, and mental self-control will provide a shelter, a harbor, an island, a refuge, and a support.”
But though the world is swept away by old age, illness, and death, when one has departed, bodily, verbal, and mental self-control will provide a shelter, a harbor, an island, a refuge, and a support.”
But we have not done anything good and wholesome, nor have we made a shelter for ourselves.
But we have not done anything good and wholesome, nor have we made a shelter for ourselves.
But whatever has come into being and is conditioned, a product of volition, dependently originated, is impermanent.
But whatever has come into being and is conditioned, a product of volition, dependently originated, is impermanent.
But whatever has come into being and is conditioned, a product of volition, dependently originated, is impermanent.
But whatever is constructed and produced by volition is impermanent, subject to cessation.’
If he is firm in this, he attains the destruction of the taints.
But whatever is constructed and produced by volition is impermanent, subject to cessation.’
If he is firm in this, he attains the destruction of the taints.
But whatever is constructed and produced by volition is impermanent, subject to cessation.’
If he is firm in this, he attains the destruction of the taints.
But whatever is constructed and produced by volition is impermanent, subject to cessation.’
If he is firm in this, he attains the destruction of the taints.
But whatever is constructed and produced by volition is impermanent, subject to cessation.’
If he is firm in this, he attains the destruction of the taints.
But whatever is constructed and produced by volition is impermanent, subject to cessation.’
If he is firm in this, he attains the destruction of the taints.
But when a bhikkhu devoted to the higher mind from time to time gives attention to the mark of concentration, from time to time to the mark of exertion, and from time to time to the mark of equanimity, his mind becomes malleable, wieldy, and luminous, pliant and properly concentrated for the destruction of the taints.
But when a bhikkhu is ardentand does not neglect clear comprehension,in such a way he transcendsthis miserable bog;he surveys this trembling populationthat has fallen into birth and old age.
But when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith and approaches him, the Tathāgata is disposed to teach.
But when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith and approaches him, the Tathāgata is disposed to teach.
But when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith and is virtuous, and he gains internal serenity of mind and also gains the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena, then he is complete with respect to that factor.”
But when a sense of moral shame has disappeared and moral shamelessness obsesses one, then there is the entering upon the unwholesome.
But when a Tathāgata is teaching the Dhamma about non-attachment, people wish to listen, and they lend an ear and set their minds on understanding it.
But when a Tathāgata is teaching the Dhamma for the removal of conceit, people wish to listen, and they lend an ear and set their minds on understanding it.
But when a Tathāgata is teaching the Dhamma for the removal of ignorance, people wish to listen, and they lend an ear and set their minds on understanding it.
But when a Tathāgata is teaching the Dhamma that leads to peace, people wish to listen, and they lend an ear and set their minds on understanding it.
But when an esteemed bhikkhu has risen as the night begins to fade and is sitting with his legs crossed, holding his body straight, having established mindfulness before him: that is the proper occasion for going to see him.”
But when anyone exhausts wealth on these four worthy deeds, that wealth is said to have gone to good use, to have been properly used, to have been utilized for a worthy cause.”
But when asked a question pertaining to the Dhamma or the discipline, he falters and does not answer.
But when asked a question pertaining to the Dhamma or the discipline, he falters and does not answer.
But when asked a question pertaining to the Dhamma or the discipline, he falters and does not answer.
But when beings have directly known as it really is the gratification in the world as gratification, the danger as danger, and the escape from it as escape, then they have escaped from this world with … its devas and humans; they have become detached from it, released from it, and they dwell with a mind rid of barriers.”
But when delusion is abandoned, he does not engage in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
But when delusion is abandoned, he does not engage in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
But when delusion is abandoned, he does not intend for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he does not experience mental suffering and dejection.
But when delusion is abandoned, he does not intend for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he does not experience mental suffering and dejection.
But when delusion is abandoned, he does not intend for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he does not experience mental suffering and dejection.
But when delusion is abandoned, he does not intend for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he does not experience mental suffering and dejection.
But when delusion is abandoned, he understands as it really is his own good, the good of others, and the good of both.
But when delusion is abandoned, one understands as it really is one’s own good, the good of others, and the good of both.
But when energy has disappeared and laziness obsesses one, then there is the entering upon the unwholesome.
But when faith has disappeared and lack of faith obsesses one, then there is the entering upon the unwholesome.
But when from time to time he gives attention to the mark of concentration, from time to time to the mark of exertion, and from time to time to the mark of equanimity, his mind becomes malleable, wieldy, and luminous, not brittle but properly concentrated for the destruction of the taints.
But when gold is freed from these five defilements, it is malleable, wieldy, and luminous, pliant and properly fit for work.
But when hatred is abandoned, he does not intend for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he does not experience mental suffering and dejection.
But when he is asked about them, then, led on by questions, he speaks about his own faults without gaps and omissions, fully and in detail.
But when he is asked about them, then, led on by questions, he speaks about his own virtues with gaps and omissions, not fully or in detail.
But when he is asked about them, then, led on by questions, he speaks about his own virtues without gaps and omissions, fully and in detail.
But when he is asked about them, then, led on by questions, he speaks about the faults of others without gaps or omissions, fully and in detail.
But when he is asked about them, then, led on by questions, he speaks about the virtues of others without gaps and omissions, fully and in detail.
But when he is asked about them, then, though led on by questions, he speaks about his own faults with gaps and omissions, not fully or in detail.
But when he is asked about them, then, though led on by questions, he speaks about the faults of others with gaps and omissions, not fully or in detail.
But when he is asked about them, then, though led on by questions, he speaks about the virtues of others with gaps and omissions, not fully or in detail.
But when he is attending to good will, his mind launches out upon it and becomes placid, settled, and focused on it.
But when he is attending to non-harming, his mind launches out upon it and becomes placid, settled, and focused on it.
But when he is attending to renunciation, his mind launches out upon it and becomes placid, settled, and focused on it.
But when he is attending to the cessation of personal existence, his mind launches out upon it and becomes placid, settled, and focused on it.
But when he is attending to the formless, his mind launches out upon it and becomes placid, settled, and focused on it.
But when he leaves the Teacher and fellow monks in the position of a teacher, he bonds with bhikkhus … he gives up the training and reverts to the lower life.
But when he leaves the Teacher and fellow monks in the position of a teacher, he bonds with bhikkhus, bhikkhunīs, male and female lay followers, kings and royal ministers, sectarian teachers and the disciples of sectarian teachers.
But when I attained and emerged from these nine attainments of progressive dwellings in direct order and reverse order, then I claimed to have awakened to the unsurpassed perfect enlightenment in this world with … its devas and humans.
But when I did not see even one of these seven bonds of sexuality that I had not abandoned, then I claimed to have awakened to the unsurpassed perfect enlightenment in this world with … its devas and humans.
But when I directly knew as it really is the gratification in the world as gratification, the danger as danger, and the escape from it as escape, then I claimed to have awakened to the unsurpassed perfect enlightenment in this world with … its devas and humans.
But when I directly knew as it really is the gratification in the world as gratification, the danger as danger, and the escape from it as escape, then I claimed to have awakened to the unsurpassed perfect enlightenment in this world with … its devas and humans.
But when lust is abandoned, he does not engage in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
But when lust is abandoned, he does not intend for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he does not experience mental suffering and dejection.
But when lust is abandoned, he does not intend for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he does not experience mental suffering and dejection.
But when lust is abandoned, he does not intend for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he does not experience mental suffering and dejection.
But when lust is abandoned, he does not intend for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he does not experience mental suffering and dejection.
But when lust is abandoned, he understands as it really is his own good, the good of others, and the good of both.
But when lust is abandoned, one does not engage in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
But when lust is abandoned, one understands as it really is one’s own good, the good of others, and the good of both.
But when moral dread has disappeared and lack of moral dread obsesses one, then there is the entering upon the unwholesome.
But when my knowledge and vision about the devas with its eight facets was well purified, then I claimed to have awakened to the unsurpassed perfect enlightenment in this world with … its devas and humans.
But when one often reflects upon this theme, such misconduct is either completely abandoned or diminished.
But when one often reflects upon this theme, the desire and lust in regard to everyone and everything dear and agreeable is either completely abandoned or diminished.
But when one often reflects upon this theme, the intoxication with health is either completely abandoned or diminished.
But when one often reflects upon this theme, the intoxication with life is either completely abandoned or diminished.
But when one often reflects upon this theme, the intoxication with youth is either completely abandoned or diminished.
But when that bhikkhu is accomplished in faith in wholesome qualities … accomplished in wisdom in wholesome qualities, then I am unconcerned about him, thinking: ‘The bhikkhu can now look after himself.
But when that immoral man … accepts reverential salutations from affluent khattiyas, brahmins, or householders, this leads to his harm and suffering for a long time.
But when that immoral man … accepts the homage of affluent khattiyas, brahmins, or householders, this leads to his harm and suffering for a long time.
But when that immoral man … consumes almsfood given out of faith by affluent khattiyas, brahmins, or householders, this leads to his harm and suffering for a long time.
But when that immoral man … embraces a girl with soft and tender hands and feet—whether from a khattiya, brahmin, or householder clan—and sits down or lies down next to her, this leads to his harm and suffering for a long time.
But when that immoral man … makes use of a robe given out of faith by affluent khattiyas, brahmins, or householders, this leads to his harm and suffering for a long time.
But when that immoral man … uses a bed and chair given out of faith by affluent khattiyas, brahmins, or householders, this leads to his harm and suffering for a long time.
But when that immoral man … uses a dwelling given out of faith by affluent khattiyas, brahmins, or householders, this leads to his harm and suffering for a long time.
But when the Blessed One tells me: ‘Sīha, with the breakup of the body, after death, a donor, a munificent giver, is reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world,’ I do not know this, and here I go by faith in the Blessed One.”
But when the Blessed One tells me: ‘Sīha, with the breakup of the body, after death, a donor, a munificent giver, is reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world,’ I do not know this, and here I go by faith in the Blessed One.”
But when the Buddhas arise in the world,sending forth a brilliant light,they reveal this Dhamma that leadsto the stilling of suffering.
But when the mind is freed from these five defilements, it becomes malleable, wieldy, and luminous, pliant and properly concentrated for the destruction of the taints.
But when they regularly offer by family customsacrifices free from violence,no goats, sheep, and cattleor various creatures are slain.
But when those discourses are being recited that are mere poetry composed by poets, beautiful in words and phrases, created by outsiders, spoken by disciples, they want to listen to them, lend an ear to them, and apply their minds to understand them; they think those teachings should be studied and learned.
But when those discourses are being recited that are mere poetry composed by poets, beautiful in words and phrases, created by outsiders, spoken by disciples, they will want to listen to them, lend an ear to them, and apply their minds to understand them; they will think those teachings should be studied and learned.
But when those discourses spoken by the Tathāgata are being recited that are deep, deep in meaning, world-transcending, connected with emptiness, the bhikkhus want to listen to them, lend an ear to them, and apply their minds to understand them; they think those teachings should be studied and learned.
But when wisdom has disappeared and lack of wisdom obsesses one, then there is the entering upon the unwholesome.”
But while I am living here, a snake might bite me, a scorpion might sting me, or a centipede might sting me.
But while I am living here, I might encounter hoodlums escaping a crime or planning one and they might take my life.
But while I am living here, I might encounter wild beasts, such as a lion, a tiger, a leopard, a bear, or a hyena, and they might take my life.
But while I am living here, I might trip and fall down, or the food that I have eaten might harm me, or my bile or phlegm or sharp winds might become agitated in me.
But who can know this difference except the Tathāgata?
But who can know this difference except the Tathāgata?
But who can know this difference except the Tathāgata?
But who can know this difference except the Tathāgata?
But with the remainderless fading away and cessation of ignorance that body does not exist conditioned by which that pleasure and pain arise in one internally; that speech does not exist conditioned by which that pleasure and pain arise in one internally; that mind does not exist conditioned by which that pleasure and pain arise in one internally.
But you carp against others and do not substantiate it, so you are blameworthy and at fault.”
But, Bhante, I have something further to be done and increase what has been done.
But, Bhante, I have something further to be done and increase what has been done.
But, Bhante, the Blessed One is the unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed.
But, Bhante, what kind of devas should be understood as the acquisition of individuality in which neither one’s own volition nor the volition of others operates?”
But, Sariputta, you should speak to those clansmen who have gone forth from the household life into homelessness out of faith, who are not crafty … who are wise, intelligent.
By abstaining from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness, the noble disciple gives to an immeasurable number of beings freedom from fear, enmity, and affliction.
By abstaining from the destruction of life, the noble disciple gives to an immeasurable number of beings freedom from fear, enmity, and affliction.
By body, by speech, and by mind.
By body, speech, and mind.
by buying and selling as well as a brahmin woman given to him by the pouring of water.
by buying and selling as well as a brahmin woman given to him by the pouring of water.
By chance they would meet one another later in life.
By completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling, and having seen with wisdom, his taints are utterly destroyed.
By completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, he enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling.
By completely surmounting the base of neither-perceptionnor-non-perception, one enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling.
By completely surmounting the base of nothingness, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception ….
By completely surmounting the base of nothingness, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
By completely surmounting the base of nothingness, he enters and dwells in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
By completely surmounting the base of nothingness, he enters and dwells in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
By completely surmounting the base of nothingness, one enters and dwells in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
By completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness, ‘there is nothing,’ a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of nothingness ….
By completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness, ‘there is nothing,’ a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of nothingness ….
By completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness, ‘there is nothing,’ he enters and dwells in the base of nothingness.
By completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness, ‘there is nothing,’ he enters and dwells in the base of nothingness.
By completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness, ‘there is nothing,’ one enters and dwells in the base of nothingness.
By completely surmounting the base of the infinity of space, ‘consciousness is infinite,’ he enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of consciousness.
By completely surmounting the base of the infinity of space, ‘consciousness is infinite,’ he enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of consciousness.
By completely surmounting the base of the infinity of space, ‘consciousness is infinite,’ one enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of consciousness.
By criticizing what deserves criticism and praising what is praiseworthy, the Blessed One speaks on the basis of distinctions; he does not speak about such matters one-sidedly.”
By day and by night a white canopy was held over me so that cold and heat, dust, grass, and dew would not settle on me.
By giving, he becomes dear and many resort to him.He attains a good reputation and his fame increases.The generous man is composedand confidently enters the assembly.
By giving, one becomes dear,one follows the duty of the good;the good self-controlled monksalways resort to one.
By having abandoned these six things, one is capable of contemplating phenomena in phenomena both internally and externally.”
By living together with him, know him asan angry person with evil desires;a denigrator, obstinate, and insolent,envious, miserly, and deceptive.
By means of a bathing brush, lime powder, water, and the appropriate effort by the person.
By means of a furnace, salt, red chalk, a blow-pipe and tongs, and the appropriate effort by the person.
By means of cleansing paste, clay, water, and the appropriate effort by the person.
By means of heat, lye, cow dung, water, and the appropriate effort by the person.
By means of oil, ashes, a roll of cloth, and the appropriate effort by the person.
By means of wealth, one makes oneself happy and pleased and properly maintains oneself in happiness; one makes one’s parents happy and pleased and properly maintains them in happiness; one makes one’s wife and children, slaves, workers, and servants happy and pleased and properly maintains them in happiness; one makes one’s friends and companions happy and pleased and properly maintains them in happiness; one establishes for ascetics and brahmins an uplifting offering of alms that is heavenly, resulting in happiness, and conducive to heaven.
By nature he is not strongly prone to delusion and does not often experience pain and dejection born of delusion.
By nature he is not strongly prone to hatred and does not often experience pain and dejection born of hatred.
By nature he is strongly prone to delusion and often experiences pain and dejection born of delusion.
By nature he is strongly prone to hatred and often experiences pain and dejection born of hatred.
By relying on a good person, these four benefits are to be expected.”
By seeing the beginning, the danger, and the escape, and by seeing the knowledge and vision of the path and the non-path, he knew the attainment of the goal, the peace of the heart.
By seeing the beginning, the danger, and the escape, and by seeing the knowledge and vision of the path and the non-path, he knew the attainment of the goal, the peace of the heart.
By such means, it is possible that your drowsiness will be abandoned.
By such means, it is possible that your drowsiness will be abandoned.
By such means, it is possible that your drowsiness will be abandoned.
By such means, it is possible that your drowsiness will be abandoned.
By such means, it is possible that your drowsiness will be abandoned.
By such means, it is possible that your drowsiness will be abandoned.
By such means, it is possible that your drowsiness will be abandoned.
By what are they headed?
By what are they headed?
By what is the world dragged around?
By what is the world dragged around?
Can our departed relatives and family members actually partake of our gift?”
Can you make me a new pair of wheels?’ – ‘I can, lord,’ the chariotmaker replied.
Capable in attending to her work,managing the domestic help,she treats her husband in agreeable waysand safeguards the wealth he earns.
Careful attention, becoming full, fills up mindfulness and clear comprehension.
Careful attention, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
Careless attention, becoming full, fills up lack of mindfulness and clear comprehension.
Careless attention, following a wrong path, and mental sluggishness.
Careless attention, following a wrong path, and mental sluggishness.
Careless attention, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
carry him off and bring him to his relatives.
carry him off and bring him to his relatives.
carry him off and bring him to his relatives.
Certainly, only one like him could know his competence in wisdom!”
Cleansing one’s own mind and one does not cling to anything in the world.
Clear comprehension is to be developed for abandoning lack of clear comprehension.
Clouds are a defilement of the sun and moon because of which the sun and moon do not shine, blaze, and radiate; fog is a defilement of the sun and moon … smoke and dust is a defilement of the sun and moon … and Rāhu, lord of the asuras, is a defilement of the sun and moon because of which the sun and moon do not shine, blaze, and radiate.
Cold, heat, hunger, thirst, defecation, urination, bodily restraint, verbal restraint, restraint in one’s livelihood, and the formative activity of existence that leads to renewed existence.
Collapsed and fallen, they fall away;the greedy ones come back again.Done is the task, the delightful is delighted in;happiness is reached by happiness.
Come forth, venerables!
Come, Kālāmas, do not go by oral tradition, by lineage of teaching, by hearsay, by a collection of scriptures, by logical reasoning, by inferential reasoning, by reasoned cogitation, by the acceptance of a view after pondering it, by the seeming competence, or because you think: ‘The ascetic is our guru.’
But when, Kālāmas, you know for yourselves: ‘These things are unwholesome; these things are blameworthy; these things are censured by the wise; these things, if accepted and undertaken, lead to harm and suffering,’ then you should abandon them.
Come, let’s approach the Blessed One and report this matter to him.
Come, let’s go to the Blessed One and report this matter to him.
Come, let’s go to the Blessed One and report this matter to him.
Come, you too practice thus.
Compassion shown with material goods and compassion shown with the Dhamma.
Conceit … self-abasement.
Conceit, an inferiority complex, arrogance, self-overestimation, obstinacy, and self-abasement.
Conceit, the inferiority complex, and arrogance: these are the three kinds of conceit that are to be abandoned.
Conditioned phenomena should be seen in such a way, explored in such a way, discerned by insight in such a way.’
Then, some time later, he gains both internal serenity of mind and the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena.
Conduct in accordance with the Dhamma is to be developed for abandoning conduct contrary to the Dhamma.
Considering the five prospects,wise people wish for a son.“Supported by us, he will support us,or he will do work for us.The family lineage will be extended,he will manage the inheritance,or else, when we have passed on,he will make an offering on our behalf.”
Considering these prospects,wise people wish for a son.Therefore good persons,grateful and appreciative,support their mother and father,recalling how they helped one in the past; they do what is necessary for themas they did for oneself in the past.
Considering your own good, bhikkhus, it is enough to strive for the goal with heedfulness; considering the good of others, it is enough to strive for the goal with heedfulness; considering the good of both, it is enough to strive for the goal with heedfulness.”
Consummate, having overcome,he set in motion the wheel of Dhammaout of compassion for all beings.Beings pay homage to such a one,the best among devas and humans,who has gone beyond existence.
Contact is its source and origin.
Contact is their source and origin.
Contact is their source and origin.
Contact is their source and origin.
Contemplation of gratification in things that can fetter and contemplation of disenchantment in things that can fetter.
Contentment is to be developed for abandoning non-contentment.
Controlled in walking, controlled in standing,controlled in sitting and in lying down;controlled, a bhikkhu draws in the limbs,and controlled, he stretches them out.
Corpses usually lie flat on their backs.
Could one rightly say: ‘Now dust will never reappear at this crossroads’?”
Could one rightly say: ‘Now food will never again appeal to this man’?”
Could one rightly say: ‘Now the sound of the crickets will never reappear in this forest thicket’?” 
Could one rightly say: ‘Now the various kinds of shells, the gravel and pebbles, will never reappear in this pond’?”
Could one rightly say: ‘Now this crop-eating bull will never again enter among the crops’?”
Could one rightly say: ‘Now waves will never reappear on this lake’?”
Could that man cross the river?”
Could that man cross the river?”
Could this be the monk’s work?’
This is the eighth danger in entering the king’s inner palace.
Could this be the monk’s work?’
This is the fifth danger in entering the king’s inner palace.
Could this be the monk’s work?’
This is the fourth danger in entering the king’s inner palace.
Could this be the monk’s work?’
This is the ninth danger in entering the king’s inner palace.
Could this be the monk’s work?’
This is the second danger in entering the king’s inner palace.
Could this be the monk’s work?’
This is the seventh danger in entering the king’s inner palace.
Could this be the monk’s work?’
This is the sixth danger in entering the king’s inner palace.
Could this be the monk’s work?’
This is the third danger in entering the king’s inner palace.
Countries or regions should be understood to be twofold: those to be resorted to and those not to be resorted to.
Countries or regions too, I say, are twofold: those to be resorted to and those not to be resorted to.
Craving arises in a bhikkhu because of robes, almsfood, lodgings, or for the sake of life here or elsewhere.
Craving arises in a bhikkhu because of robes, almsfood, lodgings, or for the sake of life here or elsewhere.
Craving for existence has been cut off; the conduit to existence has been destroyed; now there is no more renewed existence.”
Craving for existence has been cut off; the conduit to existence has been destroyed; now there is no more renewed existence.” 
Craving is its source and origin.
Day and night, he remained brooding over Queen Bhaddā’s body.
Day and night, he remains brooding over the queen’s body.
Day and night, he remains brooding over the queen’s body.
Deeds that involve destroying growthand deeds that cause their own death:when doing such deeds they do not knowthat defeat is born of anger.
Defeated and frightened, the asuras entered their city.
Defeated and frightened, the devas entered their city.
Defeated, the asuras fled south, pursued by the devas.
Defeated, the asuras fled south, pursued by the devas.
Defeated, the devas fled north, pursued by the asuras.
Defeated, the devas fled north, pursued by the asuras.
Defiled by these,some ascetics and brahmins—impure, dusty creatures—do not shine and blaze.
Delight in company is a thorn to one who delights in solitude.
Delight in company, being difficult to correct, and bad friendship.
Delight in work … being immoderate in eating.
Delight in work … being immoderate in eating.
Delight in work, delight in talk, and delight in sleep.
Delight in work, delight in talk, and delight in sleep.
Delight in work, delight in talk, delight in sleep, and delight in company; and he does not review the extent to which his mind is liberated.
Delight in work, delight in talk, delight in sleep, delight in company, not guarding the doors of the sense faculties, and being immoderate in eating.
Delight in work, delight in talk, delight in sleep, delight in company, not guarding the doors of the sense faculties, and being immoderate in eating.
Delight in work, delight in talk, delight in sleep, delight in company, not guarding the doors of the sense faculties, and lack of moderation in eating.
Delight in work, delight in talk, delight in sleep, delight in company, not guarding the doors of the sense faculties, lack of moderation in eating, delight in bonding, and delight in proliferation.
Delight in work, delight in talk, delight in sleep, delight in company, not guarding the doors of the sense faculties, lack of moderation in eating; and when there are matters pertaining to the Saṅgha that are in the Saṅgha, the bhikkhu who is a trainee does not reflect thus: ‘There are in the Saṅgha elders of long standing, long gone forth, responsible, who will take responsibility for that.’
He himself undertakes them.
Delight in work, delight in talk, delight in sleep, delight in company; and he does not review the extent to which the mind is liberated.
Delight in work, delight in talk, delight in sleep, not guarding the doors of the sense faculties, and lack of moderation in eating.
Delightful is the Udena Shrine, delightful the Gotamaka Shrine, delightful the Sattamba Shrine, delightful the Bahuputta Shrine, delightful the Sārandada Shrine, delightful the Cāpāla Shrine.
Delighting in factions, established in non-Dhamma, he falls away from security from bondage.
Delusion leads to blindness, loss of vision, and lack of knowledge; it is obstructive to wisdom, aligned with distress, and does not lead to nibbāna.
Desire arises with reference to things in the future that are the basis for desire and lust.
Desire arises with reference to things in the past that are the basis for desire and lust.
Desire arises with reference to things presently existing that are the basis for desire and lust.
Desire does not arise with reference to things in the future that are the basis for desire and lust.
Desire does not arise with reference to things in the past that are the basis for desire and lust.
Desire does not arise with reference to things presently existing that are the basis for desire and lust.
Desiring gain, honor, and fame, he neglects seclusion; he neglects remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
Development of what?
Development of what?
Diligence and initiative are nutriments for wealth.
Directly knowing one thing, fully understanding one thing, abandoning one thing, and realizing one thing, he reaches right liberation.
Disaster due to relatives, disaster due to wealth, disaster due to illness, disaster regarding virtuous behavior, and disaster regarding view.
Disciplinary acts contrary to the Dhamma are explained and disciplinary acts in accordance with the Dhamma are not explained; disciplinary acts contrary to the discipline are explained and disciplinary acts in accordance with the discipline are not explained.
Disciplinary acts that accord with the Dhamma are explained and disciplinary acts contrary to the Dhamma are not explained; disciplinary acts that accord with the discipline are explained and disciplinary acts contrary to the discipline are not explained.
Discomfort originating from bile, phlegm, wind, or their combination; discomfort produced by change of climate; discomfort produced by careless behavior; discomfort produced by assault; or discomfort produced as the result of kamma—these do not often arise in him.
Discomfort originating from bile, phlegm, wind, or their combination; discomfort produced by change of climate; discomfort produced by careless behavior; discomfort produced by assault; or discomfort produced as the result of kamma—these do not often arise in him.
Discomfort originating from bile, phlegm, wind, or their combination; discomfort produced by change of climate; discomfort produced by careless behavior; discomfort produced by assault; or discomfort produced as the result of kamma—these do not often arise in me.
Discomfort originating from bile, phlegm, wind, or their combination; discomfort produced by change of climate; discomfort produced by careless behavior; discomfort produced by assault; or discomfort produced as the result of kamma—these do not often arise in me.
Discontent does not vanquish the steadfast one, the steadfast one is not vanquished by discontent.The steadfast one vanquishes discontent,for the steadfast one is a vanquisher of discontent.
Discontent, harmfulness, and conduct contrary to the Dhamma.
Disrespect, being difficult to correct, and bad friendship.
Disrespect, being difficult to correct, and bad friendship.
Divisive speech is non-Dhamma; abstention from divisive speech is the Dhamma….
Divisive speech is the near shore, abstention from divisive speech the far shore.
Divisive speech, I say, is also threefold: caused by greed, caused by hatred, and caused by delusion.
Do I gain internal joy of the Dhamma?
Do I gain internal serenity of mind?
Do I gain the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena or not?’
Do I gain the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena?
Do I possess bodily behavior that is pure, flawless, and irreproachable?
Do I possess verbal behavior that is pure, flawless, and irreproachable?
Do not be remorseful later, thinking: ‘Our teacher was present before us, yet we could not bring ourselves to question the Blessed One when we were in his presence.’
Do not favor the going forth of women from the household life into homelessness in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata.”
Do not favor the going forth of women from the household life into homelessness in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata.”
Do not favor the going forth of women from the household life into homelessness in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata.”
Do not favor the going forth of women from the household life into homelessness in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata.” 
Do not have cause to regret it later, like those prior deities.”
Do not have cause to regret it later.
Do not have cause to regret it later.
Do not have cause to regret it later.
Do not misrepresent the Blessed One; for it is not good to misrepresent the Blessed One.
Do not misrepresent the Blessed One; for it is not good to misrepresent the Blessed One.
Do not misrepresent the Blessed One; for it is not good to misrepresent the Blessed One.
Do not misrepresent the Blessed One; for it is not good to misrepresent the Blessed One.
Do not misrepresent the Blessed One; for it is not good to misrepresent the Blessed One.
Do not misrepresent the Blessed One; for it is not good to misrepresent the Blessed One.
Do not pass judgment on people.
Do not pass judgment on people.
Do not pass judgment on people.
Do not pass judgment on people.
Do not pollute yourself.
Do not pollute yourself.
Do not say so, Kokālika!
Do not say so, Kokālika!
Do not say so, Udāyī!
Do not speak thus.
Do not speak thus.
Do not speak thus.
Do not speak thus.
Do not speak thus.
Do not speak thus.
Do not think you are unable to follow the training, give it up, and revert to the lower life.’
While he is being exhorted and instructed by his fellow monks in this way, he protests: ‘Friends, although the Blessed One has stated that sensual pleasures provide little gratification, much suffering and anguish, and that the danger in them is more, still, I am unable to maintain the spiritual life.
Do not think you are unable to follow the training, give it up, and revert to the lower life.’
While he is being exhorted and instructed by his fellow monks in this way, he says: ‘I will try, friends, I will carry on, I will enjoy it.
Do they explain in accordance with the Dhamma so that they do not incur any reasonable criticism or ground for censure?
Do they explain in accordance with the Dhamma so that they would not incur any reasonable criticism or ground for censure?
Do they explain in accordance with the Dhamma so that they would not incur any reasonable criticism or ground for censure?
Do you consider him wise?”
Do you really think you have something to say?’
I say this person is similar to the wild colt that, when told: ‘Go forward!’ and when spurred and incited by its trainer, leaps back and damages the rail and breaks the triple pole.
Do you remember that, friend?’
And the other would say: ‘I remember, friend.
Do you remember where we formerly lived the spiritual life?’
The other says: ‘I remember, dear sir.
Do you see, Vappa, anything on account of which taints productive of painful feeling might flow in upon such a person in future lives?”
Do you see, Vappa, anything on account of which taints productive of painful feeling might flow in upon such a person in future lives?”
Do you see, Vappa, anything on account of which taints productive of painful feeling might flow in upon such a person in future lives?”
Do you see, Vappa, anything on account of which taints productive of painful feeling might flow in upon such a person in future lives?”
Do you think you too are entitled to speak?’
He then becomes angry and displeased and utters speech on account of which the Saṅgha expels him, as if the clothing made of bark fabric on the rubbish heap.
Does the element of continuation exist?”
Does the element of exertion exist?”
Does the element of force exist?”
Does the element of instigation exist?”
Does the element of persistence exist?”
Does the element of strength exist?”
Does there exist in me this quality or not?’
If both Pātimokkhas have not been well transmitted to him in detail … in terms of the rules and their detailed explication, and if, when asked: ‘Where did the Blessed One state this?’ he is unable to reply, there will be those who say to him: ‘Please first learn the discipline.’
There will be those who say this to him.
Does this quality exist in me or not?
Does this quality exist in me or not?
Does this quality exist in me or not?
Does this quality exist in me or not?
Does this quality exist in me or not?
Does this quality exist in me or not?
Does this quality exist in me or not?
Does this quality exist in me or not?
Does this quality exist in me or not?
Does this quality exist in me or not?’
Does this quality exist in me or not?’
If the bhikkhu has not established a mind of loving-kindness without resentment toward his fellow monks, there will be those who say to him: ‘Please first establish a mind of loving-kindness toward your fellow monks.’
There will be those who say this to him.
Does this quality exist in me or not?’
If the bhikkhu is not learned … and has not penetrated them well by view, there will be those who say to him: ‘Please first learn the heritage.’
There will be those who say this to him.
Does this quality exist in me or not?’
If the bhikkhu’s bodily behavior is not pure, and he does not possess bodily behavior that is pure, flawless, and irreproachable, there will be those who say to him: ‘Please first train yourself bodily.’
There will be those who say this to him.
Does this quality exist in me or not?’
If the bhikkhu’s verbal behavior is not pure, and he does not possess verbal behavior that is pure, flawless, and irreproachable, there will be those who say to him: ‘Please first train yourself verbally.’
There will be those who say this to him.
Dogs, however, still couple only with female dogs, not with other female animals.
Dogs, however, still couple with female dogs only when they are in season, not out of season.
Dogs, however, still do not buy and sell female dogs, and they initiate cohabitation only through mutual affection, doing so for the sake of family continuity.
Dogs, however, still do not store up wealth, grain, silver, and gold.
Dogs, however, still go seeking food in the evening for their evening meal and in the morning for their morning meal.
Doing what is beneficial is a nutriment for health.
Doing what is unbeneficial is an obstruction to health.
Don’t you have any compassion toward an elder bhikkhu when he’s being harassed?”
Doubt has arisen in you about a perplexing matter.
Due to that gain, he becomes intoxicated, grows heedless, and drifts into heedlessness.
Due to that gain, he becomes intoxicated, grows heedless, and drifts into heedlessness.
Due to that lack of gain, he sorrows, languishes, and laments; he weeps beating his breast and becomes confused.
Due to that lack of gain, he sorrows, languishes, and laments; he weeps beating his breast and becomes confused.
Dullness and drowsiness do not obsess my mind.
Dullness and drowsiness do not obsess one’s mind.
Dullness and drowsiness obsess my mind.
Dullness and drowsiness obsess one’s mind.
Dullness … heedlessness.
Dullness, drowsiness, restlessness, remorse, lack of faith, and heedlessness.
Duplicity is an obstruction to friendships.
During their lives beings are intoxicated with life, and when they are intoxicated with life they engage in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
Dwell having directly known all phenomena.’
We too teach the Dhamma to our disciples in such a way as this: ‘Come, friends, directly know all phenomena.
Dwell having directly known all phenomena.’
What now is the distinction, the disparity, the difference between the ascetic Gotama’s teaching of the Dhamma and our teaching, between his instruction and our instruction?”
Dwell restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
Dwell restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
Dwell thornless, bhikkhus!
Dwell without thorns!
Dwelling alone, withdrawn, heedful, ardent, and resolute, in no long time the Venerable Anuruddha realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, that unsurpassed consummation of the spiritual life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the household life into homelessness, and having entered upon it, he dwelled in it.
Dwelling in a suitable locality, relying on good persons, right resolution, and merits done in the past.
Either he himself speaks on the Dhamma, or he requests someone else to do so, or he adopts noble silence.
Either with clear comprehension one performs that bodily volitional activity conditioned by which pleasure and pain arise in one internally, or without clear comprehension one performs that bodily volitional activity conditioned by which pleasure and pain arise in one internally.
Either with clear comprehension one performs that mental volitional activity conditioned by which pleasure and pain arise in one internally, or without clear comprehension one performs that mental volitional activity conditioned by which pleasure and pain arise in one internally.
Either with clear comprehension one performs that verbal volitional activity conditioned by which pleasure and pain arise in one internally, or without clear comprehension one performs that verbal volitional activity conditioned by which pleasure and pain arise in one internally.
Elated, he relieves his itches.
Elated, he relieves his itches.
Elated, he relieves his itches.”
Elated, those bhikkhus delighted in the Blessed One’s statement.
Elated, those bhikkhus delighted in the Blessed One’s statement.
Elated, those bhikkhus delighted in the Blessed One’s statement.
Elated, those bhikkhus delighted in the Blessed One’s statement.
Elated, those bhikkhus delighted in the Blessed One’s statement.
Elated, those bhikkhus delighted in the Blessed One’s statement.
Elated, those bhikkhus delighted in the Blessed One’s statement.
Elated, those bhikkhus delighted in the Blessed One’s statement.
Elated, those bhikkhus delighted in the Blessed One’s statement.
Elated, those bhikkhus delighted in the Blessed One’s statement.
Elated, those bhikkhus delighted in the Blessed One’s statement.
Emptiness concentration, markless concentration, and wishless concentration.
Emptiness concentration, markless concentration, and wishless concentration.
Endowed with faith, accomplished in virtue,charitable and devoid of miserliness,he constantly purifies the paththat leads to safety in future lives.
Endowment with unimpaired faculties is rare in the world.
Energetic, strong, and resolute,meditative, mindful, the faculties guarded,one should practice the higher virtue,the higher mind, and the higher wisdom.
Energy is aroused in me without slackening; my mindfulness is established without confusion; my body is tranquil without disturbance; my mind is concentrated and one-pointed.
Enjoy the spiritual life.
Enjoy the spiritual life.
Enjoyment is happiness.
Enterprising in his occupations,heedful in his arrangements,balanced in his way of living,he safeguards the wealth he earns.
Enthusiasm itself is the fifth.
Enthusiasm itself was the fifth.
Established in virtuous behavior,restrained in the sense faculties,moderate in eating,intent on wakefulness: a bhikkhu dwells thus ardently,unwearying by day and night,developing wholesome qualitiesto attain security from bondage.
Even a little given to such a Saṅgha of bhikkhus, to such an assembly, becomes plentiful, while much given to it becomes even more plentiful.
Even if he is criticized slightly he loses his temper and becomes irritated, hostile, and stubborn; he displays irritation, hatred, and bitterness.
Even if he is criticized slightly he loses his temper and becomes irritated, hostile, and stubborn; he displays irritation, hatred, and bitterness.
Even if one were to establish one’s parents as the supreme lords and rulers over this great earth abounding in the seven treasures, one still would not have done enough for one’s parents, nor would one have repaid them.
Even if powerful sounds cognizable by the ear come into range of the ear … Even if powerful odors cognizable by the nose come into range of the nose … Even if powerful tastes cognizable by the tongue come into range of the tongue … Even if powerful tactile objects cognizable by the body come into range of the body … Even if powerful phenomena cognizable by the mind come into range of the mind, they do not obsess his mind; his mind is not at all affected.
Even if powerful sounds cognizable by the ear come into range of the ear … Even if powerful odors cognizable by the nose come into range of the nose … Even if powerful tastes cognizable by the tongue come into range of the tongue … Even if powerful tactile objects cognizable by the body come into range of the body … Even if powerful phenomena cognizable by the mind come into range of the mind, they do not obsess his mind; his mind is not at all affected.
Even if she is criticized a lot she does not lose her temper and become irritated, hostile, and stubborn; she does not display anger, hatred, and bitterness.
Even if she is criticized slightly she loses her temper and becomes irritated, hostile, and stubborn; she displays anger, hatred, and bitterness.
Even in those world intervals … say: ‘Indeed, it seems there are other beings who have been reborn here.’
This is the second astounding and amazing thing that becomes manifest with the manifestation of a Tathāgata, an Arahant, a Perfectly Enlightened One.
Even in those world intervals … say: ‘Indeed, it seems there are other beings who have been reborn here.’
This is the third astounding and amazing thing that becomes manifest with the manifestation of a Tathāgata, an Arahant, a Perfectly Enlightened One.
Even in those world intervals, vacant and abysmal, regions of gloom and impenetrable darkness where the light of the sun and moon, so powerful and mighty, does not reach, there too a measureless glorious radiance becomes manifest, surpassing the divine majesty of the devas.
Even in those world intervals, vacant and abysmal, regions of gloom and impenetrable darkness where the light of the sun and moon, so powerful and mighty, does not reach, there too a measureless glorious radiance becomes manifest, surpassing the divine majesty of the devas.
Even more fruitful than the great alms offering that the brahmin Velāma gave would it be to feed one person accomplished in view.
Even more fruitful than the great alms offering that the brahmin Velāma gave, and feeding a hundred once-returners, would it be to feed one non-returner.
Even more fruitful than the great alms offering that the brahmin Velāma gave, and feeding a hundred persons accomplished in view, would it be to feed one once-returner.
Even more fruitful than … feeding a hundred arahants, would it be to feed one paccekabuddha.
Even more fruitful than … feeding a hundred non-returners, would it be to feed one arahant.
Even more fruitful than … feeding a hundred paccekabuddhas, would it be to feed the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One … would it be to feed the Saṅgha of bhikkhus headed by the Buddha … would it be to build a dwelling dedicated to the Saṅgha of the four quarters … would it be for one with a mind of confidence to go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha … would it be for one with a mind of confidence to undertake the five training rules: to abstain from the destruction of life, to abstain from taking what is not given, to abstain from sexual misconduct, to abstain from false speech, to abstain from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
Even more fruitful … would it be to develop a mind of loving-kindness even for the time it takes to pull a cow’s udder.
Even those royal bull elephants, bound by strong thongs in the villages, towns, and capital cities, burst and break their bonds asunder; frightened, they urinate and defecate and flee here and there.
Even those wanderers Vassa and Bhañña of Ukkalā, who were proponents of non-causality, inactivity, and nihilism, did not think that these four Dhamma factors should be censured and repudiated.
Even though he is seated in the midst of the Saṅgha of bhikkhus, yet he is far from the Saṅgha and the Saṅgha is far from him.
Even though one does not follow the example of such a person, a bad report still circulates about oneself: ‘He has bad friends, bad companions, bad comrades.’
Just as a snake that has passed through feces, though it does not bite one, would smear one, so too, though one does not follow the example of such a person, a bad report still circulates about oneself: ‘He has bad friends, bad companions, bad comrades.’
Therefore such a person is to be looked upon with disgust, not to be associated with, followed, and served.
Even though one does not follow the example of such a person, a good report still circulates about oneself: ‘He has good friends, good companions, good comrades.’
Therefore such a person is to be associated with, followed, and served.
Even though she might form the wish: ‘May my chicks pierce their shells with the points of their claws or beaks and hatch safely!’ yet the chicks are incapable of doing so.
Even though she might not form the wish: ‘May my chicks pierce their shells with the points of their claws or beaks and hatch safely!’ yet the chicks are capable of doing so.
Even though someone is old—eighty, ninety, or a hundred years from birth—if he enjoys sensual pleasures, dwells in sensual pleasures, burns with a fever for sensual pleasures, is consumed with thoughts of sensual pleasures, is eager in the quest for sensual pleasures, then he is reckoned as a foolish elder.
Even though someone is old—eighty, ninety, or a hundred years from birth—if he speaks at an improper time, speaks falsely, speaks what is unbeneficial, speaks contrary to the Dhamma and the discipline, if at an improper time he speaks words that are worthless, unreasonable, rambling, and unbeneficial, then he is reckoned as a foolish elder.
Even though, when he leaves the eye faculty unguarded, bad unwholesome states of longing and dejection might invade him, he does not practice restraint over it; he does not guard the eye faculty; he does not undertake the restraint of the eye faculty.
Even though, when he leaves the mind faculty unguarded, bad unwholesome states of longing and dejection might invade him, he does not practice restraint over it; he does not guard the mind faculty; he does not undertake the restraint of the mind faculty.
Even when dead, a woman obsesses the mind of a man.
Even when I am criticized a lot I will not lose my temper and become irritated, hostile, and stubborn; I will not display anger, hatred, and bitterness.
Even when they have excellent things, they give coarse things.
Even when they have excellent things, they give coarse things.
Even when they have much, they give little.
Even when they have much, they give little.
Even with pain and dejection, weeping with a tearful face, he lives the complete and purified spiritual life.
Eventually he arrived at Rājagaha and went to Mount Vulture Peak.
Eventually, she reached Vesālī and the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.
Everywhere, the nāga is restrained:this is the nāga’s accomplishment.
Evil desire is to be abandoned neither by body nor by speech but by having repeatedly seen with wisdom.
Evil envy is to be abandoned neither by body nor by speech but by having repeatedly seen with wisdom.
Excellent, Bhante!
Excellent, Bhante!
Excellent, Bhante!
Excellent, Master Gotama!
Excellent, Master Gotama!
Excellent, Master Gotama!
Excellent, Master Gotama!
Excellent, Master Gotama!
Excellent, Master Gotama!
Excellent, Master Gotama!
Excellent, Master Gotama!
Excellent, Master Gotama!
Excellent, Master Gotama!
Excellent, Master Gotama!
Excellent, Master Gotama!
Excellent, Master Kaccāna!
Excellent, Master Piṅgiyānī!
Excited by them, taking delight in them, he attends externally to feminine faculty, her feminine comportment, her feminine appearance, her feminine aspect, her feminine desire, her feminine voice, her feminine ornamentation.
Excited by them, taking delight in them, he desires union externally, and he also desires the pleasure and joy that arise on account of such union.
Excited by them, taking delight in them, she attends externally to masculine faculty, his masculine comportment, his masculine appearance, his masculine aspect, his masculine desire, his masculine voice, his masculine ornamentation.
Excited by them, taking delight in them, she desires union externally, and she also desires the pleasure and joy that arise on account of such union.
Exertion and non-distraction … Name and form … True knowledge and liberation … The view of existence and the view of extermination … Moral shamelessness and moral recklessness … Moral shame and moral dread … Being difficult to correct and bad friendship … Being easy to correct and good friendship … Skillfulness in the elements and skillfulness in attention … … Skillfulness in regard to offenses and skillfulness in rehabilitation from offenses.
Exhort your fellow monks, Sāriputta!
Expansion in material goods and expansion in the Dhamma.
Failure in activity, failure in livelihood, and failure in view.
Failure in virtuous behavior, failure in mind, and failure in view.
Failure in virtuous behavior, failure in mind, and failure in view.
Faith, becoming full, fills up careful attention.
Faith, moral shame, and wholesome giving are qualities pursued by the good person; for this, they say, is the divine path by which one goes to the world of the devas.
Faith, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
False speech is non-Dhamma; abstention from false speech is the Dhamma….
False speech is the near shore, abstention from false speech the far shore.
False speech, divisive speech, harsh speech, and idle chatter.
False speech, divisive speech, harsh speech, and idle chatter.
False speech, I say, is also threefold: caused by greed, caused by hatred, and caused by delusion.
Fame does not obsess his mind, and disrepute does not obsess his mind.
Fame obsesses his mind, and disrepute obsesses his mind.
Fear of livelihood, fear of disrepute, fear of timidity in assemblies,  fear of death, and fear of a bad destination.
Fettered by the bond of sensualityand the bond of existence,fettered by the bond of views,preceded by ignorance,beings go on in saṃsāra,led on in birth and death.
Few are those peoplewho go beyond.The rest merely runalong the shore.
Few are those peoplewho go beyond.The rest merely runalong the shore.
Fewness of desires is to be developed for abandoning strong desires.
Firm in faith, the pious man,having known their good qualities,venerates the homeless renouncers,the mendicants who lead the spiritual life.
First, the farmer swiftly yet thoroughly plows the field and swiftly yet thoroughly harrows it.
Five hundred bullocks … Five hundred heifers … Five hundred goats … Five hundred rams had been led to the post for the sacrifice.
Five hundred bulls had been led to the post for the sacrifice.
Following their advice,nurturing those who brought him up,continuing the family lineage,endowed with faith, virtuous:this son is worthy of praise.
Fools devoid of understanding,dull-witted, unlearned,do not attend on the holy onesbut give their gifts to those outside.Those, however, who attend on the holy ones,on the wise ones esteemed as sagely,and those whose faith in the Fortunate Oneis deeply rooted and well established,go to the world of the devasor are born here in a good family.Advancing in successive steps,those wise ones attain nibbāna.
Fools devoid of understanding,dull-witted, unlearned,do not attend on the holy onesbut give their gifts to those outside.Those, however, who attend on the holy ones,on the wise ones esteemed as sagely,and those whose faith in the Fortunate Oneis deeply rooted and well established,go to the world of the devasor are born here in a good family.Advancing in successive steps,those wise ones attain nibbāna.
For a bhikkhu of peaceful mind,one completely liberated,there’s nothing further to be done,no increase what has been done.
For a foolish person immersed in ignorance, wrong view originates.
For a hundred thousand and thirty-sixnirabbudas, plus five abbudas, the slanderer of noble ones goes to hell,having defamed them with evil speech and mind.
For a long time those venerable ones have wanted to discredit the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha.
For a number of these well-known Licchavis have assembled in the meeting hall and are sitting together speaking in many ways in praise of the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha.
For a number of these well-known Licchavis have assembled in the meeting hall and are sitting together speaking in many ways in praise of the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha.
For a virtuous person, there are two receptacles: the deva realm or the human realm.”
For a wise person who has arrived at true knowledge, right view originates.
For all beings that come and go, that pass away and undergo rebirth, what is subject to loss is lost.
For all beings that come and go, that pass away and undergo rebirth, what is subject to old age grows old.
For all beings that come and go, that pass away and undergo rebirth, what is subject to old age grows old.
For all beings who come and go, who pass away and undergo rebirth, what is subject to loss is lost.
For all those in the past who sustained a large retinue did so by these same four means of sustaining a favorable relationship.
For among these five hundred bhikkhus, even the least is a stream-enterer, no longer subject to the lower world, fixed in destiny, heading for enlightenment.”
For as much as I want, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, I enter and dwell in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
For craving sews one to the production of this or that state of existence.
For craving sews one to the production of this or that state of existence.
For craving sews one to the production of this or that state of existence.
For craving sews one to the production of this or that state of existence.
For craving sews one to the production of this or that state of existence.
For craving sews one to the production of this or that state of existence.
For craving sews one to the production of this or that state of existence.
For direct knowledge of lust, these eight things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these eight things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these eleven things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these five things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these five things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these five things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these five things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these five things are to be developed.” 
For direct knowledge of lust, these four things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these four things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these four things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these nine things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these nine things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these seven things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these seven things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these seven things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these six things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these six things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these six things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these ten things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these ten things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these ten things are to be developed.” 
For direct knowledge of lust, these three things are to be developed.”
For direct knowledge of lust, these two things are to be developed.”
For gratitude and thankfulness are extolled by the good.
For having eaten as much as they want until their bellies are full, they yield to the pleasure of rest, the pleasure of sloth, the pleasure of sleep.’
For having heard this exposition of the Dhamma, I have abandoned the dart of sorrow.”
For having willed, one acts by body, speech, or mind.
For he is practicing for the welfare and happiness of many people; he is one who has established many people in the noble method, that is, in the goodness of the Dhamma, in the wholesomeness of the Dhamma.
For him the exhaustion of the taints and the exhaustion of life occur simultaneously.
For him the exhaustion of the taints and the exhaustion of life occur simultaneously.
For him, that remorse ceases.
For him, that remorse increases.
For him, that view ceases.
For him, that view increases.
For his mind was obsessed by Māra.
For how can one like me think of approaching an ascetic or brahmin living in his realm without first informing him?”
For how can one who comes on his own and returns on his own say: ‘There is no self-initiative; there is no initiative on the part of others’?”
For how can one who comes on his own and returns on his own say: ‘There is no self-initiative; there is no initiative taken by others’?
For I am a consoler with the supreme consolation; I teach the Dhamma for the sake of consolation and thereby guide my disciples.
For I am a donor, a munificent giver, and I am dear and agreeable to many people.
For I am a donor, a munificent giver, and the arahants first show compassion to me.
For I am repelled by bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct; I am repelled by the acquisition of the numerous kinds of bad unwholesome qualities.
For I assert good bodily, verbal, and mental conduct; I assert the doing of the numerous kinds of wholesome deeds.
For I assert that bad unwholesome qualities—bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct—are to be burned up.
For I assert the annihilation of lust, hatred, and delusion; I assert the annihilation of the numerous kinds of bad unwholesome qualities.
For I assert the non-doing of bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct; I assert the non-doing of the numerous kinds of bad unwholesome deeds.
For I live the complete and pure celibate life—unbroken, flawless, unblemished, unblotched.”
For I say that someone is retiring when he has abandoned the production of renewed existence, the future bed of the womb; when he has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
For I teach the Dhamma for the abolition of lust, hatred, and delusion; I teach the Dhamma for the abolition of the numerous kinds of bad unwholesome qualities.
For I usually use a robe that has been specifically offered to me, seldom one that has not been specifically offered to me; I usually eat almsfood that has been specifically offered to me, seldom almsfood that has not been specifically offered to me; I usually use a lodging that has been specifically offered to me, seldom one that has not been specifically offered to me; I usually use medicines and provisions for the sick that have been specifically offered to me, seldom those that have not been specifically offered to me.
For I usually use a robe that has been specifically offered to me, seldom one that has not been specifically offered to me; I usually eat almsfood that has been specifically offered to me, seldom almsfood that has not been specifically offered to me; I usually use a lodging that has been specifically offered to me, seldom one that has not been specifically offered to me; I usually use medicines and provisions for the sick that have been specifically offered to me, seldom those that have not been specifically offered to me.
For I wish to see the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.”
For I, Master Gotama, am a brahmin well born on both his maternal and paternal sides, of pure descent, unassailable and impeccable with respect to birth as far back as the seventh paternal generation.
For if he had done so, he would not have been bitten by a snake and died.
For if he had done so, he would not have been bitten by a snake and died.
For if the Tathāgata should pay homage to anyone, or stand up for him, or offer him a seat, even that person’s head would split.”
For ingratitude and unthankfulness are extolled by the bad.
For it is growth in the Noble One’s discipline that one sees one’s transgression as a transgression, makes amends for it in accordance with the Dhamma, and undertakes future restraint.
For it is growth in the Noble One’s discipline that one sees one’s transgression as a transgression, makes amends for it in accordance with the Dhamma, and undertakes future restraint.” 
For it is growth in the Noble One’s discipline that one sees one’s transgression as a transgression, makes amends for it in accordance with the Dhamma, and undertakes future restraint.” 
For it is possible that a violent rainstorm might come from the east, the west, the north, or the south and stir up waves on the lake.”
For it is possible that people will drink from this pond, or that cattle and goats will drink from it, or that wind and the sun’s heat will dry up the moisture.
For it is possible that people will pass through this crossroads, or that cattle and goats will pass through, or that wind and the sun’s heat will dry up the moisture, and then dust will reappear.”
For it is possible that the king or royal minister will leave that forest thicket, and then the sound of the crickets will reappear.”
For it is possible that this crop-eating bull will break the rope or burst out of the pen and again enter among the crops.”
For many inopportune times are spoken of,occasions obstructive to the path;for it is only sometimes, on occasion,that Tathāgatas arise in the world.
For Master Gotama wields the various kinds of psychic potency … exercises mastery with the body as far as the brahmā world.
For more food will not appeal to that man so long as the nutritive essence remains in his body, but when the nutritive essence disappears, it is possible that such food will again appeal to him.”
For myself I see a pleasant dwelling in this very life and I have compassion for later generations.
For on what account could suffering affect one who does no bad deed?”
For on what account could suffering affect one who does no bad deed?”
For one desiring long life, beauty, fame,acclaim, heaven, high families,and lofty delightsfollowing in succession,the wise praise heedfulnessin doing deeds of merit.
For one devoted to practicing meditation on the mark of unattractiveness, revulsion toward the mark of the beautiful becomes established: this is its outcome.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one feeling pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
For one freed by craving’s destruction,with the cessation of consciousnessthe emancipation of the mindis like the extinguishing of a lamp.
For one of careful attention, unarisen right view arises and arisen right view increases.”
For one of careless attention, unarisen wrong view arises and arisen wrong view increases.”
For one of right action, right livelihood originates.
For one of right action, right livelihood originates.
For one of right action, right livelihood originates.
For one of right concentration, right knowledge originates.
For one of right concentration, right knowledge originates.
For one of right concentration, right knowledge originates.
For one of right effort, right mindfulness originates.
For one of right effort, right mindfulness originates.
For one of right effort, right mindfulness originates.
For one of right intention, right speech originates.
For one of right intention, right speech originates.
For one of right intention, right speech originates.
For one of right knowledge, right liberation originates.
For one of right knowledge, right liberation originates.”
For one of right knowledge, right liberation originates.” 
For one of right livelihood, right effort originates.
For one of right livelihood, right effort originates.
For one of right livelihood, right effort originates.
For one of right mindfulness, right concentration originates.
For one of right mindfulness, right concentration originates.
For one of right mindfulness, right concentration originates.
For one of right speech, right action originates.
For one of right speech, right action originates.
For one of right speech, right action originates.
For one of right view, right intention originates.
For one of right view, right intention originates.
For one of right view, unarisen unwholesome qualities do not arise and arisen unwholesome qualities decline.”
For one of right view, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities increase and expand.”
For one of wrong action, wrong livelihood originates.
For one of wrong action, wrong livelihood originates.
For one of wrong concentration, wrong knowledge originates.
For one of wrong concentration, wrong knowledge originates.
For one of wrong effort, wrong mindfulness originates.
For one of wrong effort, wrong mindfulness originates.
For one of wrong intention, wrong speech originates.
For one of wrong intention, wrong speech originates.
For one of wrong knowledge, wrong liberation originates.
For one of wrong knowledge, wrong liberation originates.
For one of wrong livelihood, wrong effort originates.
For one of wrong livelihood, wrong effort originates.
For one of wrong mindfulness, wrong concentration originates.
For one of wrong mindfulness, wrong concentration originates.
For one of wrong speech,  wrong action originates.
For one of wrong speech, wrong action originates.
For one of wrong view, unarisen unwholesome qualities arise and arisen unwholesome qualities increase and expand.”
For one of wrong view, unarisen wholesome qualities do not arise and arisen wholesome qualities decline.”
For one of wrong view, wrong intention originates.
For one performing an evil deedthere is no place in the world called “hidden.”The self within you knows, O person,whether it is true or false.
For one who abstains from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness, that peril and enmity has thus been eliminated.
For one who abstains from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness, that peril and enmity has thus been eliminated.
For one who abstains from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness, that peril and enmity has thus subsided.”
For one who abstains from the destruction of life, that peril and enmity has thus been eliminated.
For one who abstains from the destruction of life, that peril and enmity has thus been eliminated.
For one who abstains from the destruction of life, that peril and enmity has thus subsided.
For one who attends carefully to an unattractive object, unarisen lust does not arise and arisen lust is abandoned.
For one who attends carefully to the liberation of the mind by loving-kindness, unarisen hatred does not arise and arisen hatred is abandoned.
For one who attends carefully to the liberation of the mind by loving-kindness, unarisen ill will does not arise and arisen ill will is abandoned.”
For one who attends carefully to the mark of the unattractive, unarisen sensual desire does not arise and arisen sensual desire is abandoned.”
For one who attends carefully, unarisen delusion does not arise and arisen delusion is abandoned.
For one who attends carefully, unarisen doubt does not arise and arisen doubt is abandoned.”
For one who attends carefully, unarisen factors of enlightenment arise and arisen factors of enlightenment reach fulfillment by development.”
For one who attends carefully, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen unwholesome qualities decline.”
For one who attends carelessly to a repulsive object, unarisen hatred arises and arisen hatred increases and expands.
For one who attends carelessly to an attractive object, unarisen lust arises and arisen lust increases and expands.
For one who attends carelessly to the mark of the attractive, unarisen sensual desire arises and arisen sensual desire increases and expands.”
For one who attends carelessly to the mark of the repulsive, unarisen ill will arises and arisen ill will increases and expands.”
For one who attends carelessly, unarisen delusion arises and arisen delusion increases and expands.
For one who attends carelessly, unarisen doubt arises and arisen doubt increases and expands.”
For one who attends carelessly, unarisen factors of enlightenment do not arise and arisen factors of enlightenment do not reach fulfillment by development.”
For one who attends carelessly, unarisen unwholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities decline.”
For one who clearly comprehends, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen unwholesome qualities decline.”
For one who does not clearly comprehend, unarisen unwholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities decline.”
For one who dwells contemplating arising and vanishing in the five aggregates subject to clinging, revulsion toward clinging becomes established: this is its outcome.”
For one who dwells contemplating impermanence in the six bases for contact, revulsion toward contact becomes established: this is its outcome.
For one who has aroused energy, unarisen dullness and drowsiness do not arise and arisen dullness and drowsiness are abandoned.”
For one who has aroused energy, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen unwholesome qualities decline.”
For one who has attained the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, the perception pertaining to the base of nothingness has ceased.
For one who has attained the base of nothingness, the perception pertaining to the base of the infinity of consciousness has ceased.
For one who has attained the base of the infinity of consciousness, the perception pertaining to the base of the infinity of space has ceased.
For one who has attained the base of the infinity of space, the perception of form has ceased.
For one who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling have ceased.
For one who has attained the first jhāna, sensual perception has ceased.
For one who has attained the fourth jhāna, in-breathing and out-breathing have ceased.
For one who has attained the second jhāna, thought and examination have ceased.
For one who has attained the third jhāna, rapture has ceased.
For one who is content, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen unwholesome qualities decline.” 
For one who is heedful, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen unwholesome qualities decline.”
For one who is heedless, unarisen unwholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities decline.”
For one who is lazy, unarisen unwholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities decline.” 
For one who is not content, unarisen unwholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities decline.”
For one who makes such sacrificeit is indeed better, never worse.Such a sacrifice is truly vastand the deities too are pleased.
For one who, ever mindful, developsmeasureless loving-kindness,the fetters thin out as he seesthe destruction of the acquisitions.
For one whose bodily, verbal, and mental deeds become tainted, bodily, verbal, and mental actions become rotten.
For one whose bodily, verbal, and mental deeds do not become tainted, bodily, verbal, and mental actions do not become rotten.
For one with a pacified mind, unarisen restlessness and remorse do not arise and arisen restlessness and remorse are abandoned.”
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a rapturous mind, the body becomes tranquil.
For one with a sluggish mind, unarisen dullness and drowsiness arise and arisen dullness and drowsiness increase and expand.”
For one with an unsettled mind, unarisen restlessness and remorse arise and arisen restlessness and remorse increase and expand.” 
For one with bad friends, unarisen unwholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities decline.” 
For one with few desires, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen unwholesome qualities decline.”
For one with good friends, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen unwholesome qualities decline.”
For one with strong desire, unarisen unwholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities decline.”
For people intent on sacrifice,for living beings seeking merit,making merit that ripens in the acquisitions,what is given here bears great fruit.
For people intent on sacrifice,for living beings seeking merit,making merit that ripens in the acquisitions,what is given to the Saṅgha bears great fruit.
For relying on the power of a trainee, one abandons lust, hatred, and delusion.
For seven years I developed a mind of loving-kindness.
For that reason, the assembly contrary to the Dhamma becomes loud and boisterous, exclaiming: ‘He is truly wise, sir!
For the ascetic Gotama is a proponent of non-doing who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of non-doing and thereby guides his disciples.”
For the donor too it is not fruitless.”
For the five hindrances are a complete heap of the unwholesome.
For the relinquishment of heedlessness, these five things are to be developed.”
For the relinquishment of heedlessness, these four things are to be developed.”
For the relinquishment of heedlessness, these three things are to be developed.”
For the relinquishment of heedlessness, these two things are to be developed.”
For the relinquishment of lust, these five things are to be developed.”
For the relinquishment of lust, these two things are to be developed.”
For the well-being of the Saṅgha and for the ease of the Saṅgha … For keeping recalcitrant persons in check and so that well-behaved bhikkhus can dwell at ease … For the restraint of taints pertaining to this present life and for the dispelling of taints pertaining to future lives … For the restraint of enmities pertaining to this present life and for the dispelling of enmities pertaining to future lives … For the restraint of faults pertaining to this present life and for the dispelling of faults pertaining to future lives … For the restraint of perils pertaining to this present life and for the dispelling of perils pertaining to future lives … For the restraint of unwholesome qualities pertaining to this present life and for the dispelling of unwholesome qualities pertaining to future lives … Out of compassion for laypeople and to stop the faction of those with evil desires … So that those without confidence might gain confidence and for increasing of those with confidence … For the continuation of the good Dhamma and for promoting the discipline.
For the well-being of the Saṅgha and for the ease of the Saṅgha … … For the continuation of the good Dhamma and for promoting the discipline.
For the well-being of the Saṅgha; for the ease of the Saṅgha; for keeping recalcitrant persons in check; so that well-behaved bhikkhus can dwell at ease; for the restraint of taints pertaining to this present life; for the dispelling of taints pertaining to future lives; so that those without confidence might gain confidence; and for increasing of those with confidence; for the continuation of the good Dhamma; and for promoting discipline.
For these five hindrances are a complete heap of the unwholesome.”
For this person has abandoned the lower fetters, the fetters for obtaining rebirth, and the fetters for obtaining existence.
For this reason a bhikkhu should overcome gain whenever it arises.
For this reason I am not pleased with this bhikkhu’s dwelling on the outskirts of a village.
For this reason I am pleased with this bhikkhu’s dwelling in the forest.
For this reason, it rolled as far as the impetus carried it and then it wobbled and fell to the ground.
For this reason, it rolled as far as the impetus carried it and then stood still as if fixed on an axle.’
For this reason, the assembly contrary to the Dhamma becomes loud and boisterous, exclaiming: ‘He is truly wise, sir!
For this reason, the assembly contrary to the Dhamma becomes loud and boisterous, exclaiming: ‘He is truly wise, sir!
For this reason, the assembly contrary to the Dhamma becomes loud and boisterous, exclaiming: ‘He is truly wise, sir!
For this reason, the assembly that accords with the Dhamma becomes loud and boisterous, exclaiming: ‘He is truly wise, sir!
For this, friend, is the escape from all marks, namely, the markless liberation of the mind.’
For this, friend, is the escape from discontent, namely, the liberation of the mind by altruistic joy.’
For this, friend, is the escape from ill will, namely, the liberation of the mind by loving-kindness.’
For this, friend, is the escape from lust, namely, the liberation of the mind by equanimity.’
For this, friend, is the escape from the dart of doubt and bewilderment, namely, the uprooting of the conceit “I am.”’
For this, friend, is the escape from the thought of harming, namely, the liberation of the mind by compassion.’
For this, Kesi, is ‘killing’ in the Noble One’s discipline: the Tathāgata thinks one should not be spoken to and instructed, and one’s wise fellow monks, too, think one should not be spoken to and instructed.”
For those confident in regard to the foremost,knowing the foremost Dhamma,confident in the Buddha—the foremost—unsurpassed, worthy of offerings; for those confident in the foremost Dhamma,in the blissful peace of dispassion;for those confident in the foremost Saṅgha,the unsurpassed field of merit; for those giving gifts to the foremost,the foremost kind of merit increases:the foremost life span, beauty, and glory,good reputation, happiness, and strength.
For those confident in regard to the foremost,knowing the foremost Dhamma,confident in the Buddha—the foremost—unsurpassed, worthy of offerings; for those confident in the foremost Dhamma,in the blissful peace of dispassion;for those confident in the foremost Saṅgha,the unsurpassed field of merit; for those giving gifts to the foremost,the foremost kind of merit increases:the foremost life span, beauty, and glory,good reputation, happiness, and strength.
For we do not want to misrepresent Master Gotama.”
For we do not want to misrepresent the Blessed One.”
For we do not want to misrepresent the Blessed One.” 
For what reason should he overcome loss … fame … disrepute … honor … lack of honor … evil desires … bad friendship whenever it arises?
For what reason?
For when he practices the way conducive to fame, it leads to obtaining fame, and he gains fame either celestial or human.
For when he practices the way conducive to heaven, it leads to obtaining the heavens, and he gains the heavens.”
For when he practices the way conducive to long life, it leads to obtaining long life, and he gains long life either celestial or human.
For when this was declared by me definitively, how can he see any ambiguity in it?
For you have asked thus: ‘Bhante, by what is the world led?
For you have asked thus: ‘It is said, Bhante, “a learned expert on the Dhamma, a learned expert on the Dhamma.”
In what way is one a learned expert on the Dhamma?’”
For you have asked thus: ‘It is said, Bhante, “a wise person of great wisdom, a wise person of great wisdom.”
In what way is one a wise person of great wisdom?’”
For you have asked thus: ‘It is said, Bhante, “learned, of penetrative wisdom; learned, of penetrative wisdom.”
In what way is one learned, of penetrative wisdom?’”
For, friends, knowing, the Blessed One knows; seeing, he sees; he has become vision, he has become knowledge, he has become the Dhamma, he has become Brahmā; he is the expounder, the proclaimer, the elucidator of meaning, the giver of the deathless, the lord of the Dhamma, the Tathāgata.
For, friends, knowing, the Blessed One knows; seeing, he sees; he has become vision, he has become knowledge, he has become the Dhamma, he has become Brahmā; he is the expounder, the proclaimer, the elucidator of meaning, the giver of the deathless, the lord of the Dhamma, the Tathāgata.
Formerly, there was delusion; that was unwholesome.
Formerly, there was hatred; that was unwholesome.
Forms cognizable by the eye that are wished for, desired, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual pleasure, tantalizing; sounds cognizable by the ear … odors cognizable by the nose … tastes cognizable by the tongue … tactile objects cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual pleasure, tantalizing.
Forms cognizable by the eye that are wished for, desired, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual pleasure, tantalizing; sounds cognizable by the ear … odors cognizable by the nose … tastes cognizable by the tongue … tactile objects cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual pleasure, tantalizing.
Forms cognizable by the eye that are wished for, desired, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual pleasure, tantalizing; sounds cognizable by the ear … odors cognizable by the nose … tastes cognizable by the tongue … tactile objects cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual pleasure, tantalizing.
Forms cognizable by the eye that are wished for, desired, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual pleasure, tantalizing; sounds cognizable by the ear … odors cognizable by the nose … tastes cognizable by the tongue … tactile objects cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual pleasure, tantalizing.
Four meters would be below ground and four meters above ground.
Free from anger, their misery gone,free from delusion, no longer avid,tamed, having abandoned anger,the taintless ones attain nibbāna.
Friends, by means of a person who inspires confidence in every way, the mind gains confidence.
Friends, I ask another person a question with the thought: ‘If, when he is asked a question by me, he answers correctly, that is good; but if he does not answer correctly, I will give him a correct explanation.’”
From fear of blame, attack, and refutation.”
From that unwholesome root of his the unwholesome will appear.
From that unwholesome root of his the unwholesome will appear.
From that wholesome root of his the wholesome will appear.
From that wholesome root of his the wholesome will appear.
From the change and alteration of things that are dear arise sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish: this is its outcome.
From time to time he approaches them and inquires: ‘How is this, Bhante?
From time to time he approaches them and inquires: ‘How is this, Bhante?
From time to time he should give attention to the mark of concentration, from time to time to the mark of exertion, and from time to time to the mark of equanimity.
From time to time he should give attention to the mark of concentration, from time to time to the mark of exertion, and from time to time to the mark of equanimity.
From today on, I will bathe and anoint myself and eat my meals and undertake my work.” 
From today onward, I will no longer do so.
From what do they originate?
From what do they originate?
From whom would the arahants first receive alms: from the one without faith who is miserly, mean, and abusive, or from the one endowed with faith, a munificent giver who delights in charity?”
Further, for the donor too it is not fruitless.”
Further, he is honored with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
Further, he is honored with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
Further, he is honored with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
Further, he is honored with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
Further, he is honored with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
Gain and loss, disrepute and fame, blame and praise, and pleasure and pain.
Gain and loss, disrepute and fame, blame and praise, and pleasure and pain.
Gain and loss, disrepute and fame,blame and praise, pleasure and pain:these conditions that people meetare impermanent, transient, and subject to change.
Generosity with material goods and generosity with the Dhamma.
Get out of my sight!”
Get rid of the trash!Remove the depraved fellows!Sweep the chaff away, non-asceticswho think themselves ascetics!
Getting to see Brahmā is the foremost sight.
Give a Dhamma talk to the bhikkhus.
Give me some.’
The other says: ‘In that case, friend, dig here.’
He digs there but doesn’t find anything.
Giving is prescribed by the wise, prescribed by good people.
Giving, endearing speech, beneficent conduct, and impartiality.
Giving, endearing speech, beneficent conduct, and impartiality.
Giving, endearing speech,beneficent conduct, and impartialityunder diverse worldly conditions,as is suitable to fit each case: these meansof sustaining a favorable relationshipare like the linchpin of a rolling chariot.
Go away, Upaka, be gone!
Go to the monastery and announce the time to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus, saying: ‘It is time, Bhante, the meal is ready at Lady Nandamātā’s residence.’” The man replied: “Yes, madam,” and he went to the monastery and delivered his message.
Gone to the forest, to the foot of a tree, or to an empty hut, he sits down, folding his legs crosswise, straightening his body, and establishing mindfulness before him.
Gone to the forest, to the foot of a tree, or to an empty hut, he sits down, folding his legs crosswise, straightening his body, and establishing mindfulness in front of him.
Gone to the forest, to the foot of a tree, or to an empty hut, he sits down, folding his legs crosswise, straightening his body, and establishing mindfulness in front of him.
Good friendship is a nutriment for virtuous behavior.
Good friendship is to be developed for abandoning bad friendship.
Good is that converting magic!
Good people prescribe giving,harmlessness, self-control, and self-taming,service to one’s mother and fatherand to the peaceful followers of the spiritual life.
Good persons resort to one.
Good will is a Dhamma factor that is primal, of long standing … Right mindfulness is a Dhamma factor that is primal, of long standing … Right concentration is a Dhamma factor that is primal, of long standing … not repudiated by wise ascetics and brahmins.
Good will is a Dhamma factor, primal, of long standing … Right mindfulness is a Dhamma factor, primal, of long standing … Right concentration is a Dhamma factor, primal, of long standing … not repudiated by wise ascetics and brahmins.
Good, sister!”
Gradually he reached Rājagaha, and then went to Mount Vulture Peak, where he approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, and sat down to one side.
Gratitude and thankfulness belong entirely to the plane of the good person.”
Greed is a cause for the origination of kamma; hatred is a cause for the origination of kamma; and delusion is a cause for the origination of kamma.
Greed is a cause for the origination of kamma; hatred is a cause for the origination of kamma; delusion is a cause for the origination of kamma.
Greed is a cause for the origination of kamma; hatred is a cause for the origination of kamma; delusion is a cause for the origination of kamma.
Greed is to be abandoned neither by body nor by speech but by having repeatedly seen with wisdom.
Greed, hatred, and delusion.
Growing in these five ways, a female noble disciple grows by a noble growth, and she absorbs the essence and the best of this life.”
Growing in these five ways, a male noble disciple grows by a noble growth, and he absorbs the essence and the best of this life.”
Growing in these ten ways, a noble disciple grows by a noble growth, and he absorbs the essence and the best of this life.”
Growth in faith, growth in virtuous behavior, and growth in wisdom.
Growth in material goods and growth in the Dhamma.
Guests who are visiting are not served on time.
Guests who are visiting are served on time.
Happiness, friends, is this nibbāna.”
Harboring doubt within, he meditates, cogitates, ponders, and ruminates.
Harboring sensual lust within, he meditates, cogitates, ponders, and ruminates.
Harboring within the five enmities,he is called immoral.With the breakup of the body,that unwise person is reborn in hell.
Harmlessness is to be developed for abandoning harmfulness.
Harsh speech is non-Dhamma; abstention from harsh speech is the Dhamma….
Harsh speech is the near shore, abstention from harsh speech the far shore.
Harsh speech, I say, is also threefold: caused by greed, caused by hatred, and caused by delusion.
Hatred is a cause and condition … Delusion is a cause and condition … Careless attention is a cause and condition … A wrongly directed mind is a cause and condition for the doing of bad kamma, for the occurrence of bad kamma.
Hatred … Delusion … Anger … Hostility … Denigration … Insolence … Miserliness is to be abandoned neither by body nor by speech but by having repeatedly seen with wisdom.
Hatred … Delusion … Discernment … The urge to travel, once arisen, is hard to dispel.
Hatthaka of Āḷavī is endowed with faith.
Have I learned much of those teachings that are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing, which proclaim the perfectly complete and pure spiritual life?
Have I retained them in mind, recited them verbally, mentally investigated them, and penetrated them well by view?
Have you ever seen or heard of such a case?”
Have you ever seen or heard of such a case?”
Have you ever seen or heard of such a case?”
Have you ever seen or heard of such a case?”
Have you ever seen or heard of such a case?”
Have you ever seen or heard that a cattle butcher, killing cows and selling them …  … a butcher of sheep … … a butcher of pigs … … a butcher of poultry … … a butcher of deer, killing deer and selling them, might, by means of that work and livelihood, travel around by elephant or horse, by chariot or vehicle, or enjoy wealth or live off a large accumulation of wealth?”
Have you ever seen or heard that a fish dealer, killing fish and selling them, might, by means of this work and livelihood, travel around by elephant or horse, by chariot or vehicle, or enjoy wealth or live off a large accumulation of wealth?”
Have you ever seen or heard that a head-anointed khattiya king, while exercising rule all his life, is pleasing and agreeable to the country if he spends as much time as he wants yielding to the pleasure of rest, the pleasure of sloth, the pleasure of sleep?”
Have you ever seen or heard that a royal official … … a favorite son … … a general … … a village headman … … a guild master, while exercising leadership over the guild all his life, is pleasing and agreeable to the guild if he spends as much time as he wants yielding to the pleasure of rest, the pleasure of sloth, the pleasure of sleep?”
Have you ever seen or heard that such a one, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it?”
Have you ever seen or heard that when a person abandons and abstains from false speech, kings have him arrested on the charge of so abstaining and then execute him, imprison him, banish him, or do with him as the occasion demands?”
Have you ever seen or heard that when a person abandons and abstains from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness, kings have him arrested on the charge of so abstaining and then execute him, imprison him, banish him, or do with him as the occasion demands?”
Have you ever seen or heard that when a person abandons and abstains from sexual misconduct, kings have him arrested on the charge of so abstaining and then execute him, imprison him, banish him, or do with him as the occasion demands?”
Have you ever seen or heard that when a person abandons and abstains from taking what is not given, kings have him arrested on the charge of so abstaining and then execute him, imprison him, banish him, or do with him as the occasion demands?”
Have you ever seen or heard that when a person abandons and abstains from the destruction of life, kings have him arrested on the charge of so abstaining and then execute him, imprison him, banish him, or do with him as the occasion demands?”
Having abandoned divisive speech, he abstains from divisive speech; he does not repeat elsewhere what he has heard here in order to divide from these, nor does he repeat to these what he has heard elsewhere in order to divide from those; thus he is one who reunites those who are divided, a promoter of unity, who enjoys concord, rejoices in concord, delights in concord, a speaker of words that promote concord.
Having abandoned divisive speech, he abstains from divisive speech; he does not repeat elsewhere what he has heard here in order to divide from these, nor does he repeat to these what he has heard elsewhere in order to divide from those; thus he is one who reunites those who are divided, a promoter of unity, who enjoys concord, rejoices in concord, delights in concord, a speaker of words that promote concord.
Having abandoned doubt, he dwells having gone beyond doubt, unperplexed about wholesome qualities; he purifies his mind from doubt.
Having abandoned doubt, he dwells having gone beyond doubt, unperplexed about wholesome qualities; he purifies his mind from doubt.
Having abandoned doubt, he dwells having gone beyond doubt, unperplexed about wholesome qualities; he purifies his mind from doubt.
Having abandoned doubt, he dwells having gone beyond doubt, unperplexed about wholesome qualities; he purifies his mind from doubt.
Having abandoned dullness and drowsiness, he dwells free from dullness and drowsiness, percipient of light, mindful and clearly comprehending; he purifies his mind from dullness and drowsiness.
Having abandoned dullness and drowsiness, he dwells free from dullness and drowsiness, percipient of light, mindful and clearly comprehending; he purifies his mind from dullness and drowsiness.
Having abandoned dullness and drowsiness, he dwells free from dullness and drowsiness, percipient of light, mindful and clearly comprehending; he purifies his mind from dullness and drowsiness.
Having abandoned dullness and drowsiness, he dwells free from dullness and drowsiness, percipient of light, mindful and clearly comprehending; he purifies his mind from dullness and drowsiness.
Having abandoned harsh speech, he abstains from harsh speech; he speaks words that are gentle, pleasing to the ear, lovable, words that go to the heart, courteous words that are desired by many people and agreeable to many people.
Having abandoned harsh speech, he abstains from harsh speech; he speaks words that are gentle, pleasing to the ear, lovable, words that go to the heart, courteous words that are desired by many people and agreeable to many people.
Having abandoned idle chatter, he abstains from idle chatter; he speaks at a proper time, speaks what is fact, speaks on what is beneficial, speaks on the Dhamma and the discipline; at the proper time he speaks words that are worth recording, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.
Having abandoned idle chatter, he abstains from idle chatter; he speaks at a proper time, speaks what is truthful, speaks what is beneficial, speaks on the Dhamma and the discipline; at the proper time he speaks such words as are worth recording, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.
Having abandoned ill will and hatred, he dwells with a mind free from ill will, compassionate for the welfare of all living beings; he purifies his mind from ill will and hatred.
Having abandoned ill will and hatred, he dwells with a mind free from ill will, compassionate for the welfare of all living beings; he purifies his mind from ill will and hatred.
Having abandoned ill will and hatred, he dwells with a mind free from ill will, compassionate toward all living beings; he purifies his mind from ill will and hatred.
Having abandoned ill will and hatred, he dwells with a mind free from ill will, compassionate toward all living beings; he purifies his mind from ill will and hatred.
Having abandoned longing for the world … … he purifies his mind from doubt.
Having abandoned longing for the world, he dwells with a mind free from longing; he purifies his mind from longing.
Having abandoned longing for the world, he dwells with a mind free from longing; he purifies his mind from longing.
Having abandoned longing for the world, he dwells with a mind free from longing; he purifies his mind from longing.
Having abandoned longing for the world, he dwells with a mind free from longing; he purifies his mind from longing.
Having abandoned lust, hatred, and delusion, one does not do anything unwholesome; one does not pursue anything bad.
Having abandoned lust, hatred, and delusion, one is capable of abandoning birth, old age, and death.”
Having abandoned lust, hatred, and delusion, one is freed from birth, from old age and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish; one is freed from suffering, I say.
Having abandoned restlessness and remorse, he dwells without agitation, with a mind inwardly peaceful; he purifies his mind from restlessness and remorse.
Having abandoned restlessness and remorse, he dwells without agitation, with a mind inwardly peaceful; he purifies his mind from restlessness and remorse.
Having abandoned restlessness and remorse, he dwells without agitation, with a mind inwardly peaceful; he purifies his mind from restlessness and remorse.
Having abandoned restlessness and remorse, he dwells without agitation, with a mind inwardly peaceful; he purifies his mind from restlessness and remorse.
Having abandoned sexual activity, he observes celibacy, living apart, abstaining from sexual intercourse, the common person’s practice.
Having abandoned sexual activity, he observes celibacy, living apart, abstaining from sexual intercourse, the common person’s practice.
Having abandoned taking what is not given, he abstains from taking what is not given; he takes only what is given, expects only what is given, and dwells honestly without thoughts of theft.
Having abandoned the fetters, it is possible that one will realize nibbāna.”
Having abandoned the five enmities,he is called virtuous.With the breakup of the body,that wise person is reborn in heaven.
Having abandoned the taking of what is not given, he abstains from taking what is not given … Having abandoned sexual misconduct, he abstains from sexual misconduct … Having abandoned false speech, he abstains from false speech … Having abandoned divisive speech, he abstains from divisive speech … Having abandoned harsh speech, he abstains from harsh speech … Having abandoned idle chatter, he abstains from idle chatter … He is without longing … He is of good will … He holds right view and has a correct perspective thus: ‘There is what is given … there are in the world ascetics and brahmins of right conduct and right practice who, having realized this world and the other world for themselves by direct knowledge, make them known to others.’
One possessing these ten qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.”
Having abandoned the taking of what is not given, he abstains from taking what is not given; he takes only what is given, expects only what is given, and dwells honestly without thoughts of theft.
Having abandoned these five perils and enmities, one is called virtuous and is reborn in heaven.
Having abandoned these five things, one is capable of entering and dwelling in the first jhāna.”
Having abandoned these five things, one is capable of entering and dwelling in the first jhāna.”
Having abandoned these five things, one is capable of realizing the fruit of arahantship.”
Having abandoned these five things, one is capable of realizing the fruit of arahantship.” 
Having abandoned these nine things, one is capable of realizing arahantship.” 
Having abandoned these six things, one is capable of contemplating the body in the body.”
Having abandoned these six things, one is capable of entering and dwelling in the first jhāna.”
Having abandoned these six things, one is capable of entering and dwelling in the first jhāna.”
Having abandoned these six things, one is capable of realizing a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.” 
Having abandoned these six things, one is capable of realizing accomplishment in view.”
Having abandoned these six things, one is capable of realizing arahantship.”
Having abandoned these six things, one is capable of realizing arahantship.”
Having abandoned these six things, one is capable of realizing the fruit of non-returning.”
Having abandoned these ten things, one is capable of realizing arahantship.” 
Having abandoned these three things, one is capable of abandoning birth, old age, and death.
Having abandoned these three things, one is capable of abandoning careless attention, following a wrong path, and mental sluggishness.
Having abandoned these three things, one is capable of abandoning disrespect, being difficult to correct, and bad friendship.
Having abandoned these three things, one is capable of abandoning lack of desire to see the noble ones, lack of desire to hear the noble Dhamma, and a mind bent on criticism.
Having abandoned these three things, one is capable of abandoning lack of faith, uncharitableness, and laziness.
Having abandoned these three things, one is capable of abandoning lust, hatred, and delusion.
Having abandoned these three things, one is capable of abandoning muddle-mindedness, lack of clear comprehension, and mental distraction.
Having abandoned these three things, one is capable of abandoning personal-existence view, doubt, and wrong grasp of behavior and observances.
Having abandoned these three things, one is capable of abandoning restlessness, non-restraint, and immorality.
Having approached, “I will stand in front of the Blessed One,” he sank down, descended, and could not remain in place.
Having attained arahantship, the Venerable Soṇa thought: “Let me go to the Blessed One and declare final knowledge in his presence.”
Then he approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said:
Having avoided it, one becomes dispassionate in mind and, having pierced through with wisdom, one sees.
Having avoided it, one becomes dispassionate in mind and, having pierced through with wisdom, one sees.
Having avoided it, one becomes dispassionate in mind, and having pierced through with wisdom, one sees.
Having banished those of evil desires,of bad conduct and resort,dwell in communion, ever mindful,the pure with the pure;then, in harmony, alert,you will make an end of suffering.
Having bathed at the eastern gate and come out, he stood in one robe drying himself.
Having bathed in the hot springs and come back out, he stood in one robe drying his limbs.
Having caused schism in a harmonious Saṅgha, he is tormented in hell for an eon.
Having cleansed oneselfand given with one’s own hands,the act of charity is very fruitfulfor oneself and in relation to others.
Having clearly seen what is suffering as it really is with correct wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine; I am not this; this is not my self,’ I understand as it really is the superior escape from it.”
Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, a bhikkhu is neither joyful nor saddened, but dwells equanimous, mindful, and clearly comprehending.
Having cognized what can be cognized, he does not misconceive the cognized, does not misconceive the uncognized, does not misconceive what can be cognized, does not misconceive one who cognizes.
Having cut off all attachments,having removed anguish in the heart,the peaceful one sleeps well,having attained peace of mind.
Having cut off all underlying tendenciesthat follow one drifting in Māra’s domain,those who attain the destruction of the taints,though in the world, have gone beyond.
Having developed these four divine abodes, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in a good destination, in the brahmā world.
Having developed these four jhānas, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
Having directly known all the world—all in the world just as it is—he is detached from all the world,disengaged from all the world.
Having directly known all things, he fully understands all things.
Having directly known this, he saw the beginning, the danger, and the escape, and he saw the knowledge and vision of the path and the non-path.
Having directly known this, he saw the beginning, the danger, and the escape, and he saw the knowledge and vision of the path and the non-path.
Having disclosed my weakness in the training, I will give up the training and revert to the lower life.’
Having disclosed his weakness in the training, he gives up the training and reverts to the lower life.
Having disclosed my weakness in the training, I will give up the training and revert to the lower life.’
His fellow monks then exhort and instruct him: ‘Friend, the Blessed One has stated that sensual pleasures provide little gratification, much suffering and anguish, and that the danger in them is more.
Having disclosed my weakness in the training, I will give up the training and revert to the lower life.’
His fellow monks then exhort and instruct him: ‘Friend, the Blessed One has stated that sensual pleasures provide little gratification, much suffering and anguish, and that the danger in them is more.
Having disclosed my weakness in the training, I will give up the training and revert to the lower life.”’ He returns to the monastery and informs the bhikkhus: ‘Friends, I am obsessed by lust, oppressed by lust.
Having disclosed my weakness in the training, I will give up the training and revert to the lower life.”’ He returns to the monastery and informs the bhikkhus: ‘Friends, I am obsessed by lust, oppressed by lust.
Having disclosed my weakness in the training, I will give up the training and revert to the lower life.”’ While he is returning to the monastery, even before he arrives, he discloses his weakness in the training, gives up the training, and reverts to the lower life along the way.
Having dispelled that gain, honor, and praise, he does not neglect seclusion; he does not neglect remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
Having done so, he does not make himself happy and pleased, nor does he share the wealth and do meritorious deeds.
Having done so, he does not make himself happy and pleased, nor does he share the wealth and do meritorious deeds.
Having done so, he does not make himself happy and pleased, nor does he share the wealth and do meritorious deeds.
Having done so, he makes himself happy and pleased, and he shares the wealth and does meritorious deeds.
Having done so, he makes himself happy and pleased, and he shares the wealth and does meritorious deeds.
Having done so, he makes himself happy and pleased, and he shares the wealth and does meritorious deeds.
Having done so, he makes himself happy and pleased, and he shares the wealth and does meritorious deeds.
Having done so, he makes himself happy and pleased, but he does not share the wealth and do meritorious deeds.
Having done so, he makes himself happy and pleased, but he does not share the wealth and do meritorious deeds.
Having done so, he makes himself happy and pleased, but he does not share the wealth and do meritorious deeds.
Having done so, he would winnow the ashes in a strong wind or let them be carried away by the swift current of a river.
Having done what is good,he is worthy of veneration and praise.They praise him here in this worldand after death he rejoices in heaven.
Having eaten as much as he wants until his belly is full, he is intent upon the pleasure of rest, the pleasure of sloth, the pleasure of sleep … he lives the spiritual life aspiring for a certain order of devas,: ‘By this virtuous behavior, observance, austerity, or spiritual life I will be a deva or one of the devas.’
When he lives the spiritual life aspiring for a certain order of devas … his mind does not incline to ardor, effort, perseverance, and striving.
Having eaten as much as he wants until his belly is full, he is intent upon the pleasure of rest, the pleasure of sloth, the pleasure of sleep ….
Having engaged in misconductby body, speech, and mind,he forms the wish:“May no one find out about me.”
Having entered the villages, towns, and capital cities, he takes up his residence.
Having entered upon a certain peaceful liberation of mind, he dwells in it.
Having established yourself in these five qualities, you should further develop six things.
Having established yourself in these six qualities, you should establish mindfulness internally concerning five things.
Having exhausted that kamma, psychic potency, glory, and authority, he comes back and returns to this state of being.
Having exhausted that kamma, psychic potency, glory, and authority, he does not come back and return to this state of being.
Having experienced a taste with the tongue, a bhikkhu is neither joyful nor saddened, but dwells equanimous, mindful, and clearly comprehending.
Having felt a tactile object with the body, a bhikkhu is neither joyful nor saddened, but dwells equanimous, mindful, and clearly comprehending.
Having finished bathing and come back out, he stood in one robe drying his body.
Having folded his legs crosswise, straightened his body, and established mindfulness in front of him, just mindful he breathes in, mindful he breathes out.
Having folded my legs crosswise and straightened my body, I establish mindfulness in front of me.
Having folded my legs crosswise and straightened my body, I establish mindfulness in front of me.
Having folded my legs crosswise and straightened my body, I establish mindfulness in front of me.
Having fulfilled our duty, free of regret and remorse, we were reborn in a superior class.’
Having fulfilled right view, it is possible for him to fulfill right concentration.”
Having fulfilled the aggregate of virtuous behavior, it is possible for him to fulfill the aggregate of concentration.
Having fulfilled the duty of a trainee, it is possible for him to fulfill virtuous behavior.
Having fulfilled the duty of a trainee, it is possible that he will fulfill virtuous behavior.
Having fulfilled the duty of proper conduct, it is possible for him to fulfill the duty of a trainee.
Having fulfilled the duty of proper conduct, it is possible that he will fulfill the duty of a trainee.
Having fulfilled the factor of a trainee, it is possible for him to fulfill the aggregate of virtuous behavior.
Having fulfilled the factor of proper conduct, it is possible for him to fulfill the factor of a trainee.
Having fulfilled virtuous behavior, it is possible for him to fulfill right view.
Having fulfilled virtuous behavior, it is possible that he will abandon sensual lust, lust for form, and lust for the formless.”
Having fully understood all things, whatever feeling he feels—whether pleasant, painful, or neither painful nor pleasant—he dwells contemplating impermanence in those feelings, contemplating fading away in those feelings, contemplating cessation in those feelings, contemplating relinquishment in those feelings.
Having gained spiritual happiness,one then resolves on equanimity.Having abandoned the five hindrances,always arousing energy,he enters upon the jhānas,unified, alert, and mindful.
Having gained the best of sights,and the unsurpassed hearing,having acquired the unsurpassed gain,delighting in the unsurpassed training,attentive in service,they develop recollectionconnected with seclusion,secure, leading to the deathless.
Having given beauty, he partakes of beauty, whether celestial or human.
Having given beauty, one partakes of beauty, whether celestial or human.
Having given beauty, she partakes of beauty, whether celestial or human.
Having given discernment, one partakes of discernment, whether celestial or human.
Having given happiness, he partakes of happiness, whether celestial or human.
Having given happiness, one partakes of happiness, whether celestial or human.
Having given happiness, she partakes of happiness, whether celestial or human.
Having given life, he partakes of life, whether celestial or human.
Having given life, one partakes of life, whether celestial or human.
Having given life, she partakes of life, whether celestial or human.
Having given life, strength, beauty,happiness, and discernment,one is long-lived and famouswherever one is reborn.
Having given strength, he partakes of strength, whether celestial or human.
Having given strength, one partakes of strength, whether celestial or human.
Having given strength, she partakes of strength, whether celestial or human.
Having had a new sacrificial temple built to the east of the city, and having shaved off his hair and beard, dressed himself in rough antelope hide, and greased his body with ghee and oil, scratching his back with a deer’s horn, he enters the sacrificial temple together with his chief queen and his brahmin high priest.
Having heard a sound with the ear … Having smelled an odor with the nose … Having experienced a taste with the tongue … Having felt a tactile object with the body … Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, a bhikkhu is neither joyful nor saddened, but dwells equanimous, mindful and clearly comprehending.
Having heard a sound with the ear … Having smelled an odor with the nose … Having experienced a taste with the tongue … Having felt a tactile object with the body … Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, he is neither joyful nor saddened, but dwells equanimous, mindful and clearly comprehending.
Having heard a sound with the ear … Having smelled an odor with the nose … Having tasted a taste with the tongue … Having felt a tactile object with the body … Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind … he guards the mind faculty, he undertakes the restraint of the mind faculty.
Having heard a sound with the ear … Having smelled an odor with the nose … Having tasted a taste with the tongue … Having felt a tactile object with the body … Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, a bhikkhu does not grasp its marks and features.
Having heard a sound with the ear … Having smelled an odor with the nose … Having tasted a taste with the tongue … Having felt a tactile object with the body … Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, a bhikkhu does not grasp its marks and features.
Having heard a sound with the ear … Having smelled an odor with the nose … Having tasted a taste with the tongue … Having felt a tactile object with the body … Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, a bhikkhu does not grasp its marks and features.
Having heard a sound with the ear … Having smelled an odor with the nose … Having tasted a taste with the tongue … Having felt a tactile object with the body … Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, a bhikkhu does not grasp its marks and features.
Having heard a sound with the ear … Having smelled an odor with the nose … Having tasted a taste with the tongue … Having felt a tactile object with the body … Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, he does not grasp at its marks and features.
Having heard a sound with the ear … Having smelled an odor with the nose … Having tasted a taste with the tongue … Having felt a tactile object with the body … Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, he does not grasp at its marks and features.
Having heard a sound with the ear … Having smelled an odor with the nose … Having tasted a taste with the tongue … Having felt a tactile object with the body … Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, he does not grasp at its marks and features.
Having heard a sound with the ear … Having smelled an odor with the nose … Having tasted a taste with the tongue … Having felt a tactile object with the body … Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, one examines a mental phenomenon that is a basis for joy; one examines a mental phenomenon that is a basis for dejection; one examines a mental phenomenon that is a basis for equanimity.
Having heard a sound with the ear … Having smelled an odor with the nose … Having tasted a taste with the tongue … … Having felt a tactile object with the body … Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, he does not grasp its marks and features.
Having heard a sound with the ear … … Having smelled an odor with the nose … Having tasted a taste with the tongue … Having felt a tactile object with the body … Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, he grasps at its marks and features.
Having heard a sound with the ear, a bhikkhu is neither joyful nor saddened, but dwells equanimous, mindful, and clearly comprehending.
Having heard it from him, the bhikkhus will retain it in mind.”
Having heard it from him, the bhikkhus will retain it in mind.”
Having heard it from him, the bhikkhus will retain it in mind.”
Having heard it from him, the bhikkhus will retain it in mind.”
Having heard it from him, the bhikkhus will retain it in mind.”
Having heard it from him, the bhikkhus will retain it in mind.”
Having heard it from him, the bhikkhus will retain it in mind.”
Having heard it from the Blessed One, the bhikkhus will retain it in mind.”
Having heard it from the Venerable Sāriputta, the bhikkhus will retain it in mind.”
Having heard it, wise peoplehave regained their sanity.They have seen the impermanent as impermanentand what is suffering as suffering.
Having heard something here, he does not repeat it elsewhere in order to divide from these; or having heard something elsewhere, he does not repeat it to these people in order to divide from those.
Having heard something here, he does not repeat it elsewhere in order to divide from these; or having heard something elsewhere, he does not repeat it to these people in order to divide from those.
Having heard something here, he does not repeat it elsewhere in order to divide from these; or having heard something elsewhere, he does not repeat it to these people in order to divide from those.
Having heard something here, he repeats it elsewhere in order to divide from these; or having heard something elsewhere, he repeats it to these people in order to divide from those.
Having heard something here, he repeats it elsewhere in order to divide from these; or having heard something elsewhere, he repeats it to these people in order to divide from those.
Having heard something here, he repeats it elsewhere in order to divide from these; or having heard something elsewhere, he repeats it to these people in order to divide from those.
Having heard the cry of the devas the four great kings, the Tāvatiṃsa devas … the Yāma devas … the Tusita devas … the devas who delight in creation … the devas who control what is created by others … the devas of Brahmā’s company raise a cry: ‘This Venerable So-and-So … has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it.’
Thus at that moment, at that instant, at that second, the cry spreads as far as the brahma world.
Having heard this from the Blessed One, the bhikkhus will retain in mind whatever the Blessed One says.”
Having heard this from the Blessed One, the bhikkhus will retain it in mind.”
Having heard this from the Blessed One, the bhikkhus will retain it in mind.”
Having heard what can be heard, he does not misconceive the heard, does not misconceive the unheard, does not misconceive what can be heard, does not misconceive one who hears.
Having instructed, encouraged, inspired, and gladdened the Saṅgha of bhikkhus with a Dhamma talk for much of the night, and having surveyed the utterly silent Saṅgha of bhikkhus, the Blessed One addressed the Venerable Sāriputta: “The Saṅgha of bhikkhus is free from dullness and drowsiness, Sāriputta.
Having insulted, one gives a gift.
Having investigated and scrutinized, he believes a matter that merits belief.
Having investigated and scrutinized, he believes a matter that merits belief.
Having investigated and scrutinized, he believes a matter that merits belief.
Having investigated and scrutinized, he is suspicious about a matter that merits suspicion.
Having investigated and scrutinized, he is suspicious about a matter that merits suspicion.
Having investigated and scrutinized, he is suspicious about a matter that merits suspicion.
Having investigated and scrutinized, he speaks dispraise of one who deserves dispraise.
Having investigated and scrutinized, he speaks dispraise of one who deserves dispraise.
Having investigated and scrutinized, he speaks dispraise of one who deserves dispraise.
Having investigated and scrutinized, he speaks dispraise of one who deserves dispraise.
Having investigated and scrutinized, he speaks praise of one who deserves praise.
Having investigated and scrutinized, he speaks praise of one who deserves praise.
Having investigated and scrutinized, he speaks praise of one who deserves praise.
Having investigated and scrutinized, he speaks praise of one who deserves praise.
Having investigated and scrutinized, he speaks praise of one who deserves praise.
Having investigated and scrutinized, one believes a matter that merits belief.
Having investigated and scrutinized, one is suspicious about a matter that merits suspicion.
Having investigated and scrutinized, one speaks dispraise of one who deserves dispraise.
Having investigated and scrutinized, one speaks praise of one who deserves praise.
Having investigated and scrutinized, she believes a matter that merits belief.
Having investigated and scrutinized, she speaks dispraise of one who deserves dispraise.
Having investigated and scrutinized, she speaks dispraise of one who deserves dispraise.
Having investigated and scrutinized, she speaks dispraise of one who deserves dispraise.
Having investigated and scrutinized, she speaks praise of one who deserves praise.
Having investigated and scrutinized, she speaks praise of one who deserves praise.
Having investigated and scrutinized, she speaks praise of one who deserves praise.
Having known the exquisiteness of form,the origination of feelings,how perception arises,and where it disappears;having known volitional activitiesas alien, as suffering, and not as self,truly that bhikkhu who sees rightly,peaceful, delights in the peaceful state.He bears his final body,having conquered Māra and his mount.
Having known the happiness of freedom from debt,one should recall the happiness of ownership.Enjoying the happiness of enjoyment,a mortal then sees things clearly with wisdom.
Having known the world as it is,one should attain accomplishment in view.One accomplished in mind advancesby relying on accomplishment in the path.
Having known things thus as they really are,through complete non-clingingthe mind is rightly liberatedwith the destruction of all fetters.
Having known this danger—that craving is the origin of suffering—free from craving, devoid of grasping,a bhikkhu should wander mindfully.
Having left the dark qualities behind,a wise person should develop the bright ones.Having come from home into homelessness,where it is hard to take delight—
Having left the dark qualities behind,a wise person should develop the bright ones.Having come from home into homelessness,where it is hard to take delight—
Having lived here in accord with Dhamma,the path leading to a good destination,those who desire sensual pleasures rejoice,delighting in the deva world.
Having lived here in accord with Dhamma,the path leading to a good destination,those who desire sensual pleasures rejoice,delighting in the deva world.
Having made this a basis, some beings here are purified in such a way.
Having made this a basis, some beings here become pure in such a way.
Having made this a basis, too, some beings here are purified in such a way.
Having made this a basis, too, some beings here become pure in such a way.
Having no understanding of the meaning and the Dhamma, he does not practice in accordance with the Dhamma.
Having obtained the human statewhen the good Dhamma has been well proclaimed,those who do not seize the momenthave let the right moment slip by.
Having offered the teacher’s fee to his teacher, he seeks a wife both in accordance with the Dhamma and contrary to the Dhamma.
Having offered the teacher’s fee to his teacher, he seeks a wife both in accordance with the Dhamma and contrary to the Dhamma.
Having offered the teacher’s fee to his teacher, he seeks a wife solely in accordance with the Dhamma, not contrary to the Dhamma.
Having offered the teacher’s fee to his teacher, he shaves off his hair and beard, puts on ochre robes, and goes forth from the household life into homelessness.
Having overcome all enmity and peril,they have transcended all suffering.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’  One not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, blue ones, blue in color, with a blue hue, with a blue tint … … yellow ones, yellow in color, with a yellow hue, with a yellow tint … … red ones, red in color, with a red hue, with a red tint … … white ones, white in color, with a white hue, with a white tint.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
For direct knowledge of lust, these eight things are to be developed.”
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
One not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, limited, beautiful or ugly.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
One not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, measureless, beautiful or ugly.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
One percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, measureless, beautiful or ugly.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
This is the eighth basis of overcoming.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
This is the eighth basis of overcoming.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
This is the fifth basis of overcoming.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
This is the fifth basis of overcoming.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
This is the first basis of overcoming.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
This is the first basis of overcoming.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
This is the fourth basis of overcoming.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
This is the fourth basis of overcoming.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
This is the second basis of overcoming.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
This is the second basis of overcoming.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
This is the seventh basis of overcoming.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
This is the seventh basis of overcoming.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
This is the sixth basis of overcoming.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
This is the sixth basis of overcoming.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
This is the third basis of overcoming.
Having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
This is the third basis of overcoming.
Having performed such a charitable deedwith a mind free from miserliness,the wise person, rich in faith,is reborn in a happy, non-afflictive world.
Having plunged into the pond, he would bathe and drink, and then, after coming out, he would sit or lie down in the shade of a tree right there.
Having practiced the Dhamma here,the same in virtuous behavior and observances,delighting in a deva world,they rejoice, enjoying sensual pleasures.
Having practiced the Dhamma here,the same in virtuous behavior and observances,delighting in a deva world,they rejoice, enjoying sensual pleasures.
Having prepared an appropriate gift,whether of the ordinary kind or in memory of the dead,one makes the sacrifice with a confident mindto a fertile field, to followers of the spiritual life.
Having provided such righteous protection, shelter, and guard for all these beings, that wheel-turning monarch, a righteous king who rules by the Dhamma, turns the wheel solely through the Dhamma, a wheel that cannot be turned back by any hostile human being.
Having provided such righteous protection, shelter, and guard, that wheel-turning monarch, a righteous king who rules by the Dhamma, turns the wheel solely through the Dhamma, a wheel that cannot be turned back by any hostile creature in human form.
Having realized by his own direct knowledge the world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, he makes it known to others.
Having realized by his own direct knowledge this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, he makes it known to others.
Having realized by his own direct knowledge this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, he makes it known to others.
Having realized with his own direct knowledge this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, with its devas and humans, he makes it known to others.
Having realized with his own direct knowledge this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, with its devas and humans, he makes it known to others.
Having received such an exhortation from the Blessed One, that bhikkhu rose from his seat, paid homage to the Blessed One, circumambulated him keeping the right side toward him, and departed.
Having reflected carefully, a bhikkhu dwells restrained over the ear faculty … nose faculty … tongue faculty … body faculty … mind faculty.
Having rubbed off all stains,having attained nibbāna,one is then freed from all sufferings:this is total accomplishment.
Having said this, he further said this:
Having said this, that deity paid homage to me, circumambulated me keeping the right side toward me, and disappeared right there.
Having said this, that deity paid homage to me, circumambulated me keeping the right side toward me, and disappeared right there.”
Having said this, the Fortunate One got up from his seat and entered his dwelling.
Having said this, the Fortunate One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling.
Having said this, the Fortunate One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling.
Having said this, the Fortunate One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling.
Having said this, the Fortunate One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling.
Having said this, the Fortunate One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling.
Having said this, the Fortunate One rose from his seat and entered his dwelling.
Having said this, the Fortunate One, the Teacher, further said this:
Having said this, the Fortunate One, the Teacher, further said this:
Having said this, the Fortunate One, the Teacher, further said this:
Having said this, the Fortunate One, the Teacher, further said this: 
Having said this, the Fortunate One, the Teacher, further said this: 
Having seen a form with the eye … Having cognized a mental phenomenon with the mind, he is neither joyful nor saddened, but dwells equanimous, mindful and clearly comprehending.
Having seen a form with the eye, he does not grasp its marks and features.
Having seen a form with the eye, he is neither joyful nor saddened, but dwells equanimous, mindful and clearly comprehending.
Having seen a form with the eye, one examines a form that is a basis for joy; one examines a form that is a basis for dejection; one examines a form that is a basis for equanimity.
Having seen her, he sinks, founders, does not brace himself, and cannot maintain the spiritual life.
Having seen him, he rose from his seat, went up to that person, and said to him: “Get up, friend.
Having seen him, he said to that bhikkhu:
Having seen him, I said to that bhikkhu: ‘Bhikkhu, bhikkhu!
Having seen the peril in clingingas the origin of birth and death,being liberated by non-clingingin the extinction of birth and death,those happy ones have attained security;they have reached nibbāna in this very life.
Having seen the peril in the hells,one should avoid evil deeds;having undertaken the noble Dhamma,the wise one should avoid them.
Having seen the Venerable Mahāmoggallāna coming in the distance, the brahmā Tissa said to him:
Having sensed what can be sensed, he does not misconceive the sensed, does not misconceive the unsensed, does not misconceive what can be sensed, does not misconceive one who senses.
Having shaved off his hair and beard, he puts on ochre robes and goes forth from the household life into homelessness.
Having shaved off his hair and beard, he puts on ochre robes and goes forth from the household life into homelessness.
Having smelled an odor with the nose, a bhikkhu is neither joyful nor saddened, but dwells equanimous, mindful, and clearly comprehending.
Having stayed in Kapilavatthu as long as he wanted, the Blessed One set out on tour toward Vesālī.
Having taken the opportunity to do wholesome deeds,passing from here, self-luminous, they roam in Nandana,where they delight, rejoice, and enjoy themselves,furnished with the five objects of sensual pleasure.Having fulfilled the word of the unattached Stable One,the Fortunate One’s disciples rejoice in heaven.
Having taken up the issue, they do not persuade one another and do not allow themselves to be persuaded; they do not deliberate and do not welcome deliberation.
Having taken up the issue, they persuade one another and allow themselves to be persuaded; they deliberate and welcome deliberation.
Having thus discarded attraction and repulsion, he is freed from birth, from old age and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish; he is freed from suffering, I say.
Having thus practiced charitywith a mind freely generous,one intelligent and wise, rich in faith,is reborn in a pleasant, unafflicted world.
Having triumphed in that battle, he emerges victorious and settles at the head of the battlefield.
Having triumphed in that battle, he emerges victorious and settles at the head of the battlefield.
Having triumphed in that battle, he emerges victorious and settles at the head of the battlefield.
Having understood that the Blessed One had consented, Sīha rose from his seat, paid homage to the Blessed One, circumambulated him keeping the right side toward him, and departed.
Having understood that the female lay follower Nandamātā had finished her recitation, the great king Vessavaṇa applauded: “Good, sister!
Having understood the future result, one avoids it.
Having understood the future result, one avoids it.
Having understood the future result, one avoids it.
Having understood the meaning and the Dhamma, he practices in accordance with the Dhamma.
Having understood what is non-Dhamma and harmful, and also what is the Dhamma and beneficial, one should practice in accordance with the Dhamma and with what is beneficial,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.”
Having understood what is non-Dhamma and harmful, and also what is the Dhamma and beneficial, one should practice in accordance with the Dhamma and with what is beneficial,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.” 
Having understood what is non-Dhamma and harmful, and also what is the Dhamma and beneficial, one should practice in accordance with the Dhamma and with what is beneficial.
Having understood what is non-Dhamma and harmful, and also what is the Dhamma and beneficial, one should practice in accordance with the Dhamma and with what is beneficial.
Having understood what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma, and also what is harmful and what is beneficial, one should practice in accordance with the Dhamma and with what is beneficial,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.”
Having understood what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma, and also what is harmful and what is beneficial, one should practice in accordance with the Dhamma and with what is beneficial.
Having understood what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma, and also what is harmful and what is beneficial, one should practice in accordance with the Dhamma and with what is beneficial.
Having understood what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma, and also what is harmful and what is beneficial, one should practice in accordance with the Dhamma and with what is beneficial.’
Now what, friends, is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma?
Having understood what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma, and also what is harmful and what is beneficial, one should practice in accordance with the Dhamma and with what is beneficial.’
Now what, friends, is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma?
Having understood what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma, and also what is harmful and what is beneficial, one should practice in accordance with the Dhamma and with what is beneficial.”
Having understood what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma, and also what is harmful and what is beneficial, one should practice in accordance with the Dhamma and with what is beneficial.” 
Having understood what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma, and what is harmful and what is beneficial, one should practice in accordance with the Dhamma and with what is beneficial,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.”
Having understood what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma, and what is harmful and what is beneficial, one should practice in accordance with the Dhamma and with what is beneficial,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.”
Having understood what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma, and what is harmful and what is beneficial, one should practice in accordance with the Dhamma and with what is beneficial….
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them,’ the elder bhikkhus, those of middle standing, and the junior bhikkhus think he should be corrected and instructed.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
Having undertaken the training rules, train in them.’
Having undertaken them, one trains in the training rules.
Having undertaken them, one trains in the training rules.
Having undertaken them, train in the training rules.
Having undertaken them, train in the training rules.
Having vanquished Māraand overcome the end-maker,the striver has finished with birth.Such a sage, wise, a world-knower,identifies with nothing at all.
Having walked for alms in Vesālī, after the meal, when he had returned from his alms round, he entered the Great Wood and sat down at the foot of a tree to dwell for the day.
He abstains from accepting gold and silver, raw grain, raw meat, women and girls, men and women slaves, goats and sheep, fowl and pigs, elephants, cattle, horses, and mares, fields and land.
He abstains from accepting gold and silver, raw grain, raw meat, women and girls, men and women slaves, goats and sheep, fowl and pigs, elephants, cattle, horses, and mares, fields and land.
He abstains from adorning and beautifying himself by wearing garlands and applying scents and unguents.
He abstains from adorning and beautifying himself by wearing garlands and applying scents and unguents.
He abstains from dancing, singing, instrumental music, and unsuitable shows.
He abstains from dancing, singing, instrumental music, and unsuitable shows.
He abstains from going on errands and running messages; from buying and selling; from cheating with weights, metals, and measures; from accepting bribes, deceiving, defrauding, and trickery.
He abstains from going on errands and running messages; from buying and selling; from cheating with weights, metals, and measures; from accepting bribes, deceiving, defrauding, and trickery.
He abstains from high and large beds.
He abstains from high and large beds.
He abstains from the destruction of life, abstains from taking what is not given, abstains from sexual misconduct, abstains from false speech, abstains from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
He abstains from the destruction of life, abstains from taking what is not given, abstains from sexual misconduct, abstains from false speech, abstains from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
He abstains from the destruction of life, abstains from taking what is not given, abstains from sexual misconduct, abstains from false speech, abstains from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
He abstains from the destruction of life, from taking what is not given, from sexual misconduct, from false speech, from divisive speech, from harsh speech, from idle chatter; he is without longing, of good will, and holds right view.
He abstains from the destruction of life, from taking what is not given, from sexual misconduct, from false speech, from divisive speech, from harsh speech, from idle chatter; he is without longing, of good will, and holds right view.
He abstains from wounding, murdering, binding, brigandage, plunder, and violence.
He abstains from wounding, murdering, binding, brigandage, plunder, and violence.
He accurately discloses his symptoms to his kindhearted attendant; he reports, as fits the case, that his condition is getting worse, or getting better, or remaining the same.
He acquires gain.
He acquires gain.
He always does his duty toward his parents;he promotes the welfare of his wife and children.He takes care of the people in his homeand those who live in dependence on him.
He always sleeps well,the brahmin who has attained nibbāna,cooled off, without acquisitions,not tainted by sensual pleasures.
He appeared to me in his previous bodily form, but I don’t recall any alteration of my mind.”
He approached Sakka, ruler of the devas, and said to him: “Respected sir, you should know that the Venerable Uttara, at Mahisavatthu, in Dhavajālikā on Mount Saṅkheyya, has been teaching the Dhamma to the bhikkhus thus: ‘Friends, it is good for a bhikkhu from time to time to review his own failings … the failings of others … his own achievements … the achievements of others.’”
He approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and reported to the Blessed One his entire conversation with the brahmā Tissa.
He approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said to him:
He approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said:
He approached the Venerable Nārada, paid homage to him, and sat down to one side.
He approached the Venerable Uttara, paid homage to him, stood to one side, and said to him:
He approached the wanderer Sarabha, sat down on the seat that was prepared for him, and said to him: “Is it true, Sarabha, that you have been saying: ‘I have learned the Dhamma of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan son.
He approaches them from time to time and inquires: ‘How is this, Bhante?
He arouses himself, strives, and makes an effort to obtain recognition and gain, honor, and praise.
He arranged his upper robe over one shoulder, bent down with his right knee on the ground, reverently saluted me, and said: ‘So it is, Blessed One!
He ate as much as he wanted of the tree’s fruits, broke off a branch, and left!
He attacks one who does not attack him.
He attends to the breaking up of ignorance.
He attends to the breaking up of ignorance.
He attends to the breaking up of ignorance.
He attends to the cessation of personal existence.
He attends to the cessation of personal existence.
He bathes and drinks, comes out, and sets off wherever he wants.
He becomes excited by these and takes delight in them.
He becomes excited by these and takes delight in them.
He brought the new pair of wheels to King Pacetana and said: ‘This is the new pair of wheels that I have made for you, lord.’ – ‘What is the difference, friend chariotmaker, between the wheel that took six months less six days to complete and the one that took six days to complete?
He can patiently endure arisen bodily feelings that are painful, racking, sharp, piercing, harrowing, disagreeable, sapping one’s vitality.
He can patiently endure forms, sounds, odors, tastes, and tactile objects.
He cannot patiently endure arisen bodily feelings that are painful, racking, sharp, piercing, harrowing, disagreeable, sapping one’s vitality.
He cannot patiently endure forms, cannot patiently endure sounds, cannot patiently endure odors, cannot patiently endure tastes, and cannot patiently endure tactile objects.
He cannot patiently endure forms, sounds, odors, tastes, and tactile objects.
He carries loads, determined: ‘Whether or not the other horses carry loads, I myself will carry them.’
When moving, he moves only along a straight path.
He compares his own body with it thus: ‘This body, too, is of the same nature; it will be like that; it is not beyond that.’
Or suppose he were to see a corpse thrown aside in a charnel ground, a skeleton with flesh and blood, held together with sinews … a fleshless skeleton smeared with blood, held together with sinews … a skeleton without flesh and blood, held together with sinews … disconnected bones scattered in all directions: here a handbone, there a footbone, here a shinbone, there a thighbone, here a hipbone, there a backbone, and there the skull.
He compares his own body with it thus: ‘This body, too, is of the same nature; it will be like that; it is not beyond that.’
Or suppose he were to see a corpse thrown aside in a charnel ground, being devoured by crows, hawks, vultures, dogs, jackals, or various kinds of living beings.
He compares his own body with it thus: ‘This body, too, is of the same nature; it will be like that; it is not beyond that.’
Or suppose he were to see a corpse thrown aside in a charnel ground, bones bleached white, the color of shells … bones heaped up, more than a year old … bones rotted, crumbled to dust.
He compares his own body with it thus: ‘This body, too, is of the same nature; it will be like that; it is not beyond that.’
This subject of recollection, developed and cultivated in this way, leads to the uprooting of the conceit ‘I am.’
He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This attainment of the base of nothingness is constructed and produced by volition.
He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This attainment of the base of the infinity of space is constructed and produced by volition.
He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This first jhāna is constructed and produced by volition.
He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This fourth jhāna is constructed and produced by volition.
He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This liberation of the mind by equanimity is constructed and produced by volition.
He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This liberation of the mind by loving-kindness is constructed and produced by volition.
He considers whatever phenomena exist there pertaining to feeling, perception, volitional activities, and consciousness as impermanent ….
He considers whatever phenomena exist there pertaining to feeling, perception, volitional activities, and consciousness as impermanent ….
He considers whatever phenomena exist there pertaining to feeling, perception, volitional activities, and consciousness as impermanent ….
He considers whatever phenomena exist there pertaining to feeling, perception, volitional activities, and consciousness as impermanent, suffering, an illness, a boil, a dart, misery, affliction, alien, disintegrating, empty, and non-self.
He considers whatever phenomena exist there pertaining to form, feeling, perception, volitional activities, and consciousness as impermanent … he becomes one of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without ever returning from that world.
He considers whatever phenomena exist there pertaining to form, feeling, perception, volitional activities, and consciousness as impermanent, suffering, an illness, a boil, a dart, misery, affliction, alien, disintegrating, empty, and non-self.
He contemplates whatever phenomena there pertain to form, feeling, perception, volitional activities, and consciousness as impermanent, as suffering, as a disease, as a boil, as a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as alien, as disintegrating, as empty, as non-self.
He contemplates whatever phenomena there pertain to form, feeling, perception, volitional activities, and consciousness as impermanent, as suffering, as a disease, as a boil, as a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as alien, as disintegrating, as empty, as non-self.
He contemplates whatever phenomena there pertain to form, feeling, perception, volitional activities, and consciousness as impermanent, as suffering, as a disease, as a boil, as a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as alien, as disintegrating, as empty, as non-self.
He contemplates whatever phenomena there pertain to form, feeling, perception, volitional activities, and consciousness as impermanent, as suffering, as a disease, as a boil, as a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as alien, as disintegrating, as empty, as non-self.
He couples only with a brahmin woman, not with a khattiya woman, a vessa woman, a sudda woman, or a caṇḍāla woman, nor with a woman from a family of hunters, bamboo workers, chariot makers, or flower scavengers.
He couples with a brahmin woman, a khattiya woman, a vessa woman, a sudda woman, and a caṇḍāla woman, and a woman from a family of hunters, bamboo workers, chariot makers, or flower scavengers.
He couples with a brahmin woman, a khattiya woman, a vessa woman, a sudda woman, and a caṇḍāla woman, and a woman from a family of hunters, bamboo workers, chariot makers, or flower scavengers.
He couples with a pregnant woman, a woman who is nursing, a woman in season, and a woman out of season.
He couples with a pregnant woman, a woman who is nursing, a woman in season, and a woman out of season.
He creates an obstruction to the donor’s acquiring merit, to the recipients’ gaining a gift, and already he has maimed and injured himself.
He creeps along by body, speech, and mind.
He cunningly approaches families, cunningly sits down, cunningly speaks on the Dhamma, and cunningly holds in his excrement and urine.
He destroys life, takes what is not given, does not observe celibacy, speaks falsely, and indulges in liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
He destroys life, takes what is not given, does not observe celibacy, speaks falsely, and indulges in liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
He destroys life, takes what is not given, engages in sexual misconduct, and speaks falsely.
He destroys life, takes what is not given, engages in sexual misconduct, speaks falsehood, speaks divisively, speaks harshly, indulges in idle chatter; he is full of longing, has a mind of ill will, and holds wrong view.
He destroys life, takes what is not given, engages in sexual misconduct, speaks falsely, and indulges in liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
He destroys life, takes what is not given, engages in sexual misconduct, speaks falsely, and indulges in liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
He destroys life, takes what is not given, engages in sexual misconduct, speaks falsely, and indulges in liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
He develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to energy and activities of striving … that possesses concentration due to mind and activities of striving … that possesses concentration due to investigation and activities of striving….”
He develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to energy and activities of striving.
He develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to energy and activities of striving.
He develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to energy … … that possesses concentration due to mind … … that possesses concentration due to investigation and activities of striving.
He develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to investigation and activities of striving.
He develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to investigation and activities of striving.
He develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to mind and activities of striving.
He develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to mind and activities of striving.
He develops the enlightenment factor of discrimination of phenomena … the enlightenment factor of energy … the enlightenment factor of rapture … the enlightenment factor of tranquility … the enlightenment factor of concentration … the enlightenment factor of equanimity that is based upon seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in release.
He develops the enlightenment factor of discrimination of phenomena … the enlightenment factor of energy … the enlightenment factor of rapture … the enlightenment factor of tranquility … the enlightenment factor of concentration … the enlightenment factor of equanimity, which is based upon seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in release.
He did not request the Blessed One: “Bhante, let the Blessed One live on for an eon!
He dies confused.
He dies confused.
He dies confused.
He directly knew: ‘Destroyed is birth, the spiritual life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming back to any state of being.’
And the bhikkhu Gavesī became one of the arahants.
He directly knew: “Destroyed is birth, the spiritual life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming back to any state of being.”
And that bhikkhu became one of the arahants.
He directly knew: “Destroyed is birth, the spiritual life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming back to any state of being.”
And that bhikkhu became one of the arahants.
He directly knew: “Destroyed is birth, the spiritual life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming back to any state of being.”
And the Venerable Anuruddha became one of the arahants.
He directly knew: “Destroyed is birth, the spiritual life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming back to any state of being.”
And the Venerable Anuruddha became one of the arahants.
He directly knew: “Destroyed is birth, the spiritual life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming back to any state of being.”
And the Venerable Citta Hatthisāriputta became one of the arahants.
He directly knew: “Destroyed is birth, the spiritual life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming back to any state of being.”
And the Venerable Māluṅkyāputta became one of the arahants.
He directly knew: “Destroyed is birth, the spiritual life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming back to any state of being.”
And the Venerable Soṇa became one of the arahants.
He discloses his weakness in the training, gives up the training, and reverts to the lower life.
He discloses his weakness in the training, gives up the training, and reverts to the lower life.
He discloses his weakness in the training, gives up the training, and reverts to the lower life.
He discloses his weakness in the training, gives up the training, and reverts to the lower life.
He discloses his weakness in the training, gives up the training, and reverts to the lower life.
He discloses his weakness in the training, gives up the training, and reverts to the lower life.
He does his work in his neighborhood.
He does not accurately disclose his symptoms to his kindhearted attendant; he does not report, as fits the case, that his condition is getting worse, or getting better, or remaining the same.
He does not achieve what he has not yet achieved.
He does not achieve what he has not yet achieved.
He does not achieve what he has not yet achieved; he falls away from what he has achieved; a bad report circulates about him; he dies confused; and with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
He does not acquire gain.
He does not acquire gain.
He does not arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
He does not arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
He does not arouse energy … for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
He does not arouse energy … for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
He does not arouse energy … for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
He does not arouse energy … for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
He does not arouse energy … for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
He does not arouse energy … for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
He does not attack one who does not attack him.
He does not become excited by these or take delight in them.
He does not become excited by these or take delight in them.
He does not become intoxicated, grow heedless, and drift into heedlessness due to that gain.
He does not become intoxicated, grow heedless, and drift into heedlessness due to that gain.
He does not couple with a pregnant woman, nor with a woman who is nursing, nor with a woman out of season.
He does not create any new kamma and he terminates the old kamma having contacted it again and again.
He does not create any new kamma and he terminates the old kamma having contacted it again and again.
He does not create any new kamma and he terminates the old kamma having contacted it again and again.
He does not create any new kamma and he terminates the old kamma having contacted it again and again.
He does not create any new kamma and he terminates the old kamma having contacted it again and again.
He does not create any new kamma and he terminates the old kamma having contacted it again and again.
He does not create any new kamma and he terminates the old kamma having contacted it again and again.
He does not creep along by body, speech, and mind.
He does not do his work in his neighborhood.
He does not dwell with a mind obsessed and oppressed by ill will … by dullness and drowsiness … by restlessness and remorse … by doubt, and he understands as it really is the escape from arisen doubt.
He does not eat as much as he wants until his belly is full nor is he intent upon the pleasure of rest, the pleasure of sloth, the pleasure of sleep….
He does not enter upon a wrong course because of desire … he knows which has been appointed and which has not been appointed….”
He does not enter upon a wrong course because of desire … he knows which has been assigned and which has not been assigned.
He does not enter upon a wrong course because of desire … he knows which has been assigned and which has not been assigned.
He does not enter upon a wrong course because of desire … he knows which has been assigned and which has not been assigned.
He does not enter upon a wrong course because of desire … he knows which has been assigned and which has not been assigned.
He does not enter upon a wrong course because of desire … he knows which have been supervised and which have not been supervised.
He does not enter upon a wrong course because of desire … he knows which have been supervised and which have not been supervised.
He does not enter upon a wrong course because of desire … he knows which have been supervised and which have not been supervised.
He does not enter upon a wrong course because of desire … he knows which have been supervised and which have not been supervised.
He does not enter upon a wrong course because of desire … he knows which have been supervised and which have not been supervised.
He does not enter upon a wrong course because of desire; he does not enter upon a wrong course because of hatred; he does not enter upon a wrong course because of delusion; he does not enter upon a wrong course because of fear; he knows which has been assigned and which has not been assigned.
He does not feel regret,having given away many material things.Those with deep insight praisethe gifts given in this way.
He does not feel that feeling.
He does not feel that kind of feeling.
He does not feel that kind of feeling.
He does not feel that kind of feeling.
He does not feel that kind of feeling.
He does not forsake you when you are in trouble.
He does not have sexual relations with women who are protected by their mother, father, mother and father, brother, sister, or relatives; who are protected by their Dhamma; who have a husband; whose violation entails a penalty; or even with one already engaged.
He does not have sexual relations with women who are protected by their mother, father, mother and father, brother, sister, or relatives; who are protected by their Dhamma; who have a husband; whose violation entails a penalty; or even with one already engaged.
He does not have sexual relations with women who are protected by their mother, father, mother and father, brother, sister, or relatives; who are protected by their Dhamma; who have a husband; whose violation entails a penalty; or even with one already engaged.
He does not himself abstain from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness, and does not encourage others to abstain from them.
He does not himself abstain from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness, but he encourages others to abstain from them.
He does not instigate work projects; he does not take up disciplinary issues; he is not hostile toward eminent bhikkhus; he is not intent on lengthy and unsettled wandering; he is able to instruct, encourage, inspire, and gladden one from time to time with a Dhamma talk.
He does not kill a woman.
He does not know what is beneficial and harmful, so he offers what is harmful and withholds what is beneficial.
He does not live the spiritual life aspiring for a certain order of devas,: ‘By this virtuous behavior, observance, austerity, or spiritual life I will be a deva or one of the devas.’
Since he does not live the spiritual life aspiring for a certain order of devas … his mind inclines to ardor, effort, perseverance, and striving.
He does not long for the wealth and property of others thus: ‘Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!’
He does not long for the wealth and property of others thus: ‘Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!’
He does not long for the wealth and property of others thus: ‘Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!’
He does not neglect seclusion but devotes himself to internal serenity of mind.
He does not observe moderation in what is beneficial.
He does not obtain food … and lighting.
He does not obtain food … and lighting.
He does not obtain food, drink, clothing, and vehicles; garlands, scents, and unguents; bedding, housing, and lighting.
He does not obtain food, drink, clothing, and vehicles; garlands, scents, and unguents; bedding, housing, and lighting.
He does not obtain food, drink, clothing, and vehicles; garlands, scents, and unguents; bedding, housing, and lighting.
He does not perceive any other exquisiteness of form more excellent or sublime than that one; he does not yearn for any other exquisiteness of form more excellent or sublime than that one.
He does not perceive any other exquisiteness of volitional activities more excellent or sublime than that one; he does not yearn for any other exquisiteness of volitional activities more excellent or sublime than that one.
He does not possess such wealth,nor does he do deeds of merit;the blind man destitute of eyescasts an unlucky throw in both respects.
He does not presume intimacy upon mere acquaintance; he does not distribute things that he does not own; he does not consort with those who are divided; he does not whisper in the ear; and he does not make excessive requests.
He does not pursue that object, does not develop and cultivate it, does not focus on it well.
He does not rape a young girl.
He does not regard feeling as self … perception as self … volitional activities as self … consciousness as self, or self as possessing consciousness, or consciousness as in self, or self as in consciousness.
He does not rob a monk.
He does not rob the royal treasury.
He does not roughly despise you.
He does not rouse himself, strive, and make an effort to acquire gain.
He does not rouse himself, strive, and make an effort to acquire gain.
He does not rouse himself, strive, and make an effort to acquire gain.
He does not rouse himself, strive, and make an effort to acquire gain.
He does not see his transgression as a transgression.
He does not sorrow, languish, and lament due to that lack of gain; he does not weep beating his breast and become confused.
He does not sorrow, languish, and lament due to that lack of gain; he does not weep beating his breast and become confused.
He does not speak falsely; he does not speak divisively; he does not speak harshly; he does not speak idle chatter; with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
He does not squander what has been given out of faith.
He does not squander what has been given out of faith.
He does not squander what has been given out of faith.
He does not steal the wealth and property of others in the village or in the forest.
He does not steal the wealth and property of others in the village or in the forest.
He does not steal the wealth and property of others in the village or in the forest.
He does not steal without leaving anything behind.
He does not stop at the boundary of the ancient brahmins but violates it.
He does not stop seeing bhikkhus; he does not neglect listening to the good Dhamma; he trains in the higher virtuous behavior; he is full of confidence in bhikkhus, whether they be elders, newly ordained, or of middle standing; he listens to the Dhamma with a mind that is not bent on criticism, not seeking to find faults with it; he does not seek a person worthy of offerings among outsiders; he first does deeds here.
He does not take a wrong course because of desire, because of hatred, because of delusion, or because of fear.
He does not take his medicine.
He does not tolerate an arisen thought of ill will … an arisen thought of harming … any other bad unwholesome states that arise from time to time, but abandons them, dispels them, terminates them, and obliterates them.
He does not tolerate an arisen thought of ill will … an arisen thought of harming … any other bad unwholesome states that arise from time to time, but abandons them, dispels them, terminates them, and obliterates them.
He does not tolerate an arisen thought of ill will … an arisen thought of harming … bad unwholesome states whenever they arise; he abandons them, dispels them, calms them down, terminates them, and obliterates them.
He does not tolerate an arisen thought of ill will … an arisen thought of harming … bad unwholesome states whenever they arise; he abandons them, dispels them, terminates them, and obliterates them.
He does not tolerate an arisen thought of ill will … an arisen thought of harming … bad unwholesome states whenever they arise; he abandons them, dispels them, terminates them, and obliterates them.
He does not tolerate an arisen thought of ill will … an arisen thought of harming … bad unwholesome states whenever they arise; he abandons them, dispels them, terminates them, and obliterates them.
He does not try to prevent bhikkhus from acquiring gains; he does not try to bring harm to bhikkhus; he does not try to prevent bhikkhus from residing; he does not insult and revile bhikkhus; he does not divide bhikkhus from each other; he speaks praise of the Buddha; he speaks praise of the Dhamma; he speaks praise of the Saṅgha.
He does not try to prevent laypeople from acquiring gains; he does not try to bring harm to laypeople; he does not insult and revile laypeople; he does not divide laypeople from each other; he speaks praise of the Buddha;  he speaks praise of the Dhamma; he speaks praise of the Saṅgha; he fulfills a legitimate promise to laypeople.
He does not try to prevent laypeople from acquiring gains; he does not try to bring harm to laypeople; he does not insult and revile laypeople; he does not divide laypeople from each other; he speaks praise of the Buddha; he speaks praise of the Dhamma; he speaks praise of the Saṅgha; they see him at a resort.
He does not walk too far behind or too close; he takes your bowl when it is full; he restrains you when your speech is bordering on an offense; he does not keep on interrupting you while you are speaking; and he is wise, intelligent, astute.
He does not, on that account, misconceive himself as ‘an ascetic’ or as ‘a brahmin.’
He does not misconceive: ‘I am better’ or ‘I am equal’ or ‘I am worse.’
Rather, having directly known the truth in that, he is practicing simply for disenchantment with sensual pleasures, for their fading away and cessation.
He does not, on that account, misconceive himself as ‘an ascetic’ or as ‘a brahmin.’
He does not misconceive: ‘I am better’ or ‘I am equal’ or ‘I am worse.’
Rather, having directly known the truth in that, he is practicing simply for disenchantment with states of existence, for their fading away and cessation.
He does not, on that account, misconceive himself as ‘an ascetic’ or as ‘a brahmin.’
He does not misconceive: ‘I am better’ or ‘I am equal’ or ‘I am worse.’
Rather, having directly known the truth in that, he is practicing simply out of sympathy and compassion for living beings.
He does not, on that account, misconceive himself as ‘an ascetic’ or as ‘a brahmin.’
He does not misconceive: ‘I am better’ or ‘I am equal’ or ‘I am worse.’
Rather, having directly known the truth in that, he is practicing the path of nothingness.
He does what is beneficial.
He does what is hard to do.
He does what is hard to do.
He does what is harmful.
He draws many people away from a bad Dhamma and establishes them in the good Dhamma.
He draws many people away from the good Dhamma and establishes them in a bad Dhamma.
He dwells both openly and privately possessing in common with his fellow monks the view that is noble and emancipating, which leads one who acts upon it to the complete destruction of suffering.
He dwells both openly and privately possessing in common with his fellow monks virtuous behavior that is unbroken, flawless, unblemished, unblotched, freeing, praised by the wise, ungrasped, leading to concentration.
He dwells contemplating feelings in feelings … mind in mind … phenomena in phenomena, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed longing and dejection in regard to the world.
He dwells contemplating feelings in feelings … … mind in mind … … phenomena in phenomena, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed longing and dejection in regard to the world.
He dwells contemplating feelings in feelings … … mind in mind … … phenomena in phenomena, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed longing and dejection in regard to the world.
He dwells depending upon these five trainee powers: the power of faith … the power of wisdom.
He dwells depending upon these five trainee powers: the power of faith … the power of wisdom.
He dwells depending upon these five trainee powers: the power of faith … the power of wisdom.
He dwells depending upon these five trainee powers: the power of faith, the power of moral shame, the power of moral dread, the power of energy, and the power of wisdom.
He dwells depending upon these five trainee powers: the power of faith, the power of moral shame, the power of moral dread, the power of energy, and the power of wisdom.
He dwells depending upon these five trainee powers: the powers of faith … and wisdom.
He dwells depending upon these five trainee powers: the powers of faith … and wisdom.
He dwells depending upon these five trainee powers: the powers of faith … and wisdom.
He dwells happily in this very life, without distress, anguish, or fever, and in this very life he attains nibbāna.
He dwells happily in this very life, without distress, anguish, or fever, and in this very life he attains nibbāna.
He dwells having contacted that base with the body in whatever way, and he understands it with wisdom.
He dwells having contacted that base with the body in whatever way, and he understands it with wisdom.
He dwells having contacted that base with the body in whatever way, and he understands it with wisdom.
He dwells having contacted that base with the body in whatever way, and he understands it with wisdom.
He dwells having contacted that base with the body in whatever way.
He dwells having contacted that base with the body in whatever way.
He dwells having contacted that base with the body in whatever way.
He dwells having contacted that base with the body in whatever way.
He dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with compassion … with a mind imbued with altruistic joy … with a mind imbued with equanimity, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter.
He dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with compassion … with a mind imbued with altruistic joy … with a mind imbued with equanimity, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter.
He dwells pursuing the practice of bathing in water three times daily including the evening.
He dwells pursuing the practice of bathing in water three times daily including the evening.
He dwells with a mind obsessed and oppressed by ill will … by dullness and drowsiness … by restlessness and remorse … by doubt, and he does not understand as it really is the escape from arisen doubt.
He earns his living by all kinds of work.
He eats little and is intent on abstemiousness regarding food.
He eats once a day, abstaining from eating at night and outside the proper time.
He eats once a day, abstaining from eating at night and outside the proper time.
He either commits a pārājika and cuts off the outlet, or commits a certain defiled offense, or contracts a severe illness.
He encourages them in concordant bodily action, concordant verbal action, and concordant qualities.
He encourages them in discordant bodily action, discordant verbal action, and discordant qualities.
He encourages them in regard to virtuous behavior.
He engages in good conduct by body, speech, and mind.
He engages in good conduct by body, speech, and mind.
He engages in good conduct by body, speech, and mind.
He engages in good conduct by body, speech, and mind.
He engages in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
He engages in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
He engages in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
He engages in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
He entered and sat down at the foot of a tree to pass the day.
He enters upon a wrong course because of desire … he does not know which has been appointed and which has not been appointed….
He enters upon a wrong course because of desire … he does not know which has been assigned and which has not been assigned.
He enters upon a wrong course because of desire … he does not know which has been assigned and which has not been assigned.
He enters upon a wrong course because of desire … he does not know which has been assigned and which has not been assigned.
He enters upon a wrong course because of desire … he does not know which has been assigned and which has not been assigned.
He enters upon a wrong course because of desire … he does not know which have been supervised and which have not been supervised.
He enters upon a wrong course because of desire … he does not know which have been supervised and which have not been supervised.
He enters upon a wrong course because of desire … he does not know which have been supervised and which have not been supervised.
He enters upon a wrong course because of desire … he does not know which have been supervised and which have not been supervised.
He enters upon a wrong course because of desire … he does not know which have been supervised and which have not been supervised.
He enters upon a wrong course because of desire; he enters upon a wrong course because of hatred; he enters upon a wrong course because of delusion; he enters upon a wrong course because of fear; he does not know which has been assigned and which has not been assigned.
He enters upon the rains in a residence where there live elder bhikkhus who are highly learned, heirs to the heritage, experts on the Dhamma, experts on the discipline, experts on the outlines.
He enters upon the rains in a residence where there live elder bhikkhus who are learned, heirs to the heritage, experts on the Dhamma, experts on the discipline, experts on the outlines.
He exchanged greetings with the Blessed One, and when they had exchanged greetings and cordial talk, he sat down to one side and said:
He exchanged greetings with the Venerable Sāriputta, and when they had concluded their greetings and cordial talk, he sat down to one side and said to him:
He exchanged greetings with those wanderers and, when they had concluded their greetings and cordial talk, sat down to one side.
He exchanged greetings with those wanderers and, when they had concluded their greetings and cordial talk, sat down to one side.
He falls away from what he has achieved.
He falls away from what he has achieved.
He falls into offenses in regard to the lesser and minor training rules and rehabilitates himself.
He falls into offenses in regard to the lesser and minor training rules and rehabilitates himself.
He falls into offenses in regard to the lesser and minor training rules and rehabilitates himself.
He falls into offenses in regard to the lesser and minor training rules and rehabilitates himself.
He falls into offenses in regard to the lesser and minor training rules and rehabilitates himself.
He falls into offenses in regard to the lesser and minor training rules and rehabilitates himself.
He falls into offenses in regard to the lesser and minor training rules and rehabilitates himself.
He falls into offenses in regard to the lesser and minor training rules and rehabilitates himself.
He first undertakes the preparations to slay the bullocks in sacrifice … to slay the heifers in sacrifice … to slay the goats in sacrifice … to slay the rams in sacrifice.
He formulates a question carefully; he replies to a question carefully; when another person replies to a question carefully, with well-rounded and coherent words and phrases, he approves of it.
He formulates a question carelessly; he replies to a question carelessly; when another person replies to a question carefully, with well-rounded and coherent words and phrases, he does not approve of it.
He gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
He gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
He gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
He gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
He gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
He gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
He gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
He gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
He gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
He gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
He gains robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
He gains robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
He gave such a great alms offering as this: eighty-four thousand golden bowls filled with silver; eighty-four thousand silver bowls filled with gold; eighty-four thousand bronze bowls filled with bullion; eighty-four thousand elephants with golden ornaments, golden banners, covered with nets of gold thread; eighty-four thousand chariots with upholstery of lion skins, tiger skins, leopard skins, and saffron-dyed blankets, with golden ornaments, golden banners, covered with nets of gold thread; eighty-four thousand milk cows with jute tethers and bronze pails; eighty-four thousand maidens adorned with jeweled earrings; eighty-four thousand couches spread with rugs, blankets, and covers, with excellent coverings of antelope hide, with canopies and red bolsters at both ends; eighty-four thousand koṭis of cloths made of fine linen, fine silk, fine wool, and fine cotton.
He generates desire for the abandoning of arisen bad unwholesome qualities; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
He generates desire for the abandoning of arisen bad unwholesome states … for the arising of unarisen wholesome states … for the maintenance of arisen wholesome states, for their non-decline, increase, expansion, and fulfillment by development; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives….”
He generates desire for the abandoning of arisen bad unwholesome states … … for the arising of unarisen wholesome states … … for the maintenance of arisen wholesome states, for their non-decline, increase, expansion, and fulfillment by development; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
He generates desire for the abandoning of arisen bad unwholesome states; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
He generates desire for the arising of unarisen wholesome qualities; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
He generates desire for the arising of unarisen wholesome states; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
He generates desire for the maintenance of arisen wholesome qualities, for their non-decline, increase, expansion, and fulfillment by development; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
He generates desire for the persistence of arisen wholesome states, for their non-decline, increase, expansion, and fulfillment by development; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
He gives a gift out of faith; he gives a gift respectfully; he gives a timely gift; he gives a gift unreservedly; he gives a gift without injuring himself or others.
He gives an ascetic or a brahmin food and drink … and lighting.
He gives an ascetic or a brahmin food and drink … and lighting.
He gives an ascetic or a brahmin food and drink; clothing and a vehicle; garlands, scents, and unguents; bedding, dwellings, and lighting.
He gives an ascetic or a brahmin food and drink; clothing and a vehicle; garlands, scents, and unguents; bedding, dwellings, and lighting.
He gives casually; he gives without reverence; he does not give with his own hand; he gives what would be discarded; he gives without a view about the returns of giving.
He gives it to him and fulfills his expectations.
He gives it to him and surpasses his expectations.
He gives it to him but does not fulfill his expectations.
He gives life, beauty, happiness, and strength.
He gives respectfully; he gives with reverence; he gives with his own hand; he gives what would not be discarded; he gives with a view about the returns of giving.
He gives what is hard to give.
He gives what is pure and excellent,allowable drinks and food at the proper time;he gives gifts often to fertile fields of merit,to those who lead the spiritual life.
He grows in faith, virtuous behavior, learning, generosity, and wisdom.
He grows in fields and land; in wealth and grain; in wives and children; in slaves, workers, and servants; in livestock; – in faith, virtuous behavior, learning, generosity, and wisdom.
He had been telling an assembly in Rājagaha: “I have learned the Dhamma of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan son.
He had over a thousand sons who were heroes, vigorous, able to crush the armies of their enemies.
He has a strong desire for mindfulness and alertness and does not lose his fondness for mindfulness and alertness in the future.
He has a strong desire for mindfulness and alertness and does not lose his fondness for mindfulness and alertness in the future.
He has a strong desire for seclusion and does not lose his fondness for seclusion in the future.
He has a strong desire for seclusion and does not lose his fondness for seclusion in the future.
He has a strong desire to arouse energy and does not lose his fondness for arousing energy in the future.
He has a strong desire to arouse energy and does not lose his fondness for arousing energy in the future.
He has a strong desire to attend to the Dhamma and does not lose his fondness for attending to the Dhamma in the future.
He has a strong desire to attend to the Dhamma and does not lose his fondness for attending to the Dhamma in the future.
He has a strong desire to penetrate by view and does not lose his fondness for penetrating by view in the future.
He has a strong desire to penetrate by view and does not lose his fondness for penetrating by view in the future.
He has a strong desire to remove vain wishes and does not lose his fondness for removing vain wishes in the future.
He has a strong desire to remove vain wishes and does not lose his fondness for removing vain wishes in the future.
He has aroused energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities and acquiring wholesome qualities; he is strong, firm in exertion, not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
He has aroused energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities and acquiring wholesome qualities; he is strong, firm in exertion, not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
He has aroused energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities and acquiring wholesome qualities; he is strong, firm in exertion, not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
He has aroused energy thus: ‘Willingly, let only my skin, sinews, and bones remain, and let the flesh and blood dry up in my body, but I will not relax my energy so long as I have not attained what can be attained by manly strength, energy, and exertion.’
Possessing these eight qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts … an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.”
He has aroused energy … not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
He has attained the analytical knowledge of meaning, the analytical knowledge of the Dhamma, the analytical knowledge of language, the analytical knowledge of discernment, and he is skillful and diligent in attending to the diverse chores that are to be done for his fellow monks; he possesses sound judgment about them in order to carry out and arrange them properly.
He has cut off craving, stripped off the fetter, and by completely breaking through conceit, he has made an end of suffering.
He has departed from greed … beings here become pure in such a way.
He has departed from greed … some beings here are purified in such a way.
He has departed from greed … some beings here are purified in such a way.
He has departed from greed … some beings here are purified in such a way.
He has departed from greed … some beings here are purified in such a way.
He has departed from greed … some beings here become pure in such a way.
He has departed from greed … some beings here become pure in such a way.
He has departed from greed … … some beings here become pure in such a way.
He has departed from greed, freed himself from it, emerged from it.
He has departed from greed, freed himself from it, emerged from it.
He has departed from greed, freed himself from it, emerged from it.
He has departed from greed, freed himself from it, emerged from it.
He has developed a limited perception of earth and a measureless perception of water.
He has dispelled attraction and repulsion;they are gone and no longer present.Having known the dustless, sorrowless state,he understands rightly and has transcended existence.
He has faith in the enlightenment of the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
He has few desires.
He has followed those teachings by ear, recited them verbally, examined them with the mind, and penetrated them well by view.
He has followed those teachings by ear, recited them verbally, examined them with the mind, and penetrated them well by view.
He has followed those teachings by ear, recited them verbally, examined them with the mind, and penetrated them well by view.
He has followed those teachings by ear, recited them verbally, examined them with the mind, and penetrated them well by view.
He has heard: ‘The devas of Brahmā’s company are long-lived, beautiful, and abound in happiness.’
It occurs to him: ‘Oh, with the breakup of the body, after death, may I be reborn in companionship with the devas of Brahmā’s company!’ He sets his mind on this, fixes his mind on this, and develops this state of mind.
He has heard: ‘The devas the four great kings are long-lived, beautiful, and abound in happiness.’
It occurs to him: ‘Oh, with the breakup of the body, after death, may I be reborn in companionship with the devas the four great kings!’ He sets his mind on this, fixes his mind on this, and develops this state of mind.
He has heard: ‘The Tāvatiṃsa devas … the Yāma devas … the Tusita devas … the devas who delight in creation … the devas who control what is created by others are long-lived, beautiful, and abound in happiness.’
It occurs to him: ‘Oh, with the breakup of the body, after death, may I be reborn in companionship with the devas who control what is created by others!’ He sets his mind on this, fixes his mind on this, and develops this state of mind.
He has heard: ‘This is the cessation of suffering,’ and he sees the meaning of this, having pierced through it with wisdom.
He has heard: ‘This is the origin of suffering,’ and he sees the meaning of this, having pierced through it with wisdom.
He has heard: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering,’ and he sees the meaning of this, having pierced through it with wisdom.
He has learned much … and penetrated well by view.
He has learned much … and penetrated well by view.
He has learned much … and penetrated well by view.
He has learned much … and penetrated well by view.
He has learned much … and penetrated well by view.
He has learned much … and penetrated well by view.
He has learned much … … he has penetrated well by view.
He has learned much, remembers what he has learned, and accumulates what he has learned.
He has learned much, remembers what he has learned, and accumulates what he has learned.
He has learned much, remembers what he has learned, and accumulates what he has learned.
He has learned much, remembers what he has learned, and accumulates what he has learned.
He has learned much, remembers what he has learned, and accumulates what he has learned.
He has learned much, remembers what he has learned, and accumulates what he has learned.
He has learned much, remembers what he has learned, and accumulates what he has learned.
He has no shame or fear of wrong,his speech is not respectful;one overcome by angerhas no island at all.
He has not totally abandoned the underlying tendency to conceit; he has not totally abandoned the underlying tendency to lust for existence; he has not totally abandoned ignorance.
He has not totally abandoned the underlying tendency to conceit; he has not totally abandoned the underlying tendency to lust for existence; he has not totally abandoned ignorance.
He has not totally abandoned the underlying tendency to conceit; he has not totally abandoned the underlying tendency to lust for existence; he has not totally abandoned ignorance.
He has sexual relations with women who are protected by their mother, father, mother and father, brother, sister, or relatives; who are protected by their Dhamma; who have a husband; whose violation entails a penalty; or even with one already engaged.
He has sexual relations with women who are protected by their mother, father, mother and father, brother, sister, or relatives; who are protected by their Dhamma; who have a husband; whose violation entails a penalty; or even with one already engaged.
He has thought out five hundred arguments by which those of other sects, when rebutted, know: ‘We’ve been rebutted.’”
He has totally abandoned the underlying tendency to conceit; he has totally abandoned the underlying tendency to lust for existence; he has totally abandoned ignorance.
He heard the female lay follower Nandamātā chanting the Pārāyana and stood waiting until the end of her recitation.
He heard the Venerable Uttara at Mahisavatthu, in Dhavajālikā on Mount Saṅkheyya, teaching the Dhamma to the bhikkhus thus: ‘Friends, it is good for a bhikkhu from time to time to review his own failings … the failings of others … his own achievements … the achievements of others.’
Then, just as a strong man might extend his drawn-in arm or draw in his extended arm, Vessavaṇa disappeared from Mount Saṅkheyya and reappeared among the Tāvatiṃsa devas.
He hears: ‘Such and such a bhikkhu, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.’
It does not occur to him: ‘When will I, too, with the destruction of the taints, realize for myself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwell in it?’
For what reason?
He hears: ‘Such and such a bhikkhu, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.’
It does not occur to him: ‘When will I, too, with the destruction of the taints, realize for myself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwell in it?’
This is called the person without expectation.
He hears: ‘Such and such a bhikkhu, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.’
It occurs to him: ‘When will I, too, with the destruction of the taints, realize for myself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwell in it?’
This is called the person full of expectation.
He hears: ‘The khattiyas have anointed such and such a khattiya.’
It does not occur to him: ‘When will the khattiyas anoint me too?’
This is called the person without expectation.
He hears: ‘The khattiyas have anointed such and such a khattiya.’
It occurs to him: ‘When will the khattiyas anoint me too?’
This is called the person full of expectation.
He himself abstains from false speech but does not encourage others to abstain from false speech.
He himself abstains from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness, and encourages others to abstain from them.
He himself abstains from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness, but does not encourage others to abstain from them.
He himself abstains from sexual misconduct but does not encourage others to abstain from sexual misconduct.
He himself abstains from taking what is not given but does not encourage others to abstain from taking what is not given.
He himself abstains from taking what is not given … holds right view; he encourages others in right view; he approves of right view; and he speaks in praise of right view.
He himself abstains from the destruction of life; he encourages others to abstain from the destruction of life; he approves of abstaining from the destruction of life; and he speaks in praise of abstaining from the destruction of life.
He himself destroys life; he encourages others to destroy life; he approves of the destruction of life; and he speaks in praise of the destruction of life.
He himself in turn enjoys immeasurable freedom from fear, enmity, and affliction.
He himself in turn enjoys immeasurable freedom from fear, enmity, and affliction.
He himself reveres the Dhamma … reveres the Saṅgha … reveres the training … reveres concentration … is easy to correct … has good friends and speaks in praise of good friendship; he encourages other bhikkhus who do not have good friends to find good friends and, at the proper time, genuinely and truthfully, he speaks praise of those bhikkhus who have good friends.
He himself reveres the Dhamma … … reveres the Saṅgha … … reveres the training … … is easy to correct … … has good friends and speaks in praise of good friendship; he encourages other bhikkhus who do not have good friends to enter upon good friendship and, at the proper time, genuinely and truthfully, he speaks praise of those bhikkhus who have good friends.
He himself takes what is not given … … engages in sexual misconduct … speaks falsely … speaks divisively … speaks harshly … … indulges in idle chatter … is full of longing … bears ill will … holds wrong view; he encourages others in wrong view; he approves of wrong view; and he speaks in praise of wrong view.
He holds right view and has a correct perspective.
He holds right view; he has abandoned wrong view and remains secluded from it.
He holds wrong view and has a distorted perspective.
He inquires whether you are fit and healthy, agile and strong, and feeling at ease.
He inquires whether you are fit and healthy, agile and strong, and feeling at ease.’
Then say thus: ‘Bhante, King Ajātasattu wishes to wage war against the Vajjis.
He instigates work projects; he takes up disciplinary issues; he is hostile toward eminent bhikkhus; he is intent on lengthy and unsettled wandering; he is unable to instruct, encourage, inspire, and gladden one from time to time with a Dhamma talk.
He is a good speaker with a good delivery; he is gifted with speech that is polished, clear, articulate, expressive of the meaning.
He is a good speaker with a good delivery; he is gifted with speech that is polished, clear, articulate, expressive of the meaning.
He is a good speaker with a good delivery; he is gifted with speech that is polished, clear, articulate, expressive of the meaning.
He is a long-distance shooter, a sharp-shooter, and one who splits a great body.
He is a reciter and preserver of the hymns, a master of the three Vedas with their vocabularies, ritual, phonology, and etymology, and the histories as a fifth; skilled in philology and grammar, he is fully versed in natural philosophy and in the marks of a great man.
He is a schemer, a flatterer, a hinter, a belittler, and one who pursues gain with gain.
He is able from time to time to instruct, encourage, inspire, and gladden the patient with a Dhamma talk.
He is able to convince those on both sides of the issue, to describe matters to them, to persuade them, to demonstrate to them, and to placate them.
He is able to dissuade them, by way of the Dhamma, from erroneous views that have arisen.
He is able to eliminate one’s dissatisfaction or to get someone else to eliminate it.
He is able to encourage them in the higher mind.
He is able to encourage them in the higher virtuous behavior.
He is able to encourage them in the higher wisdom.
He is able to instruct, encourage, inspire, and gladden with a Dhamma talk those who approach him.
He is able to look after a patient or to get someone else to look after him.
He is able to prepare medicine.
He is able to use the Dhamma to dispel regrets that might arise.
He is attracted to fame and repelled by disrepute.
He is attracted to gain and repelled by loss.
He is attracted to pleasure and repelled by pain.
He is attracted to praise and repelled by blame.
He is called one who lives an impure celibate life, one who is fettered by the bond of sexuality.
He is called one who lives an impure celibate life, one who is fettered by the bond of sexuality.
He is capable of expounding the detailed meaning of this synopsis.
He is capable of expounding the detailed meaning of this synopsis.
He is content with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
He is content with any kind of robe; he is content with any kind of almsfood; he is content with any kind of lodging; he is content with any kind of medicines and provisions for the sick; and he dwells engrossed in thoughts of renunciation.
He is content with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
He is cooked there in a swirl of foam.
He is dear, respected, and esteemed,a speaker and one who endures speech;he gives deep talks and does not enjoin oneto do what is wrong.
He is destructive and impudent, ravenous and voracious, cruel and pitiless, weak and raucous, muddle-minded and acquisitive.
He is devoid of faith, immoral, lazy, and unwise.
He is devoid of faith, morally shameless, morally reckless, lazy, and unwise.
He is devoid of faith; he is immoral; he is superstitious and believes in auspicious signs, not in kamma; he seeks outside here for a person worthy of offerings; and he first does deeds there.
He is devoid of lust for form, devoid of desire, affection, thirst, passion, and craving for it….
He is devoid of lust; he is devoid of hatred; he is devoid of delusion; he is not denigrating; and he is not insolent.
He is disgusted at having to remove feces, urine, vomit, or spittle.
He is endowed with faith, has a sense of moral shame, has moral dread, and is energetic and wise.
He is endowed with faith, is virtuous, energetic, and wise.
He is endowed with faith.
He is endowed with faith; he is virtuous; he is not superstitious and believes in kamma, not in auspicious signs; he does not seek outside here for a person worthy of offerings; and he first does deeds here.
He is filled with lust toward that which provokes lust; he is filled with hatred toward that which provokes hatred; he is deluded by that which deludes; he is agitated by that which agitates; and he is intoxicated by that which intoxicates.
He is firm in the discipline, immovable.
He is freed from birth, from old age and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish; he is freed from suffering, I say.
He is freed from birth, from old age and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish; he is freed from suffering, I say.
He is graceful when going forward and returning, and also well restrained when sitting among the houses.
He is handsome, attractive, graceful, possessing supreme beauty of complexion.
He is handsome, attractive, graceful, possessing supreme beauty of complexion.
He is hard to attack, hard to defeat,deep, hard to assault;he is proficient in bothwhat is beneficial and harmful.
He is himself accomplished in concentration, and he answers questions posed during a discussion on accomplishment in concentration.
He is himself accomplished in concentration, and he answers questions that come up in a discussion on accomplishment in concentration.
He is himself accomplished in liberation, and he answers questions posed during a discussion on accomplishment in liberation.
He is himself accomplished in liberation, and he answers questions that come up in a discussion on accomplishment in liberation.
He is himself accomplished in the knowledge and vision of liberation, and he answers questions posed during a discussion on accomplishment in the knowledge and vision of liberation.
He is himself accomplished in the knowledge and vision of liberation, and he answers questions that come up in a discussion on accomplishment in the knowledge and vision of liberation.
He is himself accomplished in wisdom, and he answers questions posed during a discussion on accomplishment in wisdom.
He is himself accomplished in wisdom, and he answers questions that come up in a discussion on accomplishment in wisdom.
He is honest and open, one who reveals himself as he really is to the Teacher and his wise fellow monks.
He is incapable of intentionally depriving a living being of life; he is incapable of taking by way of theft what is not given; he is incapable of engaging in sexual intercourse; he is incapable of deliberately speaking falsehood; he is incapable of storing things up in order to enjoy sensual pleasures as he did in the past when a layman.’
Bhante, did I hear that correctly from the Blessed One, grasp it correctly, attend to it correctly, remember it correctly?”
He is incapable of intentionally depriving a living being of life; he is incapable of taking by way of theft what is not given; he is incapable of engaging in sexual intercourse; he is incapable of deliberately speaking falsehood; he is incapable of storing things up in order to enjoy sensual pleasures as he did in the past when a layman; he is incapable of entering upon a wrong course on account of desire; he is incapable of entering upon a wrong course on account of hatred; he is incapable of entering upon a wrong course on account of delusion; he is incapable of entering upon a wrong course on account of fear.’
In the past, Sajjha, and also now I say thus: ‘A bhikkhu who is an arahant—one whose taints are destroyed … one completely liberated through final knowledge—is incapable of transgression in these nine cases.’”
He is incapable of intentionally depriving a living being of life; he is incapable of taking by way of theft what is not given; he is incapable of engaging in sexual intercourse; he is incapable of deliberately speaking falsehood; he is incapable of storing things up in order to enjoy sensual pleasures as he did in the past when a layman; he is incapable of rejecting the Buddha; he is incapable of rejecting the Dhamma; he is incapable of rejecting the Saṅgha; he is incapable of rejecting the training.’
In the past, Sutavā, and also now I say thus: ‘A bhikkhu who is an arahant—one whose taints are destroyed … one completely liberated through final knowledge—is incapable of transgression in these nine cases.’”
He is intent upon non-affliction because he is devoid of lust through the destruction of lust; because he is devoid of hatred through the destruction of hatred; because he is devoid of delusion through the destruction of delusion.
He is intent upon renunciation because he is devoid of lust through the destruction of lust; because he is devoid of hatred through the destruction of hatred; because he is devoid of delusion through the destruction of delusion.
He is intent upon solitude because he is devoid of lust through the destruction of lust; because he is devoid of hatred through the destruction of hatred; because he is devoid of delusion through the destruction of delusion.
He is just like that mountain-dwelling cow that was foolish, incompetent, inexperienced, and unskilled in walking on rough mountains.
He is learned, generous, and wise.
He is learned, generous, and wise.
He is learned, generous, and wise.’
The Blessed One declared that you possess these seven astounding and amazing qualities.”
He is mild and pleasant to live with, and he does not agitate other bhikkhus.
He is mild and pleasant to live with, and he does not agitate other horses.
He is miserly and greedy with regard to dwellings.
He is miserly and greedy with regard to families.
He is miserly with regard to dwellings.
He is miserly with regard to dwellings.
He is miserly with regard to dwellings.
He is miserly with regard to families.
He is miserly with regard to families.
He is miserly with regard to families.
He is miserly with regard to gains.
He is miserly with regard to gains.
He is miserly with regard to gains.
He is miserly with regard to praise.
He is miserly with regard to praise.
He is miserly with regard to the Dhamma.
He is murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to living beings.
He is murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to living beings.
He is not a schemer, a flatterer, a hinter, a belittler, or one who pursues gain with gain.
He is not accomplished in manners and duties; he is not learned or an expert in learning; he is not given to effacement nor is he one who delights in seclusion; he is not a good speaker and he lacks a good delivery; he is unwise, stupid, and obtuse.
He is not an abolitionist who refrains from making definite declarations.”
He is not attached to existence; he is not attached to origination.
He is not attached to existence; he is not attached to origination.
He is not attached to existence; he is not attached to origination.
He is not attached to existence; he is not attached to origination.
He is not attracted to fame or repelled by disrepute.
He is not attracted to gain or repelled by loss.
He is not attracted to pleasure or repelled by pain.
He is not attracted to praise or repelled by blame.
He is not content with any kind of robe; he is not content with any kind of almsfood; he is not content with any kind of lodging; he is not content with any kind of medicines and provisions for the sick; and he dwells engrossed in thoughts of sensuality.
He is not devoid of lust for form, not devoid of desire, affection, thirst, passion, and craving for it ….
He is not devoid of lust for form, not devoid of desire, affection, thirst, passion, and craving for it….
He is not devoid of lust; he is not devoid of hatred; he is not devoid of delusion; he is denigrating; and he is insolent.
He is not disgusted at having to remove feces, urine, vomit, or spittle.
He is not freed from birth, from old age and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish; he is not freed from suffering, I say.
He is not freed from birth, from old age and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish; he is not freed from suffering, I say.
He is not freed from birth, from old age and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish; he is not freed from suffering, I say.
He is not freed from birth, from old age and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish; he is not freed from suffering, I say.
He is not miserly and greedy with regard to dwellings.
He is not miserly and greedy with regard to families.
He is not miserly with regard to dwellings.
He is not miserly with regard to dwellings.
He is not miserly with regard to families.
He is not miserly with regard to families.
He is not miserly with regard to families.
He is not miserly with regard to gains.
He is not miserly with regard to gains.
He is not miserly with regard to gains.
He is not miserly with regard to praise.
He is not miserly with regard to praise.
He is not miserly with regard to the Dhamma.
He is not tormented,: ‘I have engaged in bodily good conduct’; he is not tormented,: ‘I have avoided engaging in bodily misconduct’; he is not tormented,: ‘I have engaged in verbal good conduct’; he is not tormented,: ‘I have avoided engaging in verbal misconduct’; he is not tormented,: ‘I have engaged in mental good conduct’; he is not tormented,: ‘I have avoided engaging in mental misconduct.’
These, bhikkhus, are the two things that do not cause torment.”
He is of inferior disposition and he takes delight in personal existence.
He is of superior disposition and he takes delight in nibbāna.
He is one who abstains from the destruction of life, from taking what is not given, from sexual activity, from false speech, and from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
He is one who destroys life, takes what is not given, does not observe celibacy, speaks falsely, and indulges in liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
He is one who gains at will … the four jhānas….
He is one who gains at will … the four jhānas….
He is one who gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
He is one who is firm in the discipline, immovable.
He is one who squats continuously, devoted to maintaining the squatting position.
He is one who squats continuously, devoted to maintaining the squatting position.
He is one who stands continuously, rejecting seats.
He is one who stands continuously, rejecting seats.
He is one who takes up the training, determined: ‘Whether or not other bhikkhus train, I will train.’
When moving, he moves only along a straight path.
He is one who uses a mattress of thorns; he makes a mattress of thorns his bed.
He is one who uses a mattress of thorns; he makes a mattress of thorns his bed.
He is one whose mind is well established in the four establishments of mindfulness.
He is one whose taints are destroyed; he has abandoned the taints and remains secluded from them.
He is pleasing and agreeable to his parents.
He is pleasing and agreeable to his parents.
He is pleasing and agreeable to the armed forces.
He is pleasing and agreeable to the people of the towns and countryside.
He is pleasing and agreeable; he is respected and esteemed; he is a speaker; he patiently endures being spoken to; he gives deep talks; and he does not enjoin one to do what is wrong.”
He is powerful, possessing an army of four divisions that is obedient and compliant to his commands.
He is practicing for disenchantment with sensual pleasures, dispassion toward them, and for their cessation.
He is practicing for disenchantment with states of existence, for dispassion toward them, and for their cessation.
He is practicing for the destruction of craving.
He is practicing for the destruction of greed.
He is repelled by bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct; he is repelled by the acquisition of the numerous kinds of bad unwholesome qualities.
He is repelled by sitting down or lying down near feces or urine.
He is rich, with great wealth and property, with full treasuries and storerooms.
He is seldom drowsy and is intent on vigilance.
He is seldom ill.
He is seldom ill.
He is skilled in the origination and settlement of disciplinary issues.
He is skilled in the origination and settlement of disciplinary issues.
He is skillful and diligent in attending to the diverse chores of a householder; he possesses sound judgment about them in order to carry out and arrange them properly.
He is stirred by this and acquires a sense of urgency.
He is stirred by this and acquires a sense of urgency.
He is stirred by this and acquires a sense of urgency.
He is strong, and he shows his strength right up until the end of his life.
He is the Blessed One, the Buddha,he is the lion unsurpassed;in this world with its devas,he set in motion the wheel of Brahmā.
He is the Buddha, his taints destroyed,untroubled, all doubts cut off;having reached the destruction of all kamma,he is liberated in the extinction of acquisitions.
He is the son of a male lay follower endowed with faith, and he has gone forth from the household life into homelessness out of faith.”
He is the vanquisher of all,the wise one who has untied all knots.He has reached the supreme peace,nibbāna, inaccessible to fear.
He is tormented,: ‘I have engaged in bodily misconduct’; he is tormented,: ‘I have failed to engage in bodily good conduct’; he is tormented,: ‘I have engaged in verbal misconduct’; he is tormented,: ‘I have failed to engage in verbal good conduct’; he is tormented,: ‘I have engaged in mental misconduct’; he is tormented,: ‘I have failed to engage in mental good conduct.’
These, bhikkhus, are the two things that cause torment.”
He is trained and proficient in the arts of head-anointed khattiya kings, whether elephant riding, horsemanship, driving a chariot, archery, or swordsmanship.
He is truly wise, sir!’
He is truly wise, sir!’
He is truly wise, sir!’
He is truly wise, sir!’
He is truly wise, sir!’] 
He is unable from time to time to instruct, encourage, inspire, and gladden the patient with a Dhamma talk.
He is unable to prepare medicine.
He is unlimited and has a lofty character, and he dwells without measure.
He is unlimited and has a lofty character, and he dwells without measure.
He is virtuous and has a sense of moral shame and moral dread.
He is virtuous, and has a sense of moral shame and moral dread.
He is virtuous, and has a sense of moral shame and moral dread.
He is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha … he trains in them.
He is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha … … he trains in them.
He is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
He is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
He is virtuous….
He is well known and famous and has a retinue of many people, including householders and monastics.
He is well known and famous and has a retinue of many people, including householders and monastics.
He is wise, competent, and intelligent, able to consider benefits pertaining to the past, future, and present.
He is wise; he possesses the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
He is wise; he possesses the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
He is wise; he possesses the wisdom … leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
He keeps to one house, to one morsel of food; he keeps to two houses, to two morsels … he keeps to seven houses, to seven morsels.
He kills a woman.
He knows the cessation of a disciplinary issue.
He knows the origin of a disciplinary issue.
He knows the way leading to the cessation of a disciplinary issue.
He knows what a disciplinary issue is.
He knows what is a grave offense.
He knows what is a grave offense.
He knows what is a grave offense.
He knows what is a grave offense.
He knows what is a light offense.
He knows what is a light offense.
He knows what is a light offense.
He knows what is a light offense.
He knows what is beneficial and harmful, so that he withholds what is harmful and offers what is beneficial.
He knows what is not an offense.
He knows what is not an offense.
He knows what is not an offense.
He knows what is not an offense.
He left the highway, entered the sal-tree grove, and smiled when he reached a certain place.
He left the highway, sat down on a seat that was prepared for him at the foot of a tree, and addressed the bhikkhus: “Bhikkhus, do you see that fish dealer killing fish and selling them?”
He left the highway, sat down on the seat prepared for him at the foot of a tree, and addressed the bhikkhus: “Bhikkhus, do you see that great mass of fire burning, blazing, and glowing?”
He lives on one saucer a day, on two saucers a day … on seven saucers a day.
He lives on one saucer a day, on two saucers a day … on seven saucers a day.
He lives the spiritual life aspiring for a certain order of devas,: ‘By this virtuous behavior, observance, austerity, or spiritual life I will be a deva or one of the devas.’
When he lives the spiritual life aspiring for a certain order of devas … his mind does not incline to ardor, effort, perseverance, and striving.
He lives the spiritual life of virginal celibacy for forty-eight years, studying the hymns.
He lives the spiritual life of virginal celibacy for forty-eight years, studying the hymns.
He lives the spiritual life of virginal celibacy for forty-eight years, studying the hymns.
He lives the spiritual life of virginal celibacy for forty-eight years, studying the hymns.
He lives the spiritual life of virginal celibacy for forty-eight years….
He longs for the wealth and property of others thus: ‘Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!’
He longs for the wealth and property of others thus: ‘Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!’
He longs for the wealth and property of others thus: ‘Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!’
He loves the Dhamma and is pleasing in his assertions, filled with a lofty joy pertaining to the Dhamma and discipline.
He maintains mental acts of loving-kindness toward his fellow monks, both openly and privately.
He maintains verbal acts of loving-kindness toward his fellow monks, both openly and privately.
He makes others repeat the Dhamma in detail as they have heard it and learned it.
He makes others repeat the Dhamma in detail as they have heard it and learned it.
He makes the rapture and happiness born of concentration drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body that is not pervaded by the rapture and happiness born of concentration.
He makes the rapture and happiness born of seclusion drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body that is not pervaded by the rapture and happiness born of seclusion.
He makes this earth shake, shudder, and tremble.
He meets with calamity, meets with disaster, meets with calamity and disaster.
He meets with calamity, meets with disaster, meets with calamity and disaster.
He meets with calamity, meets with disaster, meets with calamity and disaster.
He might not know how many living beings enter or leave the city, but he could be sure that whatever large living beings enter or leave the city all enter and leave through that gate.
He might think: ‘Let me enter this lake and playfully wash my ears and back.
He observes moderation in what is beneficial.
He obtains food … and lighting.
He obtains food … and lighting.
He obtains food … and lighting.
He obtains food, drink, clothing, and vehicles; garlands, scents, and unguents; bedding, housing, and lighting.
He obtains food, drink, clothing, and vehicles; garlands, scents, and unguents; bedding, housing, and lighting.
He often gets to see women.
He overestimates his good qualities, or leads the spiritual life dissatisfied, or commits a certain defiled offense, or contracts a severe illness, or goes mad and becomes mentally deranged.
He overestimates his good qualities, or leads the spiritual life dissatisfied, or commits a defiled offense, or gives up the training and reverts to the lower life, or contracts a severe illness, or goes mad and becomes mentally deranged.
He paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down to one side.
He paid homage to the Blessed One, sat down to one side, and reported to the Blessed One his entire conversation with those wanderers of other sects.
He paid homage to the Blessed One, sat down to one side, and reported to the Blessed One his entire conversation with those wanderers.
He paid homage to the Blessed One, sat down to one side, and said to him: “Here, Bhante, I had gone off to pass the day and was in seclusion …  … Then those deities, ‘Master Anuruddha is not enjoying,’ disappeared right on the spot.
He paid homage to the Blessed One, sat down to one side, and said:
He paid homage to the Blessed One, sat down to one side, and told the Blessed One what his pupil had said.
He paid homage to the Blessed One, sat down to one side, and told the Blessed One what his pupil had said.
He paid homage to the Blessed One, stood to one side, and said:
He paid homage to the Venerable Ānanda, sat down to one side, and said to him:
He passes away muddled in mind and is reborn into a certain group of devas.
He passes away muddled in mind and is reborn into a certain group of devas.
He passes away muddled in mind and is reborn into a certain group of devas.
He passes away muddled in mind and is reborn into a certain group of devas.
He passes the day communicating the Dhamma but neglects seclusion and does not devote himself to internal serenity of mind.
He passes the day in learning the Dhamma but neglects seclusion and does not devote himself to internal serenity of mind.
He passes the day in recitation but neglects seclusion and does not devote himself to internal serenity of mind.
He passes the day in thinking about the Dhamma but neglects seclusion and does not devote himself to internal serenity of mind.
He patiently endures forms, patiently endures sounds, patiently endures odors, patiently endures tastes, and patiently endures tactile objects.
He patiently endures what is hard to endure.
He patiently endures what is hard to endure.
He places faith in the enlightenment of the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant … teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
This is called accomplishment in faith.
He places faith in the enlightenment of the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant … teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
This is called accomplishment in faith.
He places faith in the enlightenment of the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant … the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
This is called the wealth of faith.
He places faith in the enlightenment of the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened … teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
He is seldom ill or afflicted, possessing an even digestion that is neither too cool nor too hot but moderate and suitable for striving.
He places faith in the enlightenment of the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened … … the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
This is called the power of faith.
He places faith in the enlightenment of the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
He places faith in the enlightenment of the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
This is called the power of faith.
He places faith in the enlightenment of the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
This is called the power of faith.
He places faith in the enlightenment of the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
This is called the wealth of faith.
He places faith in the enlightenment of the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
With faith as his pillar, the noble disciple abandons the unwholesome and develops the wholesome, abandons what is blameworthy and develops what is blameless, and maintains himself in purity.
He ponders, examines, and mentally inspects the Dhamma as he has heard it and learned it.
He ponders, examines, and mentally inspects the Dhamma as he has heard it and learned it.
He possesses supreme exquisiteness of feeling … … supreme exquisiteness of perception … … supreme exquisiteness of volitional activities.
He possesses the right intention … the right speech … the right action … the right livelihood … the right effort … the right mindfulness … the right concentration … the right knowledge … the right liberation of one beyond training.
He possesses this fifth good quality.
He possesses this first good quality.
He possesses this fourth good quality.
He possesses this second good quality.
He possesses this seventh good quality.
He possesses this sixth good quality.
He possesses this third good quality.
He presented a pair of cloths to each bhikkhu and a set of three robes to the Venerable Ānanda.
He preserves your secrets.
He presumes intimacy upon mere acquaintance; he distributes things that he does not own; he consorts with those who are divided; he whispers in the ear; and he makes excessive requests.
He pursues that object, develops and cultivates it, and focuses on it well.
He pursues that object, develops and cultivates it, and focuses on it well.
He pursues that object, develops and cultivates it, and focuses on it well.
He pursues that object, develops and cultivates it, and focuses on it well.
He pursues that object, develops and cultivates it, and focuses on it well.
He pursues that object, develops and cultivates it, and focuses on it well.
He pursues that object, develops and cultivates it, and focuses on it well.
He pursues that object, develops and cultivates it, and focuses on it well.
He pursues this path, develops it, and cultivates it.
He pursues this path, develops it, and cultivates it.
He pursues this path, develops it, and cultivates it.
He pursues this path, develops it, and cultivates it.
He pursues this path, develops it, and cultivates it.
He pursues this path, develops it, and cultivates it.
He pursues this path, develops it, and cultivates it.
He pursues this path, develops it, and cultivates it.
He pursues this path, develops it, and cultivates it.
He rapes a young girl.
He recites the Dhamma in detail as he has heard it and learned it.
He recites the Dhamma in detail as he has heard it and learned it.
He recollects his manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births … … he recollects his manifold past abodes with their aspects and details.
He recollects his manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many eons of world-dissolution, many eons of world-evolution, many eons of world-dissolution and world-evolution, thus: ‘There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn elsewhere, and there too I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn here.’
Thus he recollects his manifold past abodes with their aspects and details.
He reflects thus: ‘Today the cows grazed in such and such a place and drank water in such and such a place.
He regards feeling as self … … perception as self … volitional activities as self … consciousness as self, or self as possessing consciousness, or consciousness as in self, or self as in consciousness.
He reigned after he had conquered this earth as far as its ocean boundaries, not by force and weapons but by the Dhamma.
He relishes it, desires it, and finds satisfaction in it.
He relishes it, desires it, and finds satisfaction in it.
He relishes it, desires it, and finds satisfaction in it.
He relishes it, desires it, and finds satisfaction in it.
He relishes it, desires it, and finds satisfaction in it.
He relishes it, desires it, and finds satisfaction in it.
He relishes it, desires it, and finds satisfaction in it.
He relishes it, desires it, and finds satisfaction in it.
He relishes it, desires it, and finds satisfaction in it.
He relishes it, desires it, and finds satisfaction in it.
He relishes it, desires it, and finds satisfaction in it.
He relishes it, desires it, and finds satisfaction in it.
He relishes this, desires it, and finds satisfaction in it.
He repairs what is broken and split.
He respectfully eats whatever food they give him, whether coarse or excellent, without being annoyed.
He respectfully eats whatever food they give him, whether moist or dry, without scattering it.
He reveals his secrets to you.
He reveals his tricks, ploys, gambits, and wiles as they really are to his trainer so that his trainer can make an effort to stamp them out of him.
He reveals his tricks, ploys, gambits, and wiles as they really are to the Teacher or to his wise fellow monks so that they can make an effort to stamp them out of him.
He reviews the extent to which his mind is liberated.
He reviews the extent to which his mind is liberated.
He reviews the extent to which his mind is liberated.
He robs a monk.
He robs the royal treasury.
He rouses himself, strives, and makes an effort to acquire gain.
He rouses himself, strives, and makes an effort to acquire gain.
He rouses himself, strives, and makes an effort to acquire gain.
He rouses himself, strives, and makes an effort to acquire gain.
He said thus: “As powerful and mighty as these Vajjis are, I will annihilate them, destroy them, bring calamity and disaster upon them.”
He sat down in the appointed seat and said to the Venerable Upavāṇa:
He sat down in the seat that was prepared.
He sat down on a seat that was prepared and said to those wanderers: “Wanderers, there are these four Dhamma factors that are primal, of long standing, traditional, ancient, unadulterated and never before adulterated, which are not being adulterated and will not be adulterated, which are not repudiated by wise ascetics and brahmins.
He sat down on the appointed seat and addressed the bhikkhus: “Bhikkhus, who has been instructing, exhorting, inspiring, and gladdening the bhikkhus in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk, with speech that is polished, clear, articulate, expressive of the meaning, comprehensive, and unhindered?”
He sat down on the appointed seat and said to the Venerable Mahāmoggallāna: “What, Moggallāna, was the discussion that you were engaged in just now?
He saw the Venerable Ānanda from a distance and said to him:
He says thus: ‘As powerful and mighty as these Vajjis are, I will annihilate them, destroy them, bring calamity and disaster upon them.’”
He says thus: ‘Come, this is the path, this is the way.
He says thus: ‘Whenever a man or a woman has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha, and abstains from the destruction of life, from taking what is not given, from sexual misconduct, from false speech, and from indulging in liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn only in a good destination, not in a bad destination.’
I ask the Blessed One: ‘What kind of teacher, Bhante, should one have confidence in, so that, with the breakup of the body, after death, one is reborn only in a good destination, not in a bad destination?
He says thus: “As powerful and mighty as these Vajjis are, I will annihilate them, destroy them, bring calamity and disaster upon them.”’ Learn well how the Blessed One answers you and report it to me, for Tathāgatas do not speak falsely.”
He says: ‘Let so many bulls be slaughtered for sacrifice, let so many bullocks be slaughtered for sacrifice, let so many heifers be slaughtered for sacrifice, let so many goats be slaughtered for sacrifice, let so many sheep be slaughtered for sacrifice, let so many trees be felled for the sacrificial posts, let so much grass be cut for the sacrificial grass.’
And then his slaves, messengers, and servants make preparations, weeping with tearful faces, being spurred on by threats of punishment and by fear.
He sees a householder or a householder’s son there enjoying himself, furnished and endowed with the five objects of sensual pleasure.
He sees a transgression as a transgression.
He sees affluent khattiyas, affluent brahmins, or affluent householders enjoying themselves furnished and endowed with the five objects of sensual pleasure.
He sees with correct wisdom: ‘There is a higher state that is peaceful,’ and he has totally realized that state.
He sees with correct wisdom: ‘There is a higher state that is peaceful,’ yet he has not totally realized that state.
He sees with correct wisdom: ‘There is a higher state that is peaceful,’ yet he has not totally realized that state.
He sees with correct wisdom: ‘There is a higher state that is peaceful,’ yet he has not totally realized that state.
He settles them in the vision of the Dhamma.
He should carefully examine the Dhammaand deeply see the meaning with wisdom.Like the extinguishing of a lampis the emancipation of the mind.
He should fulfill that factor,: ‘How can I be endowed with faith and also be virtuous?’
But when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith and is also virtuous, then he is complete with respect to that factor.
He should fulfill that factor,: ‘How can I be endowed with faith and also be virtuous?’
But when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith and is also virtuous, then he is complete with respect to that factor.
He should fulfill that factor,: ‘How can I be endowed with faith and also be virtuous?’
But when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith and is also virtuous, then he is complete with respect to that factor.
He should fulfill that factor,: ‘How can I be endowed with faith and also be virtuous?’
But when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith and is also virtuous, then he is complete with respect to that factor.
He should fulfill that factor,: ‘How can I be endowed with faith and virtuous, and also gain internal serenity of mind?’
But when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith and is virtuous, and also gains internal serenity of mind, then he is complete with respect to that factor.
He should fulfill that factor,: ‘How can I be endowed with faith and virtuous, gain internal serenity of mind, and also gain the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena?’
He should fulfill that factor,: ‘How can I be endowed with faith … and also be one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it?’
He should fulfill that factor,: ‘How can I be endowed with faith … and also be one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it?”
He should fulfill that factor,: ‘How can I be endowed with faith … and also be one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it’?
He should fulfill that factor,: ‘How can I be endowed with faith … … and also be one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it?’
He should fulfill that factor,: ‘How can I be endowed with faith … … and also be one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it?’
He should fulfill that factor,: ‘How can I be endowed with faith, virtuous, and also learned?’
But when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith, virtuous, and also learned, then he is complete with respect to that factor.
He should fulfill that factor,: ‘How can I be endowed with faith, virtuous, and also learned?’
But when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith, virtuous, and also learned, then he is complete with respect to that factor.
He should honor, respect, and dwell in dependence on the Dhamma … the Saṅgha … the training … concentration … heedfulness … hospitality so that he might abandon the unwholesome and develop the wholesome.”
He should honor, respect, and dwell in dependence on the Dhamma … … the Saṅgha … … the training … … concentration … … heedfulness … … hospitality so that he might abandon the unwholesome and develop the wholesome.”
He should not give full ordination; he should not give dependence; he should not have a novice attend upon him; he should not accept an agreement to serve as an exhorter of bhikkhunīs; even if he is agreed upon, he should not exhort bhikkhunīs; he should not accept any agreement in the Saṅgha; he should not be placed in any chief position; he should not give rehabilitation with that root.
He should not train in faultfindingnor seize on the other’s mistakes;he should not overwhelm and crush his opponent,nor speak mendacious words.Truly, a discussion among the goodis for the sake of knowledge and confidence.
He should overcome loss … fame … disrepute … honor … lack of honor … evil desires … bad friendship whenever it arises.
He should speak and illustrate the Dhamma;he should lift high the seers’ banner.Well-spoken words are the seers’ banner:for the Dhamma is the banner of seers.
He shows recalcitranceas a fire does a smoky crest.When his anger spreads outward,people become angry on his account.
He sits down in the seat that has been prepared and that householder or householder’s son, with his own hand, serves and satisfies him with various kinds of delicious food.
He sits down in the seat that has been prepared and that householder or householder’s son, with his own hand, serves and satisfies him with various kinds of delicious food.
He sits pervading this body with a pure bright mind, so that there is no part of his whole body that is not pervaded by the pure bright mind.
He sleeps badly; he awakens miserably; he has bad dreams; the deities do not protect him; and semen is emitted.
He sleeps well; he awakens happily; he does not have bad dreams; deities protect him; and semen is not emitted.
He speaks at a proper time, speaks truth, speaks what is beneficial, speaks on the Dhamma and the discipline; at a proper time he speaks such words as are worth recording, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.
He speaks at a proper time, speaks truth, speaks what is beneficial, speaks on the Dhamma and the discipline; at a proper time he speaks such words as are worth recording, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.
He speaks at a proper time, speaks truth, speaks what is beneficial, speaks on the Dhamma and the discipline; at a proper time he speaks such words as are worth recording, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.
He speaks at an improper time, speaks falsely, speaks what is unbeneficial, speaks contrary to the Dhamma and the discipline; at an improper time he speaks such words as are worthless, unreasonable, rambling, and unbeneficial.
He speaks at an improper time, speaks falsely, speaks what is unbeneficial, speaks contrary to the Dhamma and the discipline; at an improper time he speaks such words as are worthless, unreasonable, rambling, and unbeneficial.
He speaks at an improper time, speaks falsely, speaks what is unbeneficial, speaks contrary to the Dhamma and the discipline; at an improper time he speaks such words as are worthless, unreasonable, rambling, and unbeneficial.
He speaks falsely; he speaks divisively; he speaks harshly; he speaks idle chatter; with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
He speaks such words as are gentle, pleasing to the ear, and lovable, as go to the heart, are courteous, desired by many, and agreeable to many.
He speaks such words as are gentle, pleasing to the ear, and lovable, as go to the heart, are courteous, desired by many, and agreeable to many.
He speaks such words as are gentle, pleasing to the ear, and lovable, as go to the heart, are courteous, desired by many, and agreeable to many.
He speaks such words as are gentle, pleasing to the ear, and lovable, as go to the heart, are courteous, desired by many, and agreeable to many.
He speaks to people just like an ascetic, with a calm voice,but secretly he does evil deeds,holds pernicious views, and lacks respect.
He squanders what has been given out of faith.
He squanders what has been given out of faith.
He squanders what has been given out of faith.
He steals the wealth and property of others in the village or forest.
He steals the wealth and property of others in the village or forest.
He steals without leaving anything behind.
He stood outside the door waiting for the talk to end.
He stops at the boundary of the ancient brahmins but does not violate it.
He stops seeing bhikkhus; he neglects listening to the good Dhamma; he does not train in the higher virtuous behavior; he is full of suspicion toward bhikkhus, whether they be elders, newly ordained, or of middle standing; he listens to the Dhamma with a mind bent on criticism, seeking to find faults with it; he seeks a person worthy of offerings among outsiders; he first does deeds there.
He strives and exerts himself in the battle, but his foes slay him and finish him off.
He strives and exerts himself in the battle, but his foes wound him.
He strives and exerts himself in the battle, but his foes wound him.
He strives and exerts himself in the battle, but his foes wound him.
He subsists on forest roots and fruits; he feeds on fallen fruits.
He subsists on forest roots and fruits; he feeds on fallen fruits.
He sustains himself and subsists there on the food of afflicted spirits, or else he sustains himself there on what his friends, companions, relatives, or family members in this world offer to him.
He sustains himself and subsists there on the food of animals.
He sustains himself and subsists there on the food of devas.
He sustains himself and subsists there on the food of human beings.
He sustains himself and subsists there on the food of the hell-beings.
He takes a wrong course because of desire, because of hatred, because of delusion, or because of fear.
He takes care of the patient for the sake of material rewards, not with a mind of loving-kindness.
He takes care of the patient with a mind of loving-kindness, not for the sake of material rewards.
He takes food once a day, once every two days … once every seven days; thus even up to once every fortnight, he dwells pursuing the practice of taking food at stated intervals.
He takes food once a day, once every two days … once every seven days; thus even up to once every fortnight, he dwells pursuing the practice of taking food at stated intervals.
He takes his medicine.
He takes what is not given … He engages in sexual misconduct … He speaks falsehood … He speaks divisively … He speaks harshly … He indulges in idle chatter … He is full of longing … He has a mind of ill will and intentions of hate … He holds wrong view and has an incorrect perspective thus: ‘There is nothing given … there are in the world no ascetics and brahmins of right conduct and right practice who, having realized this world and the other world for themselves by direct knowledge, make them known to others.’
One possessing these ten qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
He taught a Dhamma to his disciples for companionship with the brahmā world.
He teaches a Dhamma that is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing; he reveals a spiritual life that is perfectly complete and pure.’
Now it is good to see such arahants.”
He teaches a Dhamma that is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing; he reveals a spiritual life that is perfectly complete and pure.’
Now it is good to see such arahants.”
He teaches a Dhamma that is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing; he reveals a spiritual life that is perfectly complete and pure.’
Now it is good to see such arahants.”
He teaches the Dhamma that is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing; he reveals the perfectly complete and pure spiritual life.
He teaches the Dhamma that is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing; he reveals the perfectly complete and pure spiritual life.
He teaches the Dhamma that is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing; he reveals the perfectly complete and pure spiritual life.
He teaches the Dhamma to others in detail as he has heard it and learned it.
He teaches the Dhamma to others in detail as he has heard it and learned it.
He tells you his secrets,yet he preserves your secrets.He does not forsake you in difficulties,nor does he roughly despise you.
He then acquires faith in the Tathāgata and considers thus: ‘Household life is crowded and dusty; life gone forth is wide open.
He then acquires faith in the Tathāgata and considers thus: ‘Household life is crowded and dusty; life gone forth is wide open.
He then approached the Blessed One and said to him:
He then approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said to the Blessed One:
He then approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and uttered this inspired utterance: “They will be Vajjis!
He then approached the Venerable Ānanda, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and delivered his message.
He then despises the other because they have lived together.
He then dwelled near Paṅkadhā.
He then eats grass without the tops broken off; they do not eat his bent and twisted bundle of branches; he drinks clear water; and when he has come out from the pool, the female elephants do not go by brushing against his body.
He then entered Kapilavatthu and searched the entire city but did not see a suitable rest house where the Blessed One could stay for the night.
He then just lay on banana leaves like a fish that had swallowed poison.
He then paid homage to me, and keeping me on his right, he disappeared right there.
He then paid homage to the Blessed One, circumambulated him keeping the right side toward him, and disappeared right there.
He then paid homage to the Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, circumambulated him keeping the right side toward him, and disappeared right there.
He then said to the Blessed One:
He then sat down in the prepared seat and addressed the bhikkhus:
He then sat down on the seat prepared for him and addressed the bhikkhus: “I will teach you, bhikkhus, the eight thoughts of a great person.
He then saw that person sitting in the midst of the Saṅgha of bhikkhus: one who was immoral, of bad character, impure, of suspect behavior, secretive in his actions, not an ascetic though claiming to be one, not a celibate though claiming to be one, inwardly rotten, corrupt, depraved.
He then says: ‘You lied to me, friend, you spoke falsely when you told me to dig here.’
The other says: ‘I didn’t lie to you, friend, I didn’t speak falsely.
He then says: ‘You lied to me, friend, you spoke falsely when you told me to dig there.’
The other says: ‘I didn’t lie to you, friend, I didn’t speak falsely.
He then seeks a teacher’s fee for his teacher both in accordance with the Dhamma and contrary to the Dhamma—by agriculture, by trade, by raising cattle, by archery, by service to the king, by a particular craft, and not only by wandering for alms without scorning the alms bowl.
He then seeks a teacher’s fee for his teacher solely in accordance with the Dhamma, not contrary to the Dhamma.
He then seeks a teacher’s fee for his teacher solely in accordance with the Dhamma, not contrary to the Dhamma.
He then seeks a teacher’s fee for his teacher solely in accordance with the Dhamma, not contrary to the Dhamma.
He then went to King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha and reported to the king his entire conversation with the Blessed One.
He then went to the meeting hall, sat down in the seat prepared for him, and addressed those bhikkhus:
He thereby reaches right liberation.
He thinks sensual thoughts in relation to it; he thinks thoughts of ill will; he thinks thoughts of harming.
He thinks thoughts of renunciation in relation to it; he thinks thoughts of good will; he thinks thoughts of non-harming.
He thinks whatever he wants to think and does not think what he does not want to think; he intends whatever he wants to intend and does not intend what he does not want to intend; thus he has attained to mental mastery over the ways of thought.
He thinks whatever he wants to think and does not think what he does not want to think; he intends whatever he wants to intend and does not intend what he does not want to intend; thus he has attained to mental mastery over the ways of thought.
He thinks: ‘If anyone accuses me of anything, these kings or royal ministers will dismiss the case.’
If anyone accuses him of anything, those kings or royal ministers dismiss the case.
He thinks: ‘If anyone accuses me of anything, these kings or royal ministers will dismiss the case.’
If anyone accuses him of anything, those kings or royal ministers dismiss the case.
He thinks: ‘If anyone accuses me of anything, these kings or royal ministers will dismiss the case.’
If anyone accuses him of anything, those kings or royal ministers dismiss the case.
He thinks: ‘If anyone should accuse me of anything, I’ll placate him with a bribe.’
If anyone accuses him of anything, he placates him with a bribe.
He thinks: ‘If anyone should accuse me of anything, I’ll placate him with one of these gains.’
If anyone accuses him of anything, he placates him with one of his gains.
He thinks: ‘If anyone should accuse me of anything, these kings or royal ministers will dismiss the case.’
If anyone accuses him of anything, those kings or royal ministers dismiss the case.
He thinks: ‘Let me return to the monastery and inform the bhikkhus: “Friends, I am obsessed by lust, oppressed by lust.
He thinks: ‘Let me return to the monastery and inform the bhikkhus: “Friends, I am obsessed by lust, oppressed by lust.
He thinks: ‘Let me return to the monastery and inform the bhikkhus: “Friends, I am obsessed by lust, oppressed by lust.
He told the king: “Sire, the Venerable Nārada has given his consent.
He tolerates an arisen thought of ill will … an arisen thought of harming … bad unwholesome states whenever they arise; he does not abandon them, dispel them, terminate them, and obliterate them.
He trains in the higher virtuous behavior; he trains in the higher mind; he trains in the higher wisdom.
He trains, bhikkhu, therefore he is called a trainee.”
He tries to prevent laypeople from acquiring gains; he tries to bring harm to laypeople; he insults and reviles laypeople; he divides laypeople from each other; he speaks dispraise of the Buddha; he speaks dispraise of the Dhamma; he speaks dispraise of the Saṅgha; he does not fulfill a legitimate promise to laypeople.
He tries to prevent laypeople from acquiring gains; he tries to bring harm to laypeople; he insults and reviles laypeople; he divides laypeople from each other; he speaks dispraise of the Buddha; he speaks dispraise of the Dhamma; he speaks dispraise of the Saṅgha; they see him at an improper resort.
He turns his mind away from those phenomena and directs it to the deathless element thus: ‘This is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, the stilling of all activities, the relinquishing of all acquisitions, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, nibbāna.’
If he is firm in this, he attains the destruction of the taints.
He turns his mind away from those phenomena and directs it to the deathless element thus: ‘This is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, the stilling of all activities, the relinquishing of all acquisitions, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, nibbāna.’
If he is firm in this, he attains the destruction of the taints.
He twists around with his body, by speech or mind;he piles up his evil deeds,in one way or another, repeatedly.
He understands a mind with lust as a mind with lust and a mind without lust as a mind without lust; a mind with hatred as a mind with hatred and a mind without hatred as a mind without hatred; a mind with delusion as a mind with delusion and a mind without delusion as a mind without delusion; a contracted mind as contracted and a distracted mind as distracted; an exalted mind as exalted and an unexalted mind as unexalted; a surpassable mind as surpassable and an unsurpassable mind as unsurpassable; a concentrated mind as concentrated and an unconcentrated mind as unconcentrated; a liberated mind as liberated and an unliberated mind as unliberated.
He understands a mind with lust as a mind with lust, and a mind without lust as a mind without lust; a mind with hatred as a mind with hatred, and a mind without hatred as a mind without hatred; a mind with delusion as a mind with delusion, and a mind without delusion as a mind without delusion; a contracted mind as contracted and a distracted mind as distracted; an exalted mind as exalted and an unexalted mind as unexalted; a surpassable mind as surpassable and an unsurpassable mind as unsurpassable; a concentrated mind as concentrated and an unconcentrated mind as unconcentrated; a liberated mind as liberated and an unliberated mind as unliberated.
He understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering.’
He understands as it really is: ‘This is the origin of suffering.’
He understands as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of suffering.’
He understands as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
He understands as it really is: ‘These are the taints.’
He understands as it really is: ‘This is the origin of the taints.’
He understands as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of the taints.’
He understands as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of the taints.’
When he knows and sees thus, his mind is liberated from the taint of sensual desire, from the taint of existence, and from the taint of ignorance.
He understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘Destroyed is birth, the spiritual life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming back to any state of being.’
This person, I say, is just like the warrior who takes up a sword and shield, arms himself with a bow and quiver, enters the fray of battle, and having triumphed in that battle, emerges victorious and settles at the head of the battlefield.
He understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the origin of suffering’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of suffering’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
He understands as it really is: ‘These are the taints’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the origin of the taints’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of the taints’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of the taints.’
He understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the origin of suffering’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of suffering’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
He understands as it really is: ‘These are the taints’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the origin of the taints’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of the taints’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of the taints.’
He understands the meaning of various statements, so that he can say: ‘This is the meaning of this statement; this is the meaning of that one.’
He has a good memory; he remembers and recollects what was done and said long ago.
He understands thus: ‘Previously, my mind was limited and undeveloped, but now it is measureless and well developed.
He understands thus: ‘Previously, my mind was limited and undeveloped, but now it is measureless and well developed.
He understands: ‘Destroyed is birth, the spiritual life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming back to any state of being.’
He usually uses a robe that has been specifically offered to him, seldom one that has not been specifically offered to him; he usually eats almsfood that has been specifically offered to him, seldom almsfood that has not been specifically offered to him; he usually uses a lodging that has been specifically offered to him, seldom one that has not been specifically offered to him; he usually uses medicines and provisions for the sick that have been specifically offered to him, seldom those that have not been specifically offered to him.
He utters such words as are rough, hard, hurtful to others, offensive to others, bordering on anger, unconducive to concentration.
He utters such words as are rough, hard, hurtful to others, offensive to others, bordering on anger, unconducive to concentration.
He utters such words as are rough, hard, hurtful to others, offensive to others, bordering on anger, unconducive to concentration.
He walks too far behind or too close; he does not take your bowl when it is full; he does not restrain you when your speech is bordering on an offense; he keeps on interrupting you while you are speaking; and he is unwise, stupid, obtuse.
He was not freed from suffering, I say.
He was Sakka, ruler of the devas, thirty-six times.
He went by carriage as far as the ground was suitable for a carriage, and then dismounted from his carriage and entered the monastery grounds on foot.
He went by carriage as far as the ground was suitable for a carriage, and then he dismounted from his carriage and entered the park on foot.
He went by carriage as far as the ground was suitable for a carriage, and then he dismounted from his carriage and entered the park on foot.
He went to the Sārandada Shrine, sat down on a seat that was prepared, and said to the Licchavis:
He who found for the sake of all beingsrelease from the snare of death;who revealed the Dhamma, the method,for the benefit of devas and humans;he in whom many people gain confidencewhen they see and listen to him;the one skilled in the path and what is not the path,the taintless one who accomplished his task;the Enlightened One bearing his final bodyis called “a great man of great wisdom.”
He who grows in faith and virtuous behavior,in wisdom, generosity, and learning—such a discerning superior manabsorbs for himself the essence of this life.
He who praises one deserving blame,or blames one deserving praise,casts with his mouth an unlucky throwby which he finds no happiness.
He will attain nibbāna in this very life.’
In this way, Ānanda, the Tathāgata knows a person by encompassing his mind with his own mind.
He will attain nibbāna in this very life.’
Suppose, Ānanda, coals that are cool and extinguished were deposited on a heap of dry grass or firewood.
He will manage the inheritance, or else, when we have passed on, he will give an offering on our behalf.’
Considering these five prospects, mother and father wish for a son to be born in their family.”
He wishes: ‘Let no one know me’; he intends: ‘Let no one know me’; he utters statements: ‘Let no one know me’; he makes bodily endeavors: ‘Let no one know me.’
He wishes: ‘Let no one know me’; he intends: ‘Let no one know me’; he utters statements: ‘Let no one know me’; he makes bodily endeavors: ‘Let no one know me.’
This, I say, is the interest he must pay.
He won’t be heedless.’
He won’t be heedless.’”
He would be one of those in the world who sleep well.”
He would cut down the creepers at their roots, dig them up, and pull out the roots, even the fine rootlets and root-fiber.
He would cut down the stump at its foot, dig it up, and pull out the roots, even the fine rootlets and root-fibers.
He would cut it down at its root, cut off the top, completely strip off the branches and foliage, trim it with axes, trim it further with hatchets, scrape it with a scraping tool, polish it with a stone ball, and set out to cross the river.
He would cut it down at its root, cut off the top, completely strip off the branches and foliage, trim it with axes, trim it further with hatchets, take a chisel and thoroughly cleanse it within, scrape it with a scraping tool, polish it with a stone ball, and make it into a boat.
He would cut the creepers into pieces, split the pieces, and reduce them to slivers.
He would cut the stump into pieces, split the pieces, and reduce them to slivers.
He would go around the cesspit on all sides but would not see even a mere fraction of a hair’s tip of the man not smeared with feces where he might get a grip and pull him out.
He would not obtain suitable food and medicine or a qualified attendant; he would not get the leader of the village district.
He would plunge into the pond, sweep away the algae and water plants with his hands, drink from his cupped hands, and then leave; so too, when a person’s verbal behavior is impure but his bodily behavior is pure, on that occasion one should not attend to the impurity of his verbal behavior but should instead attend to the purity of his bodily behavior.
He would press it down with his left foot, spread it out with his right foot, tear off an intact section, and take it away with him; so too, when a person’s bodily behavior is impure but his verbal behavior is pure, on that occasion one should not attend to the impurity of his bodily behavior but should instead attend to the purity of his verbal behavior.
He would strike a number of trees with the blade of his axe.
He would take a sharp axe and enter the woods.
He would think: ‘This little bit of water is in the puddle.
He would usually eat almsfood that has been specifically offered to him, seldom almsfood that had not been specifically offered to him.
He would usually use a lodging that had been specifically offered to him, seldom one that had not been specifically offered to him.
He would usually use a robe that has been specifically offered to him, seldom one that had not been specifically offered to him.
He would usually use medicines and provisions for the sick that had been specifically offered to him, seldom those that had not been specifically offered to him.
Hearing the good Dhamma, becoming full, fills up faith.
Hearing the good Dhamma, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
Hearing the good Dhamma, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
Heedfulness is to be developed for abandoning heedlessness.
Heedfulness leads to great good.”
Heedfulness leads to great good.”
Heedfulness leads to the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma.”
Heedlessness is the stain of a guard.
Heedlessness leads to great harm.”
Heedlessness leads to great harm.”
Heedlessness leads to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma.”
Hell, the animal realm, the sphere of afflicted spirits, human beings, and devas.
Hence many people die.
Hence many people die.
Hence many people die.
Hence the wise one, the world-knower,who has reached the world’s end and lived the spiritual life,having known the world’s end, at peace,does not desire this world or another.
Here comes the householder Anāthapiṇḍika, a disciple of the ascetic Gotama, one among the ascetic Gotama’s white-robed lay disciples who reside in Sāvatthī.
Here, a bhikkhu abounds in light, abounds in effort, abounds in inspiration; he does not become complacent; he does not neglect his duty in regard to wholesome qualities; and he extends himself further.
Here, a bhikkhu abstains from false speech, from divisive speech, from harsh speech, and from idle chatter.
Here, a bhikkhu abstains from the destruction of life, from taking what is not given, and from sexual activity.
Here, a bhikkhu arouses energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities and acquiring wholesome qualities; he is strong, firm in exertion, not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
Here, a bhikkhu attends to the perception of light; he focuses on the perception of day thus: ‘As by day, so at night; as at night, so by day.’
Thus, with a mind that is open and uncovered, he develops a mind imbued with luminosity.
Here, a bhikkhu can patiently endure forms, sounds, odors, tastes, and tactile objects.
Here, a bhikkhu cannot patiently endure forms, cannot patiently endure sounds, cannot patiently endure odors, cannot patiently endure tastes, and cannot patiently endure tactile objects.
Here, a bhikkhu cannot patiently endure forms, sounds, odors, tastes, and tactile objects.
Here, a bhikkhu delights in the Dhamma, delights in development, delights in abandoning, delights in solitude, delights in non-affliction, and delights in non-proliferation.
Here, a bhikkhu develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to desire and activities of striving.
Here, a bhikkhu develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to desire … … that possesses concentration due to energy … … that possesses concentration due to mind … … that possesses concentration due to investigation and activities of striving.
Here, a bhikkhu develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness that is based upon seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in release.
Here, a bhikkhu develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness, which is based upon seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in release.
Here, a bhikkhu diligently applies himself to an object of concentration in the morning, in the middle of the day, and in the evening.
Here, a bhikkhu does not diligently apply himself to an object of concentration in the morning, in the middle of the day, or in the evening.
Here, a bhikkhu does not from time to time approach those bhikkhus who are learned, heirs to the heritage, experts on the Dhamma, experts on the discipline, experts on the outlines, and inquire of them: ‘How is this, Bhante?
Here, a bhikkhu does not get to hear a teaching he has not heard before, forgets those teachings he has already heard, does not bring to mind those teachings with which he is already familiar, and does not understand what he has not understood.
Here, a bhikkhu does not have strong desires, does not feel distress, and is content with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick; he is endowed with faith, virtuous, energetic, mindful, and wise.
Here, a bhikkhu does not insult one who insults him, does not scold one who scolds him, and does not argue with one who picks an argument with him.
Here, a bhikkhu does not maintain bodily, verbal, and mental acts of loving-kindness both openly and privately toward those elder bhikkhus of long-standing who have long gone forth, the fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.
Here, a bhikkhu does not praise those who are displeasing or criticize those who are pleasing; he is not desirous of gains or honor; he has a sense of moral shame and moral dread; he has few desires and holds right view.
Here, a bhikkhu does not regard form as self, or self as possessing form, or form as in self, or self as in form.
Here, a bhikkhu does not suppress the mind on an occasion when it should be suppressed; he does not exert the mind on an occasion when it should be exerted; he does not encourage the mind on an occasion when it should be encouraged; and he does not look at the mind with equanimity on an occasion when one should look at it with equanimity.
Here, a bhikkhu does not teach the Dhamma to others in detail as he has heard it and learned it.
Here, a bhikkhu does not tolerate an arisen sensual thought, but abandons it, dispels it, terminates it, and obliterates it.
Here, a bhikkhu does not tolerate an arisen sensual thought, but abandons it, dispels it, terminates it, and obliterates it.
Here, a bhikkhu does not tolerate an arisen sensual thought; he abandons it, dispels it, calms it down, terminates it, and obliterates it.
Here, a bhikkhu does not tolerate an arisen sensual thought; he abandons it, dispels it, terminates it, and obliterates it.
Here, a bhikkhu does not tolerate an arisen sensual thought; he abandons it, dispels it, terminates it, and obliterates it.
Here, a bhikkhu does not tolerate an arisen thought of sensual desire; he abandons it, dispels it, terminates it, and obliterates it.
Here, a bhikkhu does not understand as it really is thus: ‘A fool is characterized by his actions; a wise person is characterized by his actions.’
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is unskilled in characteristics.
Here, a bhikkhu does not understand as it really is: ‘All form of whatever kind is the four great elements and the form derived from the four great elements.’
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has no knowledge of form.
Here, a bhikkhu does not understand the four establishments of mindfulness as they really are.
Here, a bhikkhu does not understand the noble eightfold path as it really is.
Here, a bhikkhu dwells contemplating arising and vanishing in the five aggregates subject to clinging: ‘Such is form, such its origin, such its passing away; such is feeling … such is perception … such are volitional activities … such is consciousness, such its origin, such its passing away.’
This is the development of concentration that leads to the destruction of the taints.
Here, a bhikkhu dwells contemplating arising and vanishing in the five aggregates subject to clinging: ‘Such is form, such its origin, such its passing away; such is feeling … such is perception … such are volitional activities … such is consciousness, such its origin, such its passing away’; and he dwells having contacted with the body the eight emancipations.
Here, a bhikkhu dwells contemplating arising and vanishing in the five aggregates subject to clinging: ‘Such is form, such its origin, such its passing away; such is feeling, such its origin, such its passing away; such is perception, such its origin, such its passing away; such are volitional activities, such their origin, such their passing away; such is consciousness, such its origin, such its passing away’; yet he does not dwell having contacted with the body the eight emancipations.
Here, a bhikkhu dwells contemplating the body in the body … … feelings in feelings … … mind in mind … … phenomena in phenomena, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed longing and dejection in regard to the world.
Here, a bhikkhu dwells contemplating the body in the body, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed longing and dejection in regard to the world.
Here, a bhikkhu dwells contemplating the body in the body, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed longing and dejection in regard to the world.
Here, a bhikkhu dwells contemplating the body in the body, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed longing and dejection in regard to the world.
Here, a bhikkhu dwells contemplating the unattractiveness of the body … and he has the perception of death well established internally.
Here, a bhikkhu dwells contemplating the unattractiveness of the body … and he has the perception of death well established internally.
Here, a bhikkhu dwells contemplating the unattractiveness of the body, perceiving the repulsiveness of food, perceiving non-delight in the entire world, contemplating impermanence in all conditioned phenomena; and he has the perception of death well established internally.
Here, a bhikkhu dwells contemplating the unattractiveness of the body, perceiving the repulsiveness of food, perceiving non-delight in the entire world, contemplating impermanence in all conditioned phenomena; and he has the perception of death well established internally.
Here, a bhikkhu dwells contemplating the unattractiveness of the body, perceiving the repulsiveness of food, perceiving non-delight in the entire world, contemplating impermanence in all conditioned phenomena; and he has the perception of death well established internally.
Here, a bhikkhu dwells contemplating the unattractiveness of the body, perceiving the repulsiveness of food, perceiving non-delight in the entire world, contemplating impermanence in all conditioned phenomena; and he has the perception of death well established internally.
Here, a bhikkhu dwells contemplating the unattractiveness of the body, perceiving the repulsiveness of food, perceiving non-delight in the entire world, contemplating impermanence in all conditioned phenomena; and he has the perception of death well established internally.
Here, a bhikkhu dwells contemplating the unattractiveness of the body, perceiving the repulsiveness of food, perceiving nondelight in the entire world, contemplating impermanence in all conditioned phenomena; and he has the perception of death well established internally.
Here, a bhikkhu dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter.
Here, a bhikkhu generates desire for the abandoning of arisen bad unwholesome qualities; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
Here, a bhikkhu generates desire for the arising of unarisen wholesome qualities; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
Here, a bhikkhu generates desire for the maintenance of arisen wholesome qualities, for their non-decline, increase, expansion, and fulfillment by development; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
Here, a bhikkhu generates desire for the non-arising of unarisen bad unwholesome qualities; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
Here, a bhikkhu generates desire for the non-arising of unarisen bad unwholesome qualities; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
Here, a bhikkhu generates desire for the non-arising of unarisen bad unwholesome states … … for the abandoning of arisen bad unwholesome states … … for the arising of unarisen wholesome states … … for the maintenance of arisen wholesome states, for their non-decline, increase, expansion, and fulfillment by development; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
Here, a bhikkhu generates desire for the non-arising of unarisen bad unwholesome states; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
Here, a bhikkhu generates desire for the non-arising of unarisen bad unwholesome states; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
Here, a bhikkhu generates desire for the non-arising of unarisen bad unwholesome states; he makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives.
Here, a bhikkhu gets to hear a teaching he has not heard before, does not forget those teachings he has already heard, brings to mind those teachings with which he is already familiar, and understands what he has not understood.
Here, a bhikkhu gives what is hard to give.
Here, a bhikkhu guards the doors of the sense faculties, observes moderation in eating, and is intent on wakefulness.
Here, a bhikkhu has a certain degree of faith, virtuous behavior, learning, renunciation, wisdom, and discernment.
Here, a bhikkhu has a certain degree of faith, virtuous behavior, learning, renunciation, wisdom, and discernment.
Here, a bhikkhu has a certain degree of faith, virtuous behavior, learning, renunciation, wisdom, and discernment.
Here, a bhikkhu has a keen desire to undertake the training and does not lose his fondness for undertaking the training in the future.
Here, a bhikkhu has abandoned craving, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
Here, a bhikkhu has abandoned ignorance, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
Here, a bhikkhu has abandoned sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt.
Here, a bhikkhu has abandoned sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt.
Here, a bhikkhu has abandoned sensual intention, intention of ill will, and intention of harming.
Here, a bhikkhu has abandoned the conceit ‘I am,’ cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no longer subject to future arising.
Here, a bhikkhu has abandoned the conceit ‘I am,’ cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
Here, a bhikkhu has abandoned the conceit ‘I am,’ cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
Here, a bhikkhu has abandoned the five lower fetters, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them so that they are no more subject to future arising.
Here, a bhikkhu has abandoned the search for sensual pleasures and the search for existence and has allayed the search for a spiritual life.
Here, a bhikkhu has abandoned the search for sensual pleasures and the search for existence and has allayed the search for a spiritual life.
Here, a bhikkhu has abandoned the wandering on in birth that brings renewed existence; he has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
Here, a bhikkhu has aroused energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities and acquiring wholesome qualities; he is strong, firm in exertion, not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
Here, a bhikkhu has aroused energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities and acquiring wholesome qualities; he is strong, firm in exertion, not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
Here, a bhikkhu has aroused energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities and acquiring wholesome qualities; he is strong, firm in exertion, not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
Here, a bhikkhu has attained the analytical knowledge of meaning, the analytical knowledge of the Dhamma, the analytical knowledge of language, and the analytical knowledge of discernment; and he reviews the extent to which his mind is liberated.
Here, a bhikkhu has committed a particular unwholesome deed by speech.
Here, a bhikkhu has committed a particular unwholesome deed with the body.
Here, a bhikkhu has faith, a sense of moral shame, and moral dread; he is energetic and wise; and he is unconcerned about his body and life.
Here, a bhikkhu has faith, a sense of moral shame, moral dread; he is learned, energetic, mindful, and wise.
Here, a bhikkhu has few undertakings … He eats little … He is seldom drowsy …  He gets to hear at will, without trouble or difficulty, talk concerned with the austere life that is conducive to opening up the heart, that is, talk on fewness of desires, on contentment, on solitude, on not getting bound up, on arousing energy, on virtuous behavior, on concentration, on wisdom, on liberation, on the knowledge and vision of liberation.
Here, a bhikkhu has few undertakings … He eats little … He is seldom drowsy … He is a forest dweller who resorts to remote lodgings.
Here, a bhikkhu has few undertakings, few tasks, is easy to support, and is easily contented with the requisites of life.
Here, a bhikkhu has keen eyes, is responsible, and has benefactors.
Here, a bhikkhu has knowledge of form; he is skilled in characteristics; he picks out flies’ eggs; he dresses wounds; he smokes out the sheds; he knows the watering place; he knows what it is to have drunk; he knows the road; he is skilled in pastures; he does not milk dry; and he shows extra veneration to those elder bhikkhus of long-standing who have long gone forth, the fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.
Here, a bhikkhu has mindfulness well established internally for the wisdom that discerns the arising and passing away of phenomena; he dwells contemplating the unattractiveness of the body, perceiving the repulsiveness of food, perceiving non-delight in the entire world, and contemplating impermanence in all conditioned phenomena.
Here, a bhikkhu has no knowledge of form; he is unskilled in characteristics; he fails to pick out flies’ eggs; he fails to dress wounds; he fails to smoke out the sheds; he does not know the watering place; he does not know what it is to have drunk; he does not know the road; he is unskilled in pastures; he milks dry; and he shows no extra veneration to those elder bhikkhus of long-standing who have long gone forth, the fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.
Here, a bhikkhu has not abandoned the conceit ‘I am,’ cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
Here, a bhikkhu has strong desires, feels distress, and is discontent with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick; he is without faith, immoral, lazy, muddle-minded, and unwise.
Here, a bhikkhu has strong desires, undergoes distress, and is not content with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging, or medicines and provisions for the sick.
Here, a bhikkhu himself reveres the Teacher and speaks in praise of reverence for the Teacher; he encourages other bhikkhus who do not revere the Teacher to develop reverence for the Teacher and, at the proper time, genuinely and truthfully, he speaks praise of those bhikkhus who revere the Teacher.
Here, a bhikkhu insults one who insults him, scolds one who scolds him, and argues with one who picks an argument with him.
Here, a bhikkhu is a long-distance shooter, a sharp-shooter, and one who splits a great body.
Here, a bhikkhu is a trainee practicing the way who dwells aspiring for the unsurpassed security from bondage.
Here, a bhikkhu is a trainee who has not attained his mind’s ideal, one who dwells aspiring for the unsurpassed security from bondage.
Here, a bhikkhu is accomplished in virtuous behavior, accomplished in concentration, accomplished in wisdom, accomplished in liberation, and accomplished in the knowledge and vision of liberation.
Here, a bhikkhu is accomplished in virtuous behavior, guards the doors of the sense faculties, observes moderation in eating, and is intent on wakefulness.
Here, a bhikkhu is an arahant, one whose taints are destroyed.
Here, a bhikkhu is an arahant, one whose taints have been destroyed.
Here, a bhikkhu is content with any kind of robe; he is content with any kind of almsfood; he is content with any kind of lodging; he is content with any kind of medicines and provisions for the sick; and he lives the spiritual life with satisfaction.
Here, a bhikkhu is content with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
Here, a bhikkhu is desirous of gains, honor, and reputation; he does not know the proper time and does not know moderation; he is impure; he speaks much; and he insults and reviles his fellow monks.
Here, a bhikkhu is desirous of gains, honor, and reputation; he is morally shameless and morally reckless; he has evil desires and holds wrong view.
Here, a bhikkhu is desirous of gains, honor, and reputation; he is morally shameless and morally reckless; he is envious and miserly.
Here, a bhikkhu is devoid of faith, immoral, unlearned, lazy, and unwise.
Here, a bhikkhu is devoid of faith, morally shameless, morally reckless, lazy, and unwise.
Here, a bhikkhu is devoid of faith, morally shameless, morally reckless, lazy, and unwise.
Here, a bhikkhu is endowed with faith and is virtuous, learned, energetic, and wise.
Here, a bhikkhu is endowed with faith, has a sense of moral shame, has moral dread, and is energetic and wise.
Here, a bhikkhu is endowed with faith, has a sense of moral shame, has moral dread, and is energetic and wise.
Here, a bhikkhu is endowed with faith, virtuous, learned, energetic, and wise.
Here, a bhikkhu is endowed with faith.
Here, a bhikkhu is himself accomplished in virtuous behavior and encourages others to become accomplished in virtuous behavior; he is himself accomplished in concentration and encourages others to become accomplished in concentration; he is himself accomplished in wisdom and encourages others to become accomplished in wisdom; he is himself accomplished in liberation and encourages others to become accomplished in liberation; he is himself accomplished in the knowledge and vision of liberation and encourages others to become accomplished in the knowledge and vision of liberation.
Here, a bhikkhu is himself accomplished in virtuous behavior but does not encourage others to become accomplished in virtuous behavior; he is himself accomplished in concentration but does not encourage others to become accomplished in concentration; he is himself accomplished in wisdom but does not encourage others to become accomplished in wisdom; he is himself accomplished in liberation but does not encourage others to become accomplished in liberation; he is himself accomplished in the knowledge and vision of liberation but does not encourage others to become accomplished in the knowledge and vision of liberation.
Here, a bhikkhu is himself accomplished in virtuous behavior, and he answers questions posed during a discussion on accomplishment in virtuous behavior.
Here, a bhikkhu is himself accomplished in virtuous behavior, and he answers questions that come up in a discussion on accomplishment in virtuous behavior.
Here, a bhikkhu is mindful, possessing supreme mindfulness and alertness, one who remembers and recollects what was done and said long ago.
Here, a bhikkhu is not accomplished in virtuous behavior himself and does not encourage others to become accomplished in virtuous behavior; he is not accomplished in concentration himself and does not encourage others to become accomplished in concentration; he is not accomplished in wisdom himself and does not encourage others to become accomplished in wisdom; he is not accomplished in liberation himself and does not encourage others to become accomplished in liberation; he is not accomplished in the knowledge and vision of liberation himself and does not encourage others to become accomplished in the knowledge and vision of liberation.
Here, a bhikkhu is not accomplished in virtuous behavior himself but he encourages others to become accomplished in virtuous behavior; he is not accomplished in concentration himself but he encourages others to become accomplished in concentration; he is not accomplished in wisdom himself but he encourages others to become accomplished in wisdom; he is not accomplished in liberation himself but he encourages others to become accomplished in liberation; he is not accomplished in the knowledge and vision of liberation himself but he encourages others to become accomplished in the knowledge and vision of liberation.
Here, a bhikkhu is not content with any kind of robe; he is not content with any kind of almsfood; he is not content with any kind of lodging; he is not content with any kind of medicines and provisions for the sick; and he lives the spiritual life dissatisfied.
Here, a bhikkhu is not desirous of gains, honor, and reputation; he has a sense of moral shame and moral dread; he is not envious and is not miserly.
Here, a bhikkhu is not desirous of gains, honor, and reputation; he is one who knows the proper time and who knows moderation; he is pure; he does not speak much; and he does not insult and revile his fellow monks.
Here, a bhikkhu is not desirous of gains, or honor, or a reputation; he has a sense of moral shame and moral dread; he has few desires and holds right view.
Here, a bhikkhu is not skilled in gain, not skilled in loss, not skilled in means; he does not generate desire for the achievement of wholesome qualities not yet achieved; he does not guard wholesome qualities already achieved; he does not fulfill his tasks through persistent effort.
Here, a bhikkhu is not skilled in the attainment of concentration; he is not skilled in the duration of concentration; he is not skilled in emergence from concentration; he does not practice carefully; he does not practice persistently; and he does not do what is suitable.
Here, a bhikkhu is one of right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
Here, a bhikkhu is one of right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration, right knowledge, and right liberation; and he dwells having contacted with the body the eight emancipations.
Here, a bhikkhu is one of right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration, right knowledge, and right liberation; yet he does not dwell having contacted with the body the eight emancipations.
Here, a bhikkhu is one who gains robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
Here, a bhikkhu is one who knows the Dhamma, who knows the meaning, who knows himself, who knows moderation, who knows the proper time, who knows the assembly, and who knows the superior and inferior kinds of persons.
Here, a bhikkhu is one who listens, who destroys, who guards, who patiently endures, and who goes.
Here, a bhikkhu is one who listens, who destroys, who patiently endures, and who goes.
Here, a bhikkhu is one who quickly goes to that region where he has never before gone in this long time, that is, to the stilling of all activities, the relinquishment of all acquisitions, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, nibbāna.
Here, a bhikkhu is practicing thus: ‘It might not be, and it might not be mine.
Here, a bhikkhu is repelled, humiliated, and disgusted by all conditioned phenomena.
Here, a bhikkhu is skilled in concentration, skilled in the attainment of concentration, skilled in the duration of concentration, skilled in emergence from concentration, skilled in fitness for concentration, skilled in the area of concentration, and skilled in resolution regarding concentration.
Here, a bhikkhu is skilled in gain, skilled in loss, skilled in means; he generates desire for the achievement of wholesome qualities not yet achieved; he guards wholesome qualities already achieved; he fulfills his tasks through persistent effort.
Here, a bhikkhu is skilled in places, a long-distance shooter, a sharp-shooter, and one who splits a great body.
Here, a bhikkhu is skilled in the attainment of concentration; skilled in the duration of concentration; skilled in emergence from concentration; skilled in fitness for concentration; skilled in the area of concentration; and skilled in resolution regarding concentration.
Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous … he trains in them.
Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous … he trains in them.
Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous … he trains in them.
Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous … … he trains in them.
Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous, learned, energetic, and wise.
Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous, of good character.
Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous….
Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous….
Here, a bhikkhu is wise; he possesses the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
Here, a bhikkhu is without faith, morally shameless, morally reckless, lazy, unwise, and concerned about his body and life.
Here, a bhikkhu knows feelings as they arise, as they remain present, as they disappear; he knows perceptions as they arise, as they remain present, as they disappear; he knows thoughts as they arise, as they remain present, as they disappear.
Here, a bhikkhu knows himself thus: ‘I have so much faith, virtuous behavior, learning, generosity, wisdom, and discernment.’
If a bhikkhu did not know himself thus: ‘I have so much faith … and discernment,’ he would not be called ‘one who knows himself.’
But because he knows himself thus: ‘I have so much faith … and discernment,’ he is called ‘one who knows himself.’
Thus he is one who knows the Dhamma, one who knows the meaning, and one who knows himself.
Here, a bhikkhu knows moderation in accepting robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
Here, a bhikkhu knows the assembly: ‘This is an assembly of khattiyas, this is an assembly of brahmins, this is an assembly of householders, this is an assembly of ascetics.
Here, a bhikkhu knows the Dhamma: the discourses, mixed prose and verse, expositions, verses, inspired utterances, quotations, birth stories, marvelous accounts, and questions-and-answers.
Here, a bhikkhu knows the meaning of this and that statement thus: ‘This is the meaning of this statement; this is the meaning of that statement.’
If a bhikkhu did not know the meaning of this and that statement thus … he would not be called ‘one who knows the meaning.’
But because he knows the meaning of this and that statement thus: ‘This is the meaning of this statement; this is the meaning of that statement,’ he is called ‘one who knows the meaning.’
Thus he is one who knows the Dhamma and one who knows the meaning.
Here, a bhikkhu knows the proper time thus: ‘This is the time for learning, this is the time for questioning, this is the time for exertion, this is the time for seclusion.’
If a bhikkhu did not know the proper time—’This is the time for learning … this is the time for seclusion’—he would not be called ‘one who knows the proper time.’
But because he knows the proper time—’This is the time for learning … this is the time for seclusion’—he is called ‘one who knows the proper time.’
Thus he is one who knows the Dhamma, one who knows the meaning, one who knows himself, one who knows moderation, and one who knows the proper time.
Here, a bhikkhu maintains bodily acts of loving-kindness toward his fellow monks, both openly and privately.
Here, a bhikkhu maintains bodily, verbal, and mental acts of loving-kindness both openly and privately toward those elder bhikkhus of long-standing who have long gone forth, the fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.
Here, a bhikkhu often visits prostitutes, widows, unmarried women, eunuchs, or bhikkhunīs.
Here, a bhikkhu patiently endures cold and heat; hunger and thirst; contact with flies, mosquitoes, wind, the burning sun, and serpents; rude and offensive ways of speech; he is able to bear up with arisen bodily feelings that are painful, racking, sharp, piercing, harrowing, disagreeable, sapping one’s vitality.
Here, a bhikkhu patiently endures cold and heat; hunger and thirst; contact with flies, mosquitoes, wind, the burning sun, and serpents; rude and offensive ways of speech; he is able to bear up with arisen bodily feelings that are painful, racking, sharp, piercing, harrowing, disagreeable, sapping one’s vitality.
Here, a bhikkhu patiently endures forms, patiently endures sounds, patiently endures odors, patiently endures tastes, patiently endures tactile objects, and patiently endures mental phenomena.
Here, a bhikkhu patiently endures forms, patiently endures sounds, patiently endures odors, patiently endures tastes, patiently endures tactile objects, and patiently endures mental phenomena.
Here, a bhikkhu patiently endures forms, patiently endures sounds, patiently endures odors, patiently endures tastes, patiently endures tactile objects, and patiently endures mental phenomena.
Here, a bhikkhu possesses a mind guarded by mindfulness.
Here, a bhikkhu possesses beauty, strength, and speed.
Here, a bhikkhu possesses beauty, strength, speed, and the right proportions.
Here, a bhikkhu possesses supreme exquisiteness of form.
Here, a bhikkhu possesses the aggregate of virtuous behavior of one beyond training, the aggregate of concentration of one beyond training, the aggregate of wisdom of one beyond training, the aggregate of liberation of one beyond training, and the aggregate of the knowledge and vision of liberation of one beyond training.
Here, a bhikkhu possesses the aggregate of virtuous behavior of one beyond training, the aggregate of concentration of one beyond training, the aggregate of wisdom of one beyond training, the aggregate of liberation of one beyond training, the aggregate of the knowledge and vision of liberation of one beyond training.
Here, a bhikkhu possesses the aggregate of virtuous behavior of one beyond training; he possesses the aggregate of concentration of one beyond training; he possesses the aggregate of wisdom of one beyond training; he possesses the aggregate of liberation of one beyond training; he possesses the aggregate of the knowledge and vision of liberation of one beyond training.
Here, a bhikkhu possesses the aggregate of virtuous behavior … the aggregate of concentration … the aggregate of wisdom … the aggregate of liberation … the aggregate of the knowledge and vision of liberation of one beyond training.
Here, a bhikkhu possesses the aggregate of virtuous behavior … the aggregate of concentration … the aggregate of wisdom … the aggregate of liberation … the aggregate of the knowledge and vision of liberation of one beyond training.
Here, a bhikkhu praises those who are displeasing and criticizes those who are pleasing; he is desirous of gains and honor; he is morally shameless and morally reckless; he has evil desires and holds wrong view.
Here, a bhikkhu protects an arisen excellent object of concentration: the perception of a skeleton, the perception of a worm-infested corpse, the perception of a livid corpse, the perception of a festering corpse, the perception of a fissured corpse, the perception of a bloated corpse.
Here, a bhikkhu quickly goes to that region where he has never before gone in this long stretch of time, that is, to the stilling of all activities, the relinquishment of all acquisitions, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, nibbāna.
Here, a bhikkhu refrains from any engagement and clinging, mental standpoints, adherences, and underlying tendencies in regard to the world, abandoning them without clinging to them.
Here, a bhikkhu regards form as self, or self as possessing form, or form as in self, or self as in form.
Here, a bhikkhu reviews this very body upward from the soles of the feet and downward from the tips of the hairs, enclosed in skin, as full of many kinds of impurities: ‘There are in this body hair of the head, hair of the body, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, pleura, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, stomach, excrement, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, snot, fluid of the joints, urine.’
Thus he dwells contemplating unattractiveness in this body.
Here, a bhikkhu splits the great mass of ignorance.
Here, a bhikkhu splits the great mass of ignorance.
Here, a bhikkhu suppresses the mind on an occasion when it should be suppressed; he exerts the mind on an occasion when it should be exerted; he encourages the mind on an occasion when it should be encouraged; and he looks at the mind with equanimity on an occasion when one should look at it with equanimity.
Here, a bhikkhu teaches the Dhamma to others in detail as he has heard it and learned it.
Here, a bhikkhu tolerates an arisen thought of sensual desire; he does not abandon it, dispel it, terminate it, and obliterate it.
Here, a bhikkhu understands as it really is thus: ‘A fool is characterized by his actions; a wise person is characterized by his actions.’
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is skilled in characteristics.
Here, a bhikkhu understands as it really is thus: ‘All form of whatever kind is the four great elements and the form derived from the four great elements.’
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has knowledge of form.
Here, a bhikkhu understands as it really is: ‘These are qualities that pertain to deterioration,’ and: ‘These are qualities that pertain to stabilization,’ and: ‘These are qualities that pertain to distinction,’ and: ‘These are qualities that pertain to penetration.’
He practices carefully, and he does what is suitable.
Here, a bhikkhu understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering,’ and ‘This is the origin of suffering, and ‘This is the cessation of suffering,’ and ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a bhikkhu possesses speed.
Here, a bhikkhu understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering,’ and ‘This is the origin of suffering,’ and ‘This is the cessation of suffering,’ and ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
This, I say, is his speed.
Here, a bhikkhu understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering,’ and ‘This is the origin of suffering,’ and ‘This is the cessation of suffering,’ and ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
This, I say, is his speed.
Here, a bhikkhu understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering,’ and ‘This is the origin of suffering,’ and ‘This is the cessation of suffering,’ and ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
This, I say, is his speed.
Here, a bhikkhu understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering.’
He understands as it really is: ‘This is the origin of suffering.’
He understands as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of suffering.’
He understands as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has attained the state of a noble one.” 
Here, a bhikkhu understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering.’
He understands as it really is: ‘This is the origin of suffering.’
He understands as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of suffering.’
He understands as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is a sharp-shooter.
Here, a bhikkhu understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering.’
He understands as it really is: ‘This is the origin of suffering.’
He understands as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of suffering.’
He understands as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is a sharp-shooter.
Here, a bhikkhu understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has keen eyes.
Here, a bhikkhu understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
This is called purity of view.
Here, a bhikkhu understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
This is called the training in the higher wisdom.
Here, a bhikkhu understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
This, I say, is his speed.
Here, a bhikkhu understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
This, I say, is his speed.
Here, a bhikkhu understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
This, I say, is his speed.
Here, a bhikkhu understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … … ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
This is called the wisdom of a trainee.
Here, a bhikkhu understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the origin of suffering’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of suffering’; he understands as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a bhikkhu possesses speed.
Here, a bhikkhu understands persons in terms of pairs.
Here, a bhikkhu understands the four establishments of mindfulness as they really are.
Here, a bhikkhu understands the noble eightfold path as it really is.
Here, a bhikkhu understands: ‘I have abandoned lust, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising; I have abandoned hatred … abandoned delusion, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.’
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is well liberated by wisdom.
Here, a bhikkhu usually uses a robe that has been specifically offered to him, seldom one that has not been specifically offered to him … … If one could rightly say of anyone: ‘He is a delicate ascetic among ascetics,’ it is precisely of me that one might say this.
Here, a bhikkhu usually uses a robe that has been specifically offered to him, seldom one that has not been specifically offered to him … … If one could rightly say of anyone: ‘He is a delicate ascetic among ascetics,’ it is precisely of me that one might say this.
Here, a bhikkhu usually uses a robe that has been specifically offered to him, seldom one that has not been specifically offered to him; he usually eats almsfood that has been specifically offered to him, seldom almsfood that has not been specifically offered to him; he usually uses a lodging that has been specifically offered to him, seldom one that has not been specifically offered to him; he usually uses medicines and provisions for the sick that have been specifically offered to him, seldom those that have not been specifically offered to him.
Here, a bhikkhu wields the various kinds of psychic potency: having been one, he becomes many; having been many, he becomes one; he appears and vanishes; he goes unhindered through a wall, through a rampart, through a mountain as though through space; he dives in and out of the earth as though it were water; he walks on water without sinking as though it were earth; seated cross-legged, he travels in space like a bird; with his hand he touches and strokes the moon and sun so powerful and mighty; he exercises mastery with the body as far as the brahmā world.
Here, a bhikkhu, having gone to the forest, to the foot of a tree, or to an empty hut, sits down.
Here, a bhikkhu’s mind is liberated from lust, hatred, and delusion.
Here, a bhikkhu’s mind launches out upon the cessation of proliferation, becomes placid, settles down, and is liberated in it.
Here, a brahmin is well born on both his maternal and paternal sides, of pure descent, unassailable and impeccable with respect to birth as far back as the seventh paternal generation.
Here, a brahmin is well born on both his maternal and paternal sides, of pure descent, unassailable and impeccable with respect to birth as far back as the seventh paternal generation.
Here, a brahmin is well born on both his maternal and paternal sides, of pure descent, unassailable and impeccable with respect to birth as far back as the seventh paternal generation.
Here, a brahmin is well born on both his maternal and paternal sides, of pure descent, unassailable and impeccable with respect to birth as far back as the seventh paternal generation.
Here, a brahmin is well born on both his maternal and paternal sides, of pure descent, unassailable and impeccable with respect to birth as far back as the seventh paternal generation.
Here, a certain kind of person torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself.
Here, a certain person goes naked, rejecting conventions, licking his hands, not coming when asked, not stopping when asked; he does not accept food brought or food specially made or an invitation to a meal; he receives nothing from a pot, from a bowl, across a threshold, across a stick, across a pestle, from two eating together, from a pregnant woman, from a woman nursing a child, from a woman being kept by a man, from where food is advertised to be distributed, from where a dog is waiting, from where flies are buzzing; he accepts no fish or meat, he drinks no liquor, wine, or fermented brew.
Here, a certain person is a butcher of sheep, a butcher of pigs, a fowler, a trapper of wild beasts, a hunter, a fisherman, a thief, an executioner, a prison warden, or one who follows any other such bloody occupation.
Here, a clansman abstains from the destruction of life, from taking what is not given, from sexual misconduct, from false speech, and from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
Here, a clansman abstains from the destruction of life, from taking what is not given, from sexual misconduct, from false speech, and from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
Here, a clansman dwells at home with a heart devoid of the stain of miserliness, freely generous, openhanded, delighting in relinquishment, one devoted to charity, delighting in giving and sharing.
Here, a clansman dwells at home with a heart devoid of the stain of miserliness, freely generous, openhanded, delighting in relinquishment, one devoted to charity, delighting in giving and sharing.
Here, a clansman has acquired wealth by energetic striving, amassed by the strength of his arms, earned by the sweat of his brow, righteous wealth righteously gained.
Here, a clansman has gone forth out of faith from the household life into homelessness with the thought: ‘I am immersed in birth, old age, and death; in sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish.
Here, a clansman has gone forth out of faith from the household life into homelessness with the thought: ‘I am immersed in birth, old age, and death; in sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish.
Here, a clansman has gone forth out of faith from the household life into homelessness with the thought: ‘I am immersed in birth, old age, and death; in sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish.
Here, a clansman has gone forth out of faith from the household life into homelessness with the thought: ‘I am immersed in birth, old age, and death; in sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish.
Here, a clansman has no debts to anyone, whether large or small.
Here, a clansman is endowed with faith.
Here, a clansman is endowed with faith.
Here, a clansman is wise; he possesses the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
Here, a clansman is wise; he possesses the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
Here, a clansman knows his income and expenditures and leads a balanced life, neither too extravagant nor too frugal,: ‘In this way my income will exceed my expenditures rather than the reverse.’
Just as an appraiser or his apprentice, holding up a scale, knows: ‘By so much it has dipped down, by so much it has gone up,’ so a clansman knows his income and expenditures and leads a balanced life, neither too extravagant nor too frugal,: ‘In this way my income will exceed my expenditures rather than the reverse.’
Here, a clansman knows his income and expenditures and leads a balanced life, neither too extravagant nor too frugal,: ‘In this way my income will exceed my expenditures rather than the reverse.’
Just as an appraiser or his apprentice, holding up a scale, knows: ‘By so much it has dipped down, by so much it has gone up,’ so a clansman knows his income and expenditures and leads a balanced life, neither too extravagant nor too frugal,: ‘In this way my income will exceed my expenditures rather than the reverse.’
Here, a clansman sets up protection and guard over the wealth he has acquired by initiative and energy, amassed by the strength of his arms, earned by the sweat of his brow, righteous wealth righteously gained, thinking: ‘How can I prevent kings and thieves from taking it, fire from burning it, floods from sweeping it off, and displeasing heirs from taking it?’
This is called accomplishment in protection.
Here, a clansman sets up protection and guard over the wealth he has acquired by initiative and energy, amassed by the strength of his arms, earned by the sweat of his brow, righteous wealth righteously gained, thinking: ‘How can I prevent kings and thieves from taking it, fire from burning it, floods from sweeping it off, and displeasing heirs from taking it?’
This is called accomplishment in protection.
Here, a cowherd has knowledge of form; he is skilled in characteristics; he picks out flies’ eggs; he dresses wounds; he smokes out the sheds; he knows the watering place; he knows what it is to have drunk; he knows the road; he is skilled in pastures; he does not milk dry; and he shows extra veneration to those bulls who are fathers and leaders of the herd.
Here, a cowherd has knowledge of form; he is skilled in characteristics; he picks out flies’ eggs; he dresses wounds; he smokes out the sheds; he knows the watering place; he knows what it is to have drunk; he knows the road; he is skilled in pastures; he does not milk dry; and he shows extra veneration to those bulls who are fathers and leaders of the herd.
Here, a cowherd has no knowledge of form; he is unskilled in characteristics; he fails to pick out flies’ eggs; he fails to dress wounds; he fails to smoke out the sheds; he does not know the watering place; he does not know what it is to have drunk; he does not know the road; he is unskilled in pastures; he milks dry; and he shows no extra veneration to those bulls who are fathers and leaders of the herd.
Here, a cowherd has no knowledge of form; he is unskilled in characteristics; he fails to pick out flies’ eggs; he fails to dress wounds; he fails to smoke out the sheds; he does not know the watering place; he does not know what it is to have drunk; he does not know the road; he is unskilled in pastures; he milks dry; and he shows no extra veneration to those bulls who are fathers and leaders of the herd.
Here, a fool thinks badly, speaks badly, and acts badly.
Here, a head-anointed khattiya king hears: ‘Such and such a khattiya has been anointed by the khattiyas.’
It does not occur to him: ‘When will the khattiyas anoint me too?’
For what reason?
Here, a householder or householder’s son is prospering in wealth or grain, in silver or gold.
Here, a king’s bull elephant is one who listens, who destroys, who guards, who patiently endures, and who goes.
Here, a king’s bull elephant is one who listens, who destroys, who patiently endures, and who goes.
Here, a king’s excellent thoroughbred horse patiently endures forms, patiently endures sounds, patiently endures odors, patiently endures tastes, patiently endures tactile objects, and it is endowed with beauty.
Here, a king’s excellent thoroughbred horse patiently endures forms, patiently endures sounds, patiently endures odors, patiently endures tastes, patiently endures tactile objects, and it is endowed with speed.
Here, a king’s excellent thoroughbred horse patiently endures forms, patiently endures sounds, patiently endures odors, patiently endures tastes, patiently endures tactile objects, and it is endowed with strength.
Here, a king’s excellent thoroughbred horse possesses beauty, strength, and speed.
Here, a king’s excellent thoroughbred horse possesses beauty, strength, speed, and the right proportions.
Here, a master thief depends on a thicket of cane, a thicket of trees, a coppice, or a large dense jungle.
Here, a master thief depends on a thicket of cane, a thicket of trees, a coppice, or a large dense jungle.
Here, a master thief depends on kings or royal ministers.
Here, a master thief depends on kings or royal ministers.
Here, a master thief depends on rivers that are hard to cross and rugged mountains.
Here, a master thief depends on rivers that are hard to cross and rugged mountains.
Here, a master thief depends on the uneven, on thickets, and on powerful people.
Here, a master thief depends upon the uneven, on thickets, and on powerful people; he offers bribes, and he moves alone.
Here, a master thief executes his raids all alone.
Here, a master thief is rich, with great wealth and property.
Here, a noble disciple abstains from the destruction of life … abstains from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
Here, a noble disciple abstains from the destruction of life, abstains from taking what is not given, abstains from sexual misconduct, abstains from false speech, abstains from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
Here, a noble disciple abstains from the destruction of life, abstains from taking what is not given, abstains from sexual misconduct, abstains from false speech, abstains from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
Here, a noble disciple dreads wrongdoing; he dreads bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct; he dreads acquiring bad, unwholesome qualities.
Here, a noble disciple dreads wrongdoing; he dreads bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct; he dreads acquiring bad, unwholesome qualities.
Here, a noble disciple dreads wrongdoing; he dreads bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct; he dreads acquiring evil, unwholesome qualities.
Here, a noble disciple dwells at home with a heart devoid of the stain of miserliness, freely generous, openhanded, delighting in relinquishment, devoted to charity, delighting in giving and sharing.
Here, a noble disciple dwells at home with a heart devoid of the stain of miserliness, freely generous, openhanded, delighting in relinquishment, one devoted to charity, delighting in giving and sharing.
Here, a noble disciple dwells at home with a mind free from the stain of miserliness, freely generous, openhanded, delighting in relinquishment, devoted to charity, delighting in giving and sharing.
Here, a noble disciple engages in blameless bodily, verbal, and mental action.
Here, a noble disciple has a sense of moral shame; he is ashamed of bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct; he is ashamed of acquiring bad, unwholesome qualities.
Here, a noble disciple has a sense of moral shame; he is ashamed of bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct; he is ashamed of acquiring bad, unwholesome qualities.
Here, a noble disciple has a sense of moral shame; he is ashamed of bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct; he is ashamed of acquiring evil, unwholesome qualities.
Here, a noble disciple has aroused energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities and acquiring wholesome qualities; he is strong, firm in exertion, not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
Here, a noble disciple has aroused energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities and acquiring wholesome qualities; he is strong, firm in exertion, not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
Here, a noble disciple has aroused energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities and acquiring wholesome qualities; he is strong, firm in exertion, not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
Here, a noble disciple has learned much, remembers what he has learned, and accumulates what he has learned.
Here, a noble disciple has learned much, remembers what he has learned, and accumulates what he has learned.
Here, a noble disciple is endowed with faith.
Here, a noble disciple is endowed with faith.
Here, a noble disciple is endowed with faith.
Here, a noble disciple is endowed with faith.
Here, a noble disciple is endowed with faith.
Here, a noble disciple is endowed with faith; he places faith in the enlightenment of the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
This is called accomplishment in faith.
Here, a noble disciple is mindful, possessing supreme mindfulness and alertness, one who remembers and recollects what was done and said long ago.
Here, a noble disciple is wise; he possesses the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
Here, a noble disciple is wise; he possesses the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
Here, a noble disciple is wise; he possesses the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
Here, a noble disciple is wise; he possesses the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
Here, a noble disciple is wise; he possesses the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
Here, a person does not know which qualities are wholesome and which unwholesome, which qualities are blameworthy and which blameless, which qualities are inferior and which superior; he does not know dark and bright qualities along with their counterparts.
Here, a person engages in blameless bodily action, blameless verbal action, and blameless mental action.
Here, a person engages in blameworthy bodily action, blameworthy verbal action, and blameworthy mental action.
Here, a person engages in bodily action that is mostly blameless, verbal action that is mostly blameless, and mental action that is mostly blameless.
Here, a person engages in bodily action that is mostly blameworthy, verbal action that is mostly blameworthy, and mental action that is mostly blameworthy.
Here, a person has been reborn in a low family—a family of caṇḍālas, bamboo workers, hunters, cart makers, or flower scavengers—one that is poor, with little food and drink, that subsists with difficulty, where food and clothing are obtained with difficulty; and he is ugly, unsightly, dwarfish, with much illness: blind, crippled, lame, or paralyzed.
Here, a person’s bodily behavior is impure, but his verbal behavior is pure; one should remove resentment toward such a person.
Here, a person’s faith, devotion, affection, and confidence are fickle.
Here, a shopkeeper diligently applies himself to his work in the morning, in the middle of the day, and in the evening.
Here, a shopkeeper does not diligently apply himself to his work in the morning, in the middle of the day, or in the evening.
Here, a shopkeeper has keen eyes, is responsible, and has benefactors.
Here, a shopkeeper is skilled in buying and selling goods.
Here, a shopkeeper knows of an item: ‘If this item is bought at such a price and sold at such a price, it will require this much capital and bring this much profit.’
It is in this way that a shopkeeper has keen eyes.
Here, a Tathāgata arises in the world, an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, an Enlightened One, a Blessed One.
Here, a Tathāgata has arisen in the world, an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, an Enlightened One, a Blessed One, and the Dhamma leading to peace, nibbāna, and enlightenment is taught as proclaimed by a Fortunate One.
Here, a warrior is a long-distance shooter, a sharp-shooter, and one who splits a great body.
Here, a warrior is skilled in places, a long-distance shooter, a sharp-shooter, and one who splits a great body.
Here, a wheel-turning monarch is one who knows what is good, who knows the Dhamma, who knows the right measure, who knows the proper time, and who knows the assembly.
Here, a wise person thinks well, speaks well, and acts well.
Here, a woman abstains from the destruction of life … from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
Here, a woman dwells at home with a heart devoid of the stain of miserliness, freely generous, openhanded, delighting in relinquishment, devoted to charity, delighting in giving and sharing.
Here, a woman finds out what her husband’s domestic helpers—whether slaves, messengers, or workers—have done and left undone; she finds out the condition of those who are ill; and she distributes to each an appropriate portion of food.
Here, a woman guards and protects whatever income her husband brings home—whether money or grain, silver or gold—and she is not a spendthrift, thief, wastrel, or squanderer of his earnings.
Here, a woman is accomplished in faith, accomplished in virtuous behavior, accomplished in generosity, and accomplished in wisdom.
Here, a woman is capable at her work; she manages the domestic help; she behaves agreeably to her husband; and she safeguards his earnings.
Here, a woman is endowed with faith.
Here, a woman is skillful and diligent in attending to her husband’s domestic chores, whether knitting or weaving; she possesses sound judgment about them in order to carry out and arrange them properly.
Here, a woman is wise; she possesses the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
Here, a woman would not commit any misdeed that her husband would consider disagreeable, even at the cost of her life.
Here, an evil bhikkhu depends on kings or royal ministers.
Here, an evil bhikkhu depends on kings or royal ministers.
Here, an evil bhikkhu depends on the uneven, depends on thickets, and depends on powerful people; he offers bribes and moves alone.
Here, an evil bhikkhu depends on the uneven, on thickets, and on powerful people.
Here, an evil bhikkhu engages in unrighteous bodily, verbal, and mental action.
Here, an evil bhikkhu engages in unrighteous bodily, verbal, and mental action.
Here, an evil bhikkhu gains robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
Here, an evil bhikkhu holds wrong view, adopts an extremist view.
Here, an evil bhikkhu holds wrong view; he has adopted an extremist view.
Here, an evil bhikkhu sets up a solitary residence for himself in the borderlands.
Here, any kind of form whatsoever—whether past, future, or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near—a bhikkhu sees all form as it really is with correct wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’
Any kind of feeling whatsoever … Any kind of perception whatsoever … Any kind of volitional activities whatsoever … Any kind of consciousness whatsoever—whether past, future, or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near—a bhikkhu sees all consciousness as it really is with correct wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is a long-distance shooter.
Here, any kind of form whatsoever—whether past, future, or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near—a bhikkhu sees all form as it really is with correct wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’
Any kind of feeling whatsoever … … Any kind of perception whatsoever … Any kind of volitional activities whatsoever … Any kind of consciousness whatsoever—whether past, future, or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near—a bhikkhu sees all consciousness as it really is with correct wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is a long-distance shooter.
Here, Bhante, a bhikkhu himself reveres the Teacher and speaks in praise of reverence for the Teacher; he encourages other bhikkhus who do not revere the Teacher to develop reverence for the Teacher and, at the proper time, genuinely and truthfully, he speaks praise of those bhikkhus who revere the Teacher.
Here, bhikkhu, when a bhikkhu’s mind is obsessed and oppressed by sensual lust …  … … obsessed and oppressed by ill will … … obsessed and oppressed by dullness and drowsiness … … obsessed and oppressed by restlessness and remorse … … obsessed and oppressed by doubt … … when a bhikkhu does not know and see what object to rely on and attend to in order to attain the immediate destruction of the taints….
Here, bhikkhus explain non-Dhamma as Dhamma … … and what has been prescribed by the Tathāgata as not having been prescribed by him.
Here, bhikkhus explain what is no offense as an offense, and what is an offense as no offense.
Here, bhikkhus, some person does not fulfill virtuous behavior, concentration, and wisdom.
Here, bhikkhus, some person gains internal serenity of mind but not the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena.
Here, by restraint a bhikkhu has abandoned those taints that are to be abandoned by restraint; by using he has abandoned those taints that are to be abandoned by using; by patiently enduring he has abandoned those taints that are to be abandoned by patiently enduring; by avoiding he has abandoned those taints that are to be abandoned by avoiding; by dispelling he has abandoned those taints that are to be abandoned by dispelling; and by developing he has abandoned those taints that are to be abandoned by developing.
Here, during the day, while walking back and forth and sitting, a bhikkhu purifies his mind of obstructive qualities.
Here, during the day, while walking back and forth and sitting, a bhikkhu purifies his mind of obstructive qualities.
Here, from time to time a bhikkhu approaches those bhikkhus who are learned, heirs to the heritage, experts on the Dhamma, experts on the discipline, experts on the outlines, and inquires of them: ‘How is this, Bhante?
Here, from time to time a bhikkhu approaches those bhikkhus who are learned, heirs to the heritage, experts on the Dhamma, experts on the discipline, experts on the outlines, and inquires: ‘How is this, Bhante?
Here, having gone to the forest, to the foot of a tree, or to an empty hut, a bhikkhu reflects thus: ‘Form is impermanent, feeling is impermanent, perception is impermanent, volitional activities are impermanent, consciousness is impermanent.’
Thus he dwells contemplating impermanence in these five aggregates subject to clinging.
Here, having gone to the forest, to the foot of a tree, or to an empty hut, a bhikkhu reflects thus: ‘I did not go forth from the household life into homelessness for the sake of a robe … but rather: “I am immersed in birth, old age, and death … Perhaps an ending of this entire mass of suffering can be discerned.”
As one who has gone forth from the household life into homelessness, I might think sensual thoughts, thoughts of ill will, or thoughts of harming.
Here, having gone to the forest, to the foot of a tree, or to an empty hut, a bhikkhu reflects thus: ‘I did not go forth from the household life into homelessness for the sake of a robe … but rather: “I am immersed in birth, old age, and death … Perhaps an ending of this entire mass of suffering can be discerned.”
The Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One, directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.
Here, having gone to the forest, to the foot of a tree, or to an empty hut, a bhikkhu reflects thus: ‘I did not go forth from the household life into homelessness for the sake of a robe, almsfood, or lodging, or for the sake of becoming this or that, but rather: “I am immersed in birth, old age, and death; in sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish.
Here, having gone to the forest, to the foot of a tree, or to an empty hut, a bhikkhu reflects thus: ‘The eye is non-self, forms are non-self; the ear is non-self, sounds are non-self; the nose is non-self, odors are non-self; the tongue is non-self, tastes are non-self; the body is non-self, tactile objects are non-self; the mind is non-self, mental phenomena are non-self.’
Thus he dwells contemplating non-self in these six internal and external sense bases.
Here, having gone to the forest, to the foot of a tree, or to an empty hut, a bhikkhu reflects thus: ‘This body is the source of much pain and danger; for all sorts of afflictions arise in this body, that is, eye-disease, disease of the inner ear, nose-disease, tongue-disease, body-disease, head-disease, disease of the external ear, mouth-disease, tooth-disease, cough, asthma, catarrh, pyrexia, fever, stomach ache, fainting, dysentery, gripes, cholera, leprosy, boils, eczema, tuberculosis, epilepsy, ringworm, itch, scab, chickenpox, scabies, hemorrhage, diabetes, hemorrhoids, cancer, fistula; illnesses originating from bile, phlegm, wind, or their combination; illnesses produced by change of climate; illnesses produced by careless behavior; illnesses produced by assault; or illnesses produced as the result of kamma; and cold, heat, hunger, thirst, defecation, and urination.’
Thus he dwells contemplating danger in this body.
Here, having gone to the forest, to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, a bhikkhu reflects thus: ‘This is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, the stilling of all activities, the relinquishment of all acquisitions, the destruction of craving, cessation, nibbāna.’
This is called the perception of cessation.
Here, having gone to the forest, to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, a bhikkhu reflects thus: ‘This is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, the stilling of all activities, the relinquishment of all acquisitions, the destruction of craving, dispassion, nibbāna.’
This is called the perception of dispassion.
Here, having reflected carefully, a bhikkhu dwells restrained over the eye faculty.
Here, having reflected, a bhikkhu uses some things, patiently endures other things, avoids still other things, and dispels still other things.
Here, having reflected, a bhikkhu uses some things; having reflected, he patiently endures some things; having reflected, he avoids some things; and having reflected, he dispels some things.
Here, having seen a form with the eye, a bhikkhu does not grasp at its marks and features.
Here, having seen a form with the eye, a bhikkhu does not grasp its marks and features.
Here, having seen a form with the eye, a bhikkhu does not grasp its marks and features.
Here, having seen a form with the eye, a bhikkhu does not grasp its marks and features.
Here, having seen a form with the eye, a bhikkhu does not grasp its marks and features.
Here, having seen a form with the eye, a bhikkhu does not grasp its marks and features.
Here, having seen a form with the eye, a bhikkhu grasps at its marks and features.
Here, having seen a form with the eye, a bhikkhu is neither joyful nor saddened, but dwells equanimous, mindful and clearly comprehending.
Here, having seen a form with the eye, a bhikkhu is neither joyful nor saddened, but dwells equanimous, mindful, and clearly comprehending.
Here, he is practicing for the welfare and happiness of many people; he is one who has established many people in the noble method, that is, in the goodness of the Dhamma, in the wholesomeness of the Dhamma.
Here, householder, a noble disciple is endowed with blameless bodily, verbal, and mental action.
Here, householder, a noble disciple possesses unwavering confidence in the Buddha thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
He possesses unwavering confidence in the Dhamma thus: ‘The Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One, directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.’
He possesses unwavering confidence in the Saṅgha thus: ‘The Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practicing the good way, practicing the straight way, practicing the true way, practicing the proper way; that is, the four pairs of persons, the eight types of individuals—this Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, the unsurpassed field of merit for the world.’
He possesses the virtuous behavior loved by the noble ones, unbroken, flawless, unblemished, unblotched, freeing, praised by the wise, ungrasped, leading to concentration.
Here, householder, a noble disciple possesses unwavering confidence in the Buddha thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
He possesses unwavering confidence in the Dhamma thus: ‘The Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One, directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.’
He possesses unwavering confidence in the Saṅgha thus: ‘The Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practicing the good way, practicing the straight way, practicing the true way, practicing the proper way; that is, the four pairs of persons, the eight types of individuals—this Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, the unsurpassed field of merit for the world.’
He possesses the virtuous behavior loved by the noble ones, unbroken, flawless, unblemished, unblotched, freeing, praised by the wise, ungrasped, leading to concentration.
Here, householder, the noble disciple reflects thus: ‘When this exists, that comes to be; with the arising of this, that arises.
Here, if he is summoned to a council, to an assembly, to his relatives’ presence, to his guild, or to the court, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ then, not knowing, this person says, ‘I do not know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I do not see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I see’; he does not consciously speak falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
Here, if he is summoned to a council, to an assembly, to his relatives’ presence, to his guild, or to the court, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ then, not knowing, this person says, ‘I know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I do not know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I do not see.’
Thus he consciously speaks falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
Here, in this assembly disciplinary acts contrary to the Dhamma are enacted and disciplinary acts in accordance with the Dhamma are not enacted; disciplinary acts contrary to the discipline are enacted and disciplinary acts in accordance with the discipline are not enacted.
Here, in this assembly disciplinary acts that accord with the Dhamma are enacted and disciplinary acts contrary to the Dhamma are not enacted; disciplinary acts that accord with the discipline are enacted and disciplinary acts contrary to the discipline are not enacted.
Here, in this kind of assembly the bhikkhus do not speak one another’s praises in the presence of householders clad in white, saying: ‘The bhikkhu so-and-so is one liberated in both respects … so-and-so is immoral and of bad character.’
They thereby receive gains, which they use without being tied to them, uninfatuated with them, not blindly absorbed in them, seeing the danger in them, understanding the escape.
Here, in this kind of assembly the bhikkhus speak one another’s praises in the presence of householders clad in white, saying: ‘The bhikkhu so-and-so is one liberated in both respects; so-and-so is one liberated by wisdom; so-and-so is a body witness; so-and-so is one attained to view; so-and-so is one liberated by faith; so-and-so is a Dhamma follower; so-and-so is a faith follower; so-and-so is virtuous and of good character; so-and-so is immoral and of bad character.’
They thereby receive gains, which they use while being tied to them, infatuated with them, blindly absorbed in them, not seeing the danger in them, not understanding the escape.
Here, in this kind of assembly the bhikkhus take up a disciplinary issue, one that may accord with the Dhamma or be contrary to the Dhamma.
Here, in this kind of assembly the bhikkhus take up a disciplinary issue, one that may accord with the Dhamma or be contrary to the Dhamma.
Here, in this kind of assembly the elder bhikkhus are luxurious and lax, leaders in backsliding, discarding the duty of solitude; they do not arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
Here, in this kind of assembly the elder bhikkhus are not luxurious and lax but discard backsliding and take the lead in solitude; they arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
Here, in this kind of assembly the elder bhikkhus do not become luxurious and lax, but discard backsliding and take the lead in solitude; they arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
Here, in this kind of assembly, when those discourses are being recited that are mere poetry composed by poets, beautiful in words and phrases, created by outsiders, spoken by disciples, the bhikkhus do not want to listen to them, do not lend an ear to them, or apply their minds to understand them; they do not think those teachings should be studied and learned.
Here, in this kind of assembly, when those discourses spoken by the Tathāgata are being recited that are deep, deep in meaning, world-transcending, connected with emptiness, the bhikkhus do not want to listen to them, do not lend an ear to them, or apply their minds to understand them; they do not think those teachings should be studied and learned.
Here, in whatever village or town a clansman lives, he associates with householders or their sons—whether young but of mature virtue, or old and of mature virtue—who are accomplished in faith, virtuous behavior, generosity, and wisdom; he converses with them and engages in discussions with them.
Here, in whatever village or town a clansman lives, he associates with householders or their sons—whether young but of mature virtue, or old and of mature virtue—who are accomplished in faith, virtuous behavior, generosity, and wisdom; he converses with them and engages in discussions with them.
Here, it occurs to an elder bhikkhu: ‘An elder —and one of middle standing and a junior —should correct me.
Here, it occurs to an elder bhikkhu: ‘An elder —or one of middle standing or a junior —should not correct me.
Here, one kind of excellent thoroughbred horse … possesses speed, beauty, and the right proportions.
Here, one kind of good horse possesses speed but not beauty or the right proportions.
Here, one kind of person who is like a good horse possesses speed but not beauty or the right proportions.
Here, one kind of person who is like a wild colt possesses speed but not beauty or the right proportions.
Here, one kind of person who is like a wild colt possesses speed but not beauty or the right proportions.
Here, one kind of person … possesses speed, beauty, and the right proportions.
Here, one kind of wild colt possesses speed but not beauty or the right proportions.
Here, one patient will not recover from his illness whether or not he gets suitable food, suitable medicine, and a competent attendant.
Here, one person gives another a robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
Here, one person is desirable, lovable, and agreeable to another.
Here, one person is desirable, lovable, and agreeable to another.
Here, one person is undesirable, unlovable, and disagreeable to another.
Here, one person is undesirable, unlovable, and disagreeable to another.
Here, one person lives together with another for two or three years.
Here, one without faith desires: ‘Let them know me as one endowed with faith.’
An immoral person desires: ‘Let them know me as virtuous.’
One with little learning desires: ‘Let them know me as learned.’
One who delights in company desires: ‘Let them know me as solitary.’
One who is lazy desires: ‘Let them know me as energetic.’
One who is muddle-minded desires: ‘Let them know me as mindful.’
One who is unconcentrated desires: ‘Let them know me as concentrated.’
One who is unwise desires: ‘Let them know me as wise.’
One whose taints are not destroyed desires: ‘Let them know me as one whose taints are destroyed.’
This is called evil desire.
Here, reflecting carefully a bhikkhu avoids a wild elephant, a wild horse, a wild bull, and a wild dog; he avoids a snake, a stump, a clump of thorns, a pit, a precipice, a refuse dump, and a cesspit.
Here, reflecting carefully a bhikkhu develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness, which is based upon seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in release.
Here, reflecting carefully a bhikkhu does not tolerate an arisen sensual thought; he abandons it, dispels it, terminates it, and obliterates it.
Here, reflecting carefully a bhikkhu patiently endures cold and heat, hunger and thirst; contact with flies, mosquitoes, wind, the burning sun, and serpents; rude and offensive ways of speech; he bears up with arisen bodily feelings that are painful, racking, sharp, piercing, harrowing, disagreeable, sapping one’s vitality.
Here, reflecting carefully a bhikkhu uses a robe only for warding off cold; for warding off heat; for warding off contact with flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and serpents; and only for covering the private parts.
Here, reflecting carefully, a bhikkhu consumes food neither for amusement nor for intoxication nor for the sake of physical beauty and attractiveness, but only for the support and maintenance of this body, for avoiding harm, and for assisting the spiritual life, considering: ‘Thus I shall terminate the old feeling and not arouse a new feeling, and I shall be healthy and blameless and dwell at ease.’
It is in this way that a bhikkhu observes moderation in eating.
Here, reflecting carefully, a bhikkhu consumes food neither for amusement nor for intoxication nor for the sake of physical beauty and attractiveness, but only for the support and maintenance of this body, for avoiding harm, and for assisting the spiritual life, considering: ‘Thus I shall terminate the old feeling and not arouse a new feeling, and I shall be healthy and blameless and dwell at ease.’
It is in this way that a bhikkhu observes moderation in eating.
Here, rich, wealthy, affluent householders and householders’ sons know him thus: ‘This good shopkeeper has keen eyes and is responsible; he is able to support his wife and children and pay us back from time to time.’
So they deposit wealth with him, saying: ‘Having earned wealth with this, friend shopkeeper, support your wife and children and pay us back from time to time.’
It is in this way that a shopkeeper has benefactors.
Here, right view is assisted by virtuous behavior, learning, discussion, calm, and insight.
Here, secluded from sensual pleasures … a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna ….
Here, secluded from sensual pleasures … a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna.
Here, secluded from sensual pleasures … a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna.
Here, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna … the fourth jhāna.
Here, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna … the fourth jhāna.
Here, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna … the fourth jhāna….
Here, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna … the fourth jhāna….
Here, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna … the second jhāna … the third jhāna … the fourth jhāna.
Here, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna … … the fourth jhāna….
Here, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna … … the second jhāna … … the third jhāna … … the fourth jhāna.
Here, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
Here, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
Here, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
Here, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
Here, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
Here, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
Here, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a noble disciple enters and dwells in the first jhāna … … the fourth jhāna.
Here, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, the Tathāgata enters and dwells in the first jhāna … the fourth jhāna.
Here, sister, a bhikkhu hears: ‘The bhikkhu named so-and-so, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.’
He thinks: ‘That venerable one, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
Here, sister, a bhikkhu hears: ‘The bhikkhu named so-and-so, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.’
He thinks: ‘When will I, with the destruction of the taints, realize for myself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwell in it?’
Some time later, in dependence upon craving, he abandons craving.
Here, sister, reflecting carefully, a bhikkhu consumes food neither for amusement nor for intoxication nor for the sake of physical beauty and attractiveness, but only for the support and maintenance of this body, for avoiding harm, and for assisting the spiritual life, considering: ‘Thus I shall terminate the old feeling and not arouse a new feeling, and I shall be healthy and blameless and dwell at ease.’
Some time later, in dependence upon nutriment, he abandons nutriment.
Here, some person does not himself abstain from the destruction of life and does not encourage others to abstain from the destruction of life….
Here, some person does not himself abstain from the destruction of life but he encourages others to abstain from the destruction of life….
Here, some person does not practice to remove his own lust, hatred, and delusion, nor does he encourage others to remove their lust, hatred, and delusion.
Here, some person does not resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves, and he thinks sensual thoughts, thoughts of ill will, and thoughts of harming.
Here, some person does not resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves, but he thinks thoughts of renunciation, thoughts of good will, and thoughts of harmlessness.
Here, some person encourages others to remove their lust, hatred, and delusion, but does not practice to remove his own lust, hatred, and delusion.
Here, some person gains internal serenity of mind but not the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena.
Here, some person gains internal serenity of mind but not the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena.
Here, some person has been reborn in a high family … with abundant wealth and grain; and he is handsome … possessing supreme beauty of complexion.
Here, some person has been reborn in a high family—an affluent khattiya family, an affluent brahmin family, or an affluent householder family—one that is rich, with great wealth and property, with abundant gold and silver, with abundant treasures and belongings, with abundant wealth and grain; and he is handsome, attractive, graceful, possessing supreme beauty of complexion.
Here, some person has been reborn in a low family … where food and clothing are obtained with difficulty; and he is ugly … or paralyzed.
Here, some person has been reborn in a low family—a family of caṇḍālas, bamboo workers, hunters, cart makers, or flower scavengers—one that is poor, with little food and drink, that subsists with difficulty, where food and clothing are obtained with difficulty; and he is ugly, unsightly, dwarfish, with much illness—blind, crippled, lame, or paralyzed.
Here, some person has gone under once and remains under.
Here, some person has risen up,: ‘Good is faith in wholesome qualities … good is wisdom in wholesome qualities.’
His faith neither diminishes nor grows; it just stays put.
Here, some person has risen up,: ‘Good is faith in wholesome qualities … good is wisdom in wholesome qualities.’
With the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, he is of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without returning from that world.
Here, some person has risen up,: ‘Good is faith in wholesome qualities … good is wisdom in wholesome qualities.’
With the utter destruction of three fetters and with the diminishing of greed, hatred, and delusion, this person is a once-returner who, after coming back to this world only one more time, will make an end of suffering.
Here, some person has risen up,: ‘Good is faith in wholesome qualities … good is wisdom in wholesome qualities.’
With the utter destruction of three fetters, this person is a stream-enterer, no longer subject to the lower world, fixed in destiny, heading for enlightenment.
Here, some person has risen up,: ‘Good is faith in wholesome qualities; good is a sense of moral shame in wholesome qualities; good is moral dread in wholesome qualities; good is energy in wholesome qualities; good is wisdom in wholesome qualities.’
However, his faith does not become stable or grow but rather diminishes.
Here, some person has risen up,: ‘Good is faith in wholesome qualities; good is a sense of moral shame in wholesome qualities; good is moral dread in wholesome qualities; good is energy in wholesome qualities; good is wisdom in wholesome qualities.’
With the destruction of the taints, he has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
Here, some person has the kind of eye with which one can acquire wealth not yet acquired and increase wealth already acquired, and he also has the kind of eye with which one can know wholesome and unwholesome qualities, blameworthy and blameless qualities, inferior and superior qualities, dark and bright qualities with their counterparts.
Here, some person has the kind of eye with which one can acquire wealth not yet acquired and increase wealth already acquired, but he lacks the kind of eye with which one can know wholesome and unwholesome qualities, blameworthy and blameless qualities, inferior and superior qualities, dark and bright qualities with their counterparts.
Here, some person himself abstains from the destruction of life and encourages others to abstain from the destruction of life….
Here, some person himself abstains from the destruction of life but does not encourage others to abstain from the destruction of life.
Here, some person is a head-anointed khattiya king or an affluent brahmin.
Here, some person is developed in body, virtuous behavior, mind, and wisdom.
Here, some person is developed in body, virtuous behavior, mind, and wisdom.
Here, some person is developed in body, virtuous behavior, mind, and wisdom.
Here, some person is developed in body, virtuous behavior, mind, and wisdom.
Here, some person is immoral, of bad character, impure, of suspect behavior, secretive in his actions, not an ascetic though claiming to be one, not a celibate though claiming to be one, inwardly rotten, corrupt, depraved.
Here, some person is immoral, of bad character, of impure and suspect behavior, secretive in his actions, not an ascetic though claiming to be one, not a celibate though claiming to be one, inwardly rotten, corrupt, depraved.
Here, some person is inferior in virtuous behavior, concentration, and wisdom.
Here, some person is not quick in attending to wholesome teachings … he does not practice in accordance with the Dhamma.
Here, some person is not quick in attending to wholesome teachings, is unable to retain in mind the teachings he has heard, and does not examine the meaning of the teachings he has retained.
Here, some person is not restless, puffed up, and personally vain; he is not talkative and rambling in his talk; he has mindfulness established and clearly comprehends, is concentrated, with a one-pointed mind, with restrained sense faculties.
Here, some person is prone to anger and easily exasperated.
Here, some person is prone to anger and easily exasperated.
Here, some person is quick in attending to wholesome teachings … he practices in accordance with the Dhamma.
Here, some person is quick in attending to wholesome teachings, is able to retain in mind the teachings he has heard, and examines the meaning of the teachings he has retained.
Here, some person is restless, puffed up, personally vain, talkative, rambling in his talk, muddle-minded, without clear comprehension, unconcentrated, with a wandering mind, with loose sense faculties.
Here, some person is similar in virtuous behavior, concentration, and wisdom.
Here, some person is superior in virtuous behavior, concentration, and wisdom.
Here, some person is undeveloped in body … and wisdom.
Here, some person is undeveloped in body, virtuous behavior, mind, and wisdom.
Here, some person is undeveloped in body, virtuous behavior, mind, and wisdom; he is limited and has a mean character, and he dwells in suffering.
Here, some person is undeveloped in body, virtuous behavior, mind, and wisdom; he is limited and has a mean character, and he dwells in suffering.
Here, some person is virtuous and of good character.
Here, some person lacks the kind of eye with which one can acquire wealth not yet acquired and increase wealth already acquired, and he also lacks the kind of eye with which one can know wholesome and unwholesome qualities, blameworthy and blameless qualities, inferior and superior qualities, dark and bright qualities with their counterparts.
Here, some person often gets angry, and his anger persists for a long time.
Here, some person often gets angry, but his anger does not persist for a long time.
Here, some person often goes to the monastery to listen to the Dhamma from the bhikkhus.
Here, some person often goes to the monastery to listen to the Dhamma from the bhikkhus.
Here, some person often goes to the monastery to listen to the Dhamma from the bhikkhus.
Here, some person possesses exclusively black, unwholesome qualities.
Here, some person practices to remove his own lust, hatred, and delusion but does not encourage others to remove their lust, hatred, and delusion.
Here, some person practices to remove his own lust, hatred, and delusion, and he encourages others to remove their lust, hatred, and delusion.
Here, some person resorts to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves, and there he thinks thoughts of renunciation, thoughts of good will, and thoughts of harmlessness.
Here, some person resorts to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves, but there he thinks sensual thoughts, thoughts of ill will, and thoughts of harming.
Here, some person speaks dispraise of someone who deserves dispraise, and the dispraise is accurate, truthful, and timely; but he does not speak praise of someone who deserves praise, though the praise would be accurate, truthful, and timely.
Here, some person understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering,’ and ‘This is the origin of suffering,’ and ‘This is the cessation of suffering,’ and ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
Just as, in the dense darkness of night, a man with good sight can see forms by a flash of lightning, so too some person here understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
This person is said to have a mind like lightning.
Here, some person will not enter upon the fixed course rightness in wholesome qualities whether or not he gets to see the Tathāgata and whether or not he gets to hear the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata.
Here, some person, even when spoken to roughly and harshly, in disagreeable ways, remains on friendly terms, mingles, and greets.
Here, some person, having abandoned harsh speech, abstains from harsh speech.
Here, someone abstains from false speech, from divisive speech, from harsh speech, and from idle chatter.
Here, someone abstains from false speech, from divisive speech, from harsh speech, and from idle chatter.
Here, someone abstains from the destruction of life … abstains from idle chatter.
Here, someone abstains from the destruction of life … abstains from idle chatter; he is without longing, of good will, and holds right view.
Here, someone abstains from the destruction of life … and from idle chatter.
Here, someone abstains from the destruction of life … and holds right view.
Here, someone abstains from the destruction of life … and holds right view.
Here, someone abstains from the destruction of life … … This is called accomplishment in view.
Here, someone abstains from the destruction of life, abstains from taking what is not given, abstains from sexual misconduct, abstains from false speech, abstains from divisive speech, abstains from harsh speech, and abstains from idle chatter; he is without longing, of good will, and holds right view.
Here, someone abstains from the destruction of life, abstains from taking what is not given, abstains from sexual misconduct, abstains from false speech, and abstains from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
Here, someone abstains from the destruction of life, abstains from taking what is not given, abstains from sexual misconduct, abstains from false speech, and abstains from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
Here, someone abstains from the destruction of life, from taking what is not given, and from sexual activity.
Here, someone abstains from the destruction of life, from taking what is not given, and from sexual misconduct.
Here, someone abstains from the destruction of life, from taking what is not given, from sexual misconduct, from false speech, from divisive speech, from harsh speech, and from idle chatter.
Here, someone by nature is not strongly prone to lust and does not often experience pain and dejection born of lust.
Here, someone by nature is not strongly prone to lust … hatred … delusion and does not often experience pain and dejection born of delusion.
Here, someone destroys life … and holds wrong view.
Here, someone destroys life … and holds wrong view.
Here, someone destroys life … and indulges in idle chatter.
Here, someone destroys life … indulges in idle chatter; he is full of longing, bears ill will, and holds wrong view.
Here, someone destroys life … … This is called failure in view.
Here, someone destroys life, takes what is not given, engages in sexual misconduct, speaks falsehood, speaks divisively, speaks harshly, and indulges in idle chatter.
Here, someone destroys life, takes what is not given, engages in sexual misconduct, speaks falsehood, speaks divisively, speaks harshly, and indulges in idle chatter.
Here, someone destroys life, takes what is not given, engages in sexual misconduct, speaks falsely, and indulges in liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
Here, someone destroys life, takes what is not given, engages in sexual misconduct, speaks falsely, and indulges in liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
Here, someone does not indulge in sensual pleasures or perform bad deeds.
Here, someone does not inspire confidence by his manner of going forward and returning … and carrying his outer robe and bowl; and he does not understand as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is empty and open.
Here, someone does not inspire confidence by his manner of going forward and returning … and carrying his outer robe and bowl; and he does not understand as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is shallow and appears to be shallow.
Here, someone does not inspire confidence by his manner of going forward and returning … and carrying his outer robe and bowl; and he does not understand as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is unripe and appears to be unripe.
Here, someone does not inspire confidence by his manner of going forward and returning … and carrying his outer robe and bowl; but he understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is deep but appears to be shallow.
Here, someone does not inspire confidence by his manner of going forward and returning … and carrying his outer robe and bowl; but he understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is full and open.
Here, someone does not inspire confidence by his manner of going forward and returning … and carrying his outer robe and bowl; but he understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is ripe but appears to be unripe.
Here, someone does not insult one who insults him, does not scold one who scolds him, and does not argue with one who picks an argument with him.
Here, someone does not intimidate his own retinue or the retinues of others.
Here, someone does not master the Dhamma—the discourses … questions-and-answers—and he does not understand as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is one who neither makes a hole nor lives in one.
Here, someone does not master the Dhamma—the discourses … questions-and-answers—and he does not understand as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is one who neither thunders nor rains.
Here, someone does not master the Dhamma—the discourses … questions-and-answers—but he understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is one who lives in a hole but does not make one.
Here, someone does not master the Dhamma—the discourses … questions-and-answers—but he understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is one who rains but does not thunder.
Here, someone does not often become angry, and his anger does not linger for a long time.
Here, someone does not often become angry, but his anger lingers for a long time.
Here, someone does not patiently endure cold and heat; hunger and thirst; contact with flies, mosquitoes, wind, the burning sun, and serpents; rude and offensive ways of speech; he is unable to bear up with arisen bodily feelings that are painful, racking, sharp, piercing, harrowing, disagreeable, sapping one’s vitality.
Here, someone does not understand as they really are the origin and the passing away, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in regard to sensual pleasures.
Here, someone does not understand as they really are the origin and the passing away, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in regard to states of existence.
Here, someone does not understand as they really are the origin and the passing away, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in regard to the six bases for contact.
Here, someone does not understand as they really are the origin and the passing away, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in regard to views.
Here, someone gains a son, a wife, or wealth; or they gain various goods; or else they obtain faith in an ascetic or brahmin of wrong views, of wrong practice.
Here, someone goes naked, rejecting conventions, licking his hands, not coming when asked, not stopping when asked; he does not accept food brought or food specially made or an invitation to a meal; he receives nothing from a pot, from a bowl, across a threshold, across a stick, across a pestle, from two eating together, from a pregnant woman, from a woman nursing a child, from a woman being kept by a man, from where food is advertised to be distributed, from where a dog is waiting, from where flies are buzzing; he accepts no fish or meat; he drinks no liquor, wine, or fermented brew.
Here, someone goes to hear the sound of drums, the sound of lutes, the sound of singing, or to hear various sounds; or else they go to hear the Dhamma of an ascetic or brahmin of wrong views, of wrong practice.
Here, someone goes to see the elephant-gem, the horse-gem, the jewel-gem, or to see various sights; or else they go to see an ascetic or brahmin of wrong views, of wrong practice.
Here, someone has been reborn in a high family—an affluent khattiya family, an affluent brahmin family, or an affluent householder family—one that is rich, with great wealth and property, abundant gold and silver, abundant treasures and commodities, abundant wealth and grain; and he is handsome, attractive, graceful, possessing supreme beauty of complexion.
Here, someone has been reborn in a high family….
Here, someone has been reborn in a high family….
Here, someone has been reborn in a low family—a family of caṇḍālas, hunters, bamboo workers, cart makers, or flower scavengers—one that is poor, with little food and drink, that subsists with difficulty, where food and clothing are obtained with difficulty; and he is ugly, unsightly, dwarfish, with much illness—blind, crippled, lame, or paralyzed.
Here, someone has been reborn in a low family….
Here, someone has been reborn in a low family….
Here, someone has engaged in bodily good conduct and avoided engaging in bodily misconduct; engaged in verbal good conduct and avoided engaging in verbal misconduct; engaged in mental good conduct and avoided engaging in mental misconduct.
Here, someone has engaged in bodily misconduct but failed to engage in bodily good conduct; engaged in verbal misconduct but failed to engage in verbal good conduct; engaged in mental misconduct but failed to engage in mental good conduct.
Here, someone has learned little—that is, of the discourses … questions-and-answers—but having understood the meaning of what he has learned, and having understood the Dhamma, he practices in accordance with the Dhamma.
Here, someone has learned little—that is, of the discourses, mixed prose and verse, expositions, verses, inspired utterances, quotations, birth stories, amazing accounts, and questions-and-answers—but he does not understand the meaning of what he has learned; he does not understand the Dhamma; and he does not practice in accordance with the Dhamma.
Here, someone has learned much—that is, of the discourses … questions-and-answers—and having understood the meaning of what he has learned, and having understood the Dhamma, he practices in accordance with the Dhamma.
Here, someone has learned much—that is, of the discourses … questions-and-answers—but he does not understand the meaning of what he has learned; he does not understand the Dhamma; and he does not practice in accordance with the Dhamma.
Here, someone himself abstains from the destruction of life and encourages others to abstain from the destruction of life … he himself abstains from idle chatter and encourages others to abstain from idle chatter.
Here, someone himself abstains from the destruction of life and encourages others to abstain from the destruction of life … he himself holds right view and encourages others in right view.
Here, someone himself abstains from the destruction of life and encourages others to abstain from the destruction of life … he himself holds right view and encourages others in right view.
Here, someone himself abstains from the destruction of life and encourages others to abstain from the destruction of life … he is himself without longing and encourages others in non-longing; he is himself of good will and encourages others in good will; he himself holds right view and encourages others in right view.
Here, someone himself abstains from the destruction of life and encourages others to abstain from the destruction of life; he himself abstains from taking what is not given and encourages others to abstain from taking what is not given; he himself abstains from sexual misconduct and encourages others to abstain from sexual misconduct; he himself abstains from false speech and encourages others to abstain from false speech; he himself abstains from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness, and encourages others to abstain from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
Here, someone himself destroys life and encourages others to destroy life … he himself holds wrong view and encourages others in wrong view.
Here, someone himself destroys life and encourages others to destroy life … he himself holds wrong view and encourages others in wrong view.
Here, someone himself destroys life and encourages others to destroy life … he himself indulges in idle chatter and encourages others to indulge in idle chatter.
Here, someone himself destroys life and encourages others to destroy life … he holds wrong view himself and encourages others in wrong view.
Here, someone himself destroys life and encourages others to destroy life; he himself takes what is not given and encourages others to take what is not given; he himself engages in sexual misconduct and encourages others to engage in sexual misconduct; he himself speaks falsely and encourages others to speak falsely; he himself indulges in liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness, and encourages others to indulge in liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
Here, someone holds right view and has a correct perspective thus: ‘There is what is given … there are in the world ascetics and brahmins of right conduct and right practice who, having realized this world and the other world for themselves by direct knowledge, make them known to others.’
This is called accomplishment in view.
Here, someone holds right view and has a correct perspective thus: ‘There is what is given, sacrificed, and offered; there is fruit and result of good and bad actions; there is this world and the other world; there is mother and father; there are beings spontaneously reborn; there are in the world ascetics and brahmins of right conduct and right practice who, having realized this world and the other world for themselves by direct knowledge, make them known to others.’
This is called accomplishment in view.
Here, someone holds such a doctrine and view as this: ‘There is no fault in sensual pleasures,’ and then indulges in sensual pleasures.
Here, someone holds wrong view and has an incorrect perspective thus: ‘There is nothing given … there are in the world no ascetics and brahmins of right conduct and right practice who, having realized this world and the other world for themselves by direct knowledge, make them known to others.’
This is called failure in view.
Here, someone holds wrong view and has an incorrect perspective thus: ‘There is nothing given, nothing sacrificed, nothing offered; there is no fruit or result of good and bad actions; there is no this world, no other world; there is no mother, no father; there are no beings spontaneously reborn; there are in the world no ascetics and brahmins of right conduct and right practice who, having realized this world and the other world for themselves by direct knowledge, make them known to others.’
This is called failure in view.
Here, someone indulges in sensual pleasures and performs bad deeds.
Here, someone inspires confidence by his manner of going forward and returning, looking ahead and looking aside, drawing in and extending the limbs, wearing his robes and carrying his outer robe and bowl; and he understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering,’ and ‘This is the origin of suffering,’ and ‘This is the cessation of suffering,’ and ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is deep and appears to be deep.
Here, someone inspires confidence by his manner of going forward and returning, looking ahead and looking aside, drawing in and extending the limbs, wearing his robes and carrying his outer robe and bowl; and he understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering,’ and ‘This is the origin of suffering,’ and ‘This is the cessation of suffering,’ and ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is full and covered.
Here, someone inspires confidence by his manner of going forward and returning, looking ahead and looking aside, drawing in and extending the limbs, wearing his robes and carrying his outer robe and bowl; and he understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering,’ and ‘This is the origin of suffering,’ and ‘This is the cessation of suffering,’ and ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is ripe and appears to be ripe.
Here, someone inspires confidence by his manner of going forward and returning, looking ahead and looking aside, drawing in and extending the limbs, wearing his robes and carrying his outer robe and bowl; but he does not understand as it really is: ‘This is suffering,’ and ‘This is the origin of suffering,’ and ‘This is the cessation of suffering,’ and ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is empty and covered.
Here, someone inspires confidence by his manner of going forward and returning, looking ahead and looking aside, drawing in and extending the limbs, wearing his robes and carrying his outer robe and bowl; but he does not understand as it really is: ‘This is suffering,’ and ‘This is the origin of suffering,’ and ‘This is the cessation of suffering,’ and ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is shallow but appears to be deep.
Here, someone inspires confidence by his manner of going forward and returning, looking ahead and looking aside, drawing in and extending the limbs, wearing his robes and carrying his outer robe and bowl; but he does not understand as it really is: ‘This is suffering,’ and ‘This is the origin of suffering,’ and ‘This is the cessation of suffering,’ and ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is unripe but appears to be ripe.
Here, someone instructs thus: ‘Think in this way and not in that way!
Here, someone insults one who insults him, scolds one who scolds him, and argues with one who picks an argument with him.
Here, someone intimidates both the retinues of others and also his own retinue.
Here, someone intimidates his own retinue but not the retinues of others.
Here, someone intimidates the retinues of others but not his own retinue.
Here, someone is a doer, not a talker.
Here, someone is a talker, not a doer.
Here, someone is both a talker and a doer.
Here, someone is by nature strongly prone to lust and often experiences pain and dejection born of lust.
Here, someone is by nature strongly prone to lust … hatred … delusion and often experiences pain and dejection born of delusion.
Here, someone is devoid of faith, morally shameless, morally reckless, deficient in learning, lazy, muddle-minded, and unwise.
Here, someone is endowed with faith, has a sense of moral shame and moral dread, and is learned, energetic, mindful, and wise.
Here, someone is full of longing and has a mind of ill will.
Here, someone is highly learned in the various fields of learning.
Here, someone is himself accomplished in faith and encourages others to be accomplished in faith; he himself has a sense of moral shame and encourages others in moral shame; he himself has moral dread and encourages others in moral dread; he is himself learned and encourages others in learning; he is himself energetic and encourages others to arouse energy; he is himself mindful and encourages others to establish mindfulness; he is himself wise and encourages others to be accomplished in wisdom.
Here, someone is himself devoid of faith and encourages others to be devoid of faith; he is himself morally shameless and encourages others to be morally shameless; he is himself morally reckless and encourages others to be morally reckless; he is himself deficient in learning and encourages others to be deficient in learning; he is himself lazy and encourages others in laziness; he is himself muddle-minded and encourages others in being muddle-minded; he is himself unwise and encourages others in lack of wisdom.
Here, someone is himself of right view and encourages others in right view … he is himself of right concentration and encourages others in right concentration.
Here, someone is himself of right view and encourages others in right view … he is himself of right liberation and encourages others in right liberation.
Here, someone is himself of right view and encourages others in right view … he is himself of right liberation and encourages others in right liberation.
Here, someone is himself of right view and encourages others in right view … he is himself of right liberation and encourages others in right liberation.
Here, someone is himself of wrong view and encourages others in wrong view … he is himself of wrong concentration and encourages others in wrong concentration.
Here, someone is himself of wrong view and encourages others in wrong view … he is himself of wrong liberation and encourages others in wrong liberation.
Here, someone is himself of wrong view and encourages others in wrong view … he is himself of wrong liberation and encourages others in wrong liberation.
Here, someone is himself of wrong view and encourages others in wrong view … he is himself of wrong liberation and encourages others in wrong liberation.
Here, someone is immoral, of bad character, and his retinue is also immoral, of bad character.
Here, someone is immoral, of bad character, and his retinue is immoral, of bad character.
Here, someone is immoral, of bad character, but his retinue is virtuous, of good character.
Here, someone is immoral, of bad character, but his retinue is virtuous, of good character.
Here, someone is neither a talker nor a doer.
Here, someone is of right livelihood and earns a living by a right type of livelihood.
Here, someone is of right view … of right liberation.
Here, someone is of right view … of right liberation.
Here, someone is of right view … right concentration, right knowledge, and right liberation.
Here, someone is of right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
Here, someone is of wrong livelihood and earns a living by a wrong type of livelihood.
Here, someone is of wrong view … of wrong liberation.
Here, someone is of wrong view … wrong concentration, wrong knowledge, and wrong liberation.
Here, someone is of wrong view … wrong liberation.
Here, someone is of wrong view, wrong intention, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong concentration.
Here, someone is poor, with little property and wealth.
Here, someone is rich, with much money and wealth.
Here, someone is virtuous, of good character, and his retinue is also virtuous, of good character.
Here, someone is virtuous, of good character, and his retinue is virtuous, of good character.
Here, someone is virtuous, of good character, but his retinue is immoral, of bad character.
Here, someone is virtuous, of good character, but his retinue is immoral, of bad character.
Here, someone is without longing and has a mind free of ill will.
Here, someone is without longing, without ill will, and holds right view.
Here, someone masters the Dhamma—the discourses, mixed prose and verse, expositions, verses, inspired utterances, quotations, birth stories, amazing accounts, and questions-and-answers—and he understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering,’ and ‘This is the origin of suffering,’ and ‘This is the cessation of suffering,’ and ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is one who both makes a hole and lives in it.
Here, someone masters the Dhamma—the discourses, mixed prose and verse, expositions, verses, inspired utterances, quotations, birth stories, amazing accounts, and questions-and-answers—and he understands as it really is: ‘This is suffering,’ and ‘This is the origin of suffering,’ and ‘This is the cessation of suffering,’ and ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is one who both thunders and rains.
Here, someone masters the Dhamma—the discourses, mixed prose and verse, expositions, verses, inspired utterances, quotations, birth stories, amazing accounts, and questions-and-answers—but he does not understand as it really is: ‘This is suffering,’ and ‘This is the origin of suffering,’ and ‘This is the cessation of suffering,’ and ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is one who makes a hole but does not live in it.
Here, someone masters the Dhamma—the discourses, mixed prose and verse, expositions, verses, inspired utterances, quotations, birth stories, amazing accounts, and questions-and-answers—but he does not understand as it really is: ‘This is suffering,’ and ‘This is the origin of suffering,’ and ‘This is the cessation of suffering,’ and ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
It is in this way that a person is one who thunders but does not rain.
Here, someone of the black class produces a black state.
Here, someone often becomes angry, and his anger lingers for a long time.
Here, someone often becomes angry, but his anger does not linger for a long time.
Here, someone overcome by suffering, with a mind obsessed by it, sorrows, languishes, and laments; he weeps beating his breast and becomes confused.
Here, someone patiently endures cold and heat … rude and offensive ways of speech; he is able to bear up with arisen bodily feelings that are painful, racking, sharp, piercing, harrowing, disagreeable, sapping one’s vitality.
Here, someone performs a bodily volitional activity that is both afflictive and non-afflictive, a verbal volitional activity that is both afflictive and non-afflictive, a mental volitional activity that is both afflictive and non-afflictive.
Here, someone performs a bodily volitional activity that is both afflictive and non-afflictive, a verbal volitional activity that is both afflictive and non-afflictive, a mental volitional activity that is both afflictive and non-afflictive.
Here, someone performs a non-afflictive bodily volitional activity, a non-afflictive verbal volitional activity, a non-afflictive mental volitional activity.
Here, someone performs an afflictive bodily volitional activity, an afflictive verbal volitional activity, an afflictive mental volitional activity.
Here, someone recollects the gain of a son, a wife, or wealth; or else they recollect various kinds of gain; or else they recollect an ascetic or brahmin of wrong views, of wrong practice.
Here, someone reflects thus: ‘Bodily misconduct has a bad result in the present life and in the future life; verbal misconduct has a bad result in the present life and in the future life; mental misconduct has a bad result in the present life and in the future life.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons bodily misconduct and develops bodily good conduct; he abandons verbal misconduct and develops verbal good conduct; he abandons mental misconduct and develops mental good conduct; he maintains himself in purity.
Here, someone reflects thus: ‘Bodily misconduct has a bad result in the present life and in the future life; verbal misconduct has a bad result in the present life and in the future life; mental misconduct has a bad result in the present life and in the future life.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons bodily misconduct and develops bodily good conduct; he abandons verbal misconduct and develops verbal good conduct; he abandons mental misconduct and develops mental good conduct; he maintains himself in purity.
Here, someone reflects thus: ‘Bodily misconduct has a bad result in the present life and in the future life; verbal misconduct has a bad result in the present life and in the future life; mental misconduct has a bad result in the present life and in the future life.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons bodily misconduct and develops bodily good conduct; he abandons verbal misconduct and develops verbal good conduct; he abandons mental misconduct and develops mental good conduct; he maintains himself in purity.
Here, someone reflects thus: ‘Bodily misconduct has a bad, painful result in the future life; verbal misconduct has a bad, painful result in the future life; mental misconduct has a bad, painful result in the future life.
Here, someone reflects thus: ‘Bodily misconduct has bad results in future lives; verbal misconduct has bad results in future lives; mental misconduct has bad results in future lives.
Here, someone reflects thus: ‘If I were to engage in bodily, verbal, or mental misconduct, wouldn’t I reprove myself because of my behavior?’
Afraid of the peril of self-reproach, he abandons bodily misconduct and develops bodily good conduct; he abandons verbal misconduct and develops verbal good conduct; he abandons mental misconduct and develops mental good conduct; he maintains himself in purity.
Here, someone reflects thus: ‘If I were to engage in bodily, verbal, or mental misconduct, wouldn’t others reprove me because of my behavior?’
Afraid of the peril of reproach by others, he abandons bodily misconduct and develops bodily good conduct; he abandons verbal misconduct and develops verbal good conduct; he abandons mental misconduct and develops mental good conduct; he maintains himself in purity.
Here, someone sees that when kings arrest a robber, a criminal, they subject him to various punishments: they have him flogged with whips, beaten with canes, beaten with clubs; they have his hands cut off, his feet cut off, his hands and feet cut off; his ears cut off, his nose cut off, his ears and nose cut off; they have him subjected to the ‘porridge pot,’ to the ‘polished-shell shave,’ to the ‘Rāhu’s mouth,’ to the ‘fiery wreath,’ to the ‘flaming hand,’ to the ‘blades of grass,’ to the ‘bark dress,’ to the ‘antelope,’ to the ‘meat hooks,’ to the ‘coins,’ to the ‘lye pickling,’ to the ‘pivoting pin,’ to the ‘rolled-up palliasse’; and they have him splashed with boiling oil, and they have him devoured by dogs, and they have him impaled alive on stakes, and they have his head cut off with a sword.
Here, someone sees that when kings arrest a thief who has committed a crime, they subject him to various punishments: they have him flogged with whips, beaten with canes, beaten with clubs; they have his hands cut off, his feet cut off, his hands and feet cut off; his ears cut off, his nose cut off, his ears and nose cut off; they have him subjected to the ‘porridge pot,’ to the ‘polished-shell shave,’ to the ‘Rāhu’s mouth,’ to the ‘fiery wreath,’ to the ‘flaming hand,’ to the ‘blades of grass,’ to the ‘bark dress,’ to the ‘antelope,’ to the ‘meat hooks,’ to the ‘coins,’ to the ‘lye pickling,’ to the ‘pivoting pin,’ to the ‘rolled-up palliasse’; and they have him splashed with boiling oil, and they have him devoured by dogs, and they have him impaled alive on a stake, and they have his head cut off with a sword.
Here, someone serves a khattiya, a brahmin, a householder; or they serve various others; or else they serve an ascetic or brahmin of wrong views, of wrong practice.
Here, someone takes his mother’s life, takes his father’s life, takes an arahant’s life, with a mind of hatred sheds the Tathāgata’s blood, or creates a schism in the Saṅgha.
Here, someone trains in elephantry, in horsemanship, in chariotry, in archery, in swordsmanship; or they train in various fields; or else they train under an ascetic or brahmin of wrong views, of wrong practice.
Here, someone understands as they really are the origin and the passing away, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in regard to sensual pleasures.
Here, someone understands as they really are the origin and the passing away, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in regard to states of existence.
Here, someone understands as they really are the origin and the passing away, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in regard to the six bases for contact.
Here, someone understands as they really are the origin and the passing away, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in regard to views.
Here, someone who is himself subject to old age seeks only what is subject to old age; who is himself subject to illness seeks only what is subject to illness; who is himself subject to death seeks only what is subject to death; and who is himself subject to defilement seeks only what is subject to defilement.
Here, someone who is himself subject to old age, having understood the danger in what is subject to old age, seeks the unaging, unsurpassed security from bondage, nibbāna; who is himself subject to illness, having understood the danger in what is subject to illness, seeks the illness-free, unsurpassed security from bondage, nibbāna; who is himself subject to death, having understood the danger in what is subject to death, seeks the deathless, unsurpassed security from bondage, nibbāna; who is himself subject to defilement, having understood the danger in what is subject to defilement, seeks the undefiled, unsurpassed security from bondage, nibbāna.
Here, Sāriputta is one who knows what is good, who knows the Dhamma, who knows the right measure, who knows the proper time, and who knows the assembly.
Here, Sāriputta is skilled in concentration, skilled in the attainment of concentration, skilled in the duration of concentration, skilled in emergence from concentration, skilled in fitness for concentration, skilled in the area of concentration, and skilled in resolution regarding concentration.
Here, Sāriputta, a noble disciple abstains from the destruction of life, from taking what is not given, from sexual misconduct, from false speech, and from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
Here, the ascetics and brahmins are of right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
Here, the ascetics and brahmins are of wrong view, wrong intention, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong concentration.
Here, the assembly in which the bhikkhus dwell in concord, harmoniously, without disputes, blending like milk and water, viewing each other with eyes of affection, is called the harmonious assembly.
Here, the assembly in which the bhikkhus take to arguing and quarreling and fall into disputes, stabbing each other with piercing words, is called the divided assembly.
Here, the bhikkhu who has committed an offense reflects thus: ‘I have committed a particular unwholesome misdeed with the body.
Here, the bhikkhus do not respectfully listen to the Dhamma; they do not respectfully learn the Dhamma; they do not respectfully retain the Dhamma in mind; they do not respectfully examine the meaning of the teachings they have retained in mind; they do not respectfully understand the meaning and the Dhamma and then practice in accordance with the Dhamma.
Here, the bhikkhus respectfully listen to the Dhamma; they respectfully learn the Dhamma; they respectfully retain the Dhamma in mind; they respectfully examine the meaning of the teachings they have retained in mind; they respectfully understand the meaning and the Dhamma and then practice in accordance with the Dhamma.
Here, the donor has three factors and the recipients have three factors.
Here, the donor is immoral and of bad character, and the recipients too are immoral and of bad character.
Here, the donor is immoral and of bad character, but the recipients are virtuous and of good character.
Here, the donor is virtuous and of good character, and the recipients too are virtuous and of good character.
Here, the donor is virtuous and of good character, but the recipients are immoral and of bad character.
Here, the eldest son of a head-anointed khattiya king is well born on both his maternal and paternal sides, of pure descent, unassailable and impeccable with respect to birth as far back as the seventh paternal generation.
Here, the eldest son of a head-anointed khattiya king is well born … as far back as the seventh paternal generation.
Here, the eldest son of a head-anointed khattiya king, one due to be anointed but not yet anointed, has attained the unshaken.
Here, the eldest son of a wheel-turning monarch is one who knows what is good, who knows the Dhamma, who knows the right measure, who knows the proper time, and who knows the assembly.
Here, the farmer first of all thoroughly plows and harrows the field.
Here, the husband is one who abstains from the destruction of life … he does not insult or revile ascetics and brahmins.
Here, the husband is one who abstains from the destruction of life … he does not insult or revile ascetics and brahmins.
Here, the husband is one who destroys life … he insults and reviles ascetics and brahmins.
Here, the husband is one who destroys life, takes what is not given, engages in sexual misconduct, speaks falsely, and indulges in liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness; he is immoral, of bad character; he dwells at home with a heart obsessed by the stain of miserliness; he insults and reviles ascetics and brahmins.
Here, the king’s bull elephant quickly goes to whatever region the elephant trainer sends it, whether or not it has ever gone there before.
Here, the king’s bull elephant quickly goes to whatever region the elephant trainer sends it, whether or not it has ever gone there before.
Here, the noble disciple is mindful, possessing supreme mindfulness and alertness, one who remembers and recollects what was done and said long ago.
Here, the noble disciple reflects thus: ‘The result of wrong view is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong view; he descends from wrong view.
Here, the recipients are devoid of lust or are practicing to remove lust; they are devoid of hatred or are practicing to remove hatred; they are devoid of delusion or are practicing to remove delusion.
Here, the reproving bhikkhu reflects thus: ‘This bhikkhu has committed a particular unwholesome misdeed with the body.
Here, the Tathāgata arises in the world, an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.
Here, the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One is one who knows what is good, who knows the Dhamma, who knows the right measure, who knows the proper time, and who knows the assembly.
Here, the teachings have been taught by me to my disciples for the utterly complete destruction of suffering.
Here, the teachings have been taught by me to my disciples for the utterly complete destruction of suffering.
Here, the training pertaining to proper conduct has been prescribed by me to my disciples so that those without confidence gain confidence and those with confidence increase.
Here, Visākhā, a noble disciple recollects his own virtuous behavior as unbroken … leading to concentration.
Here, Visākhā, a noble disciple recollects his own virtuous behavior as unbroken, flawless, unblemished, unblotched, freeing, praised by the wise, ungrasped, leading to concentration.
Here, Visākhā, a noble disciple recollects the deities thus: ‘There are devas the four great kings … and devas still higher than these.
Here, Visākhā, a noble disciple recollects the deities thus: ‘There are devas the four great kings, Tāvatiṃsa devas, Yāma devas, Tusita devas, devas who delight in creation, devas who control what is created by others, devas of Brahmā’s company, and devas still higher than these.
Here, Visākhā, a noble disciple recollects the Dhamma thus: ‘The Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One … to be personally experienced by the wise.’
When a noble disciple recollects the Dhamma, his mind becomes placid, joy arises, and the defilements of the mind are abandoned.
Here, Visākhā, a noble disciple recollects the Dhamma thus: ‘The Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One, directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.’
When a noble disciple recollects the Dhamma, his mind becomes placid, joy arises, and the defilements of the mind are abandoned in the same way that one’s body, when dirty, is cleansed by exertion.
Here, Visākhā, a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha thus: ‘The Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practicing the good way … the unsurpassed field of merit for the world.’
When a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha, his mind becomes placid, joy arises, and the defilements of the mind are abandoned.
Here, Visākhā, a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha thus: ‘The Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practicing the good way, practicing the straight way, practicing the true way, practicing the proper way; that is, the four pairs of persons, the eight types of individuals—this Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, the unsurpassed field of merit for the world.’
When a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha, his mind becomes placid, joy arises, and the defilements of the mind are abandoned in the same way that a dirty cloth is cleansed by exertion.
Here, Visākhā, a noble disciple recollects the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
When a noble disciple recollects the Tathāgata, his mind becomes placid, joy arises, and the defilements of the mind are abandoned in the same way that one’s head, when dirty, is cleansed by exertion.
Here, Visākhā, a noble disciple recollects the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is … teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
When a noble disciple recollects the Tathāgata, his mind becomes placid, joy arises, and the defilements of the mind are abandoned.
Here, whatever may be the means by which a clansman earns his living—whether by farming, trade, raising cattle, archery, government service, or by some other craft —he is skillful and diligent; he possesses sound judgment about it in order to carry out and arrange it properly.
Here, whatever may be the means by which a clansman earns his living—whether by farming, trade, raising cattle, archery, government service, or some other craft—he is skillful and diligent; he possesses sound judgment about it in order to carry out and arrange it properly.
Here, whatever ordinary personal truths may be held by ordinary ascetics and brahmins—that is, ‘The world is eternal’ or ‘The world is not eternal’; ‘The world is finite’ or ‘The world is infinite’; ‘The soul and the body are the same’ or ‘The soul is one thing and the body another’; ‘The Tathāgata exists after death’ or ‘The Tathāgata does not exist after death’ or ‘The Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death’ or ‘The Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death’—a bhikkhu has discarded and dispelled them all, given them up, rejected them, let go of them, abandoned and relinquished them.
Here, whatever ordinary personal truths may be held by ordinary ascetics and brahmins—that is, ‘The world is eternal’ or ‘The world is not eternal’; ‘The world is finite’ or ‘The world is infinite’; ‘The soul and the body are the same’ or ‘The soul is one thing, the body another’; ‘The Tathāgata exists after death,’ or ‘The Tathāgata does not exist after death,’ or ‘The Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death,’ or ‘The Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death’—a bhikkhu has discarded and dispelled them all, given them up, rejected them, let go of them, abandoned and relinquished them.
Here, whatever task the elephant trainer sets for it, whether or not it has ever done it before, the king’s bull elephant heeds it, attends to it, directs his whole mind to it, and listens with eager ears.
Here, whatever task the elephant trainer sets for it, whether or not it has ever done it before, the king’s bull elephant heeds it, attends to it, directs its whole mind to it, and listens with eager ears.
Here, when a bhikkhu experiences a taste with the tongue, he becomes enamored of a tantalizing taste and cannot concentrate his mind.
Here, when a bhikkhu experiences a taste with the tongue, he does not become enamored of a tantalizing taste and can concentrate his mind.
Here, when a bhikkhu feels a tactile object with the body, he becomes enamored of a tantalizing tactile object and cannot concentrate his mind.
Here, when a bhikkhu feels a tactile object with the body, he does not become enamored of a tantalizing tactile object and can concentrate his mind.
Here, when a bhikkhu hears a sound with the ear, he becomes enamored of a tantalizing sound and cannot concentrate his mind.
Here, when a bhikkhu hears a sound with the ear, he does not become enamored of a tantalizing sound and can concentrate his mind.
Here, when a bhikkhu is one with few desires, he does not desire: ‘Let people know me to be one with few desires.’
When he is content, he does not desire: ‘Let people know me to be one who is content.’
When he resorts to solitude, he does not desire: ‘Let people know me to be one who resorts to solitude.’
When he is energetic, he does not desire: ‘Let people know me to be energetic.’
When he is mindful, he does not desire: ‘Let people know me to be mindful.’
When he is concentrated, he does not desire: ‘Let people know me to be concentrated.’
When he is wise, he does not desire: ‘Let people know me to be wise.’
When he delights in non-proliferation, he does not desire: ‘Let people know me to be one who delights in non-proliferation.’
When it was said: ‘This Dhamma is for one with few desires, not for one with strong desires,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.
Here, when a bhikkhu resorts to solitude, bhikkhus, bhikkhunīs, male lay followers, female lay followers, kings, royal ministers, heads of other sects, and disciples belonging to other sects approach him.
Here, when a bhikkhu sees a form with the eye, he becomes enamored of a tantalizing form and cannot concentrate his mind.
Here, when a bhikkhu sees a form with the eye, he does not become enamored of a tantalizing form and can concentrate his mind.
Here, when a bhikkhu smells an odor with the nose, he becomes enamored of a tantalizing odor and cannot concentrate his mind.
Here, when a bhikkhu smells an odor with the nose, he does not become enamored of a tantalizing odor and can concentrate his mind.
Here, when a king’s bull elephant has entered the battle, it destroys elephants and elephant riders, horses and cavalry, chariots and charioteers, and infantry.
Here, when a king’s bull elephant has entered the battle, it destroys elephants and elephant riders; it destroys horses and cavalry; it destroys chariots and charioteers; it destroys infantry.
Here, when a king’s bull elephant has entered the battle, it patiently endures being struck by spears, swords, arrows, and axes; it endures the sounds of drums, kettledrums, conches, and tom-toms.
Here, when a king’s bull elephant has entered the battle, it patiently endures being struck by spears, swords, arrows, and axes; it endures the thundering of drums, kettledrums, conches, and tom-toms.
Here, when a king’s bull elephant has gone to battle, if it is deprived of one portion of grass and water, or two, three, four, or five portions, it sinks, founders, does not brace itself, and cannot enter the battle.
Here, when a king’s bull elephant has gone to battle, if it is pierced by one volley of arrows, or by two, three, four, or five volleys, it sinks, founders, does not brace itself, and cannot enter the battle.
Here, when a king’s bull elephant has gone to battle, on hearing the sounds of elephants, horses, chariots, or infantrymen, or the sounds of drums, kettledrums, conches, and tom-toms, it does not sink and founder but braces itself and can enter the battle.
Here, when a king’s bull elephant has gone to battle, on hearing the sounds of elephants, horses, chariots, or infantrymen, or the sounds of drums, kettledrums, conches, and tom-toms, it sinks, founders, does not brace itself, and cannot enter the battle.
Here, when a king’s bull elephant has gone to battle, on seeing the elephant troops, the cavalry, the charioteers, or the infantry, it does not sink and founder, but braces itself and can enter the battle.
Here, when a king’s bull elephant has gone to battle, on seeing the elephant troops, the cavalry, the charioteers, or the infantry, it sinks, founders, does not brace itself, and cannot enter the battle.
Here, when a king’s bull elephant has gone to battle, on smelling the odor of the urine and feces of royal bull elephants that are of pedigree stock and accustomed to battle, it does not sink and founder but braces itself and can enter the battle.
Here, when a king’s bull elephant has gone to battle, on smelling the odor of the urine and feces of the royal bull elephants that are of pedigree stock and accustomed to battle, it sinks, founders, does not brace itself, and cannot enter the battle.
Here, when a king’s bull elephant has gone to battle, though it is deprived of one portion of grass and water, or of two, three, four, or five portions, it does not sink and founder but braces itself and can enter the battle.
Here, when a king’s bull elephant has gone to battle, though it is pierced by one volley of arrows, or by two, three, four, or five volleys, it does not sink and founder but braces itself and can enter the battle.
Here, when faithful householders invite a bhikkhu to take robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick, a bhikkhu accepts without moderation.
Here, when faithful householders invite a bhikkhu to take robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick, a bhikkhu is moderate in accepting.
Here, when praise or dispraise is being spoken about another person, he readily believes it.
Here, when the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata is being taught, a bhikkhu does not gain inspiration in the meaning, does not gain inspiration in the Dhamma, does not gain joy connected with the Dhamma.
Here, when the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata is being taught, a bhikkhu gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains joy connected with the Dhamma.
Here, when the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata is being taught, a bhikkhu heeds it, attends to it, directs his whole mind to it, and listens to the Dhamma with eager ears.
Here, when the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata is being taught, a bhikkhu heeds it, attends to it, directs his whole mind to it, and listens with eager ears.
Here, when the king’s bull elephant has entered a battle, it guards its front quarters, its back quarters, its front feet, its back feet, its head, its ears, its tusks, its trunk, its tail, and its rider.
Here, when there is sensual desire in him, a bhikkhu understands: ‘There is sensual desire in me’; or when there is no sensual desire in him, he understands: ‘There is no sensual desire in me’; and he also understands how unarisen sensual desire arises, how arisen sensual desire is abandoned, and how abandoned sensual desire does not arise again in the future.
Here, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous passing away of joy and dejection, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna, neither painful nor pleasant, which has purification of mindfulness by equanimity.
Here, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous passing away of joy and dejection, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna, neither painful nor pleasant, which has purification of mindfulness by equanimity.
Here, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, ‘space is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space.
Here, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, ‘space is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space.
Here, with the complete surmounting of the base of the infinity of consciousness, ‘there is nothing,’ a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of nothingness.
Here, with the destruction of the taints, a bhikkhu has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
Here, with the destruction of the taints, a bhikkhu has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
Here, with the destruction of the taints, a bhikkhu has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
Here, with the destruction of the taints, a bhikkhu has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
Here, with the destruction of the taints, a bhikkhu has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
Here, with the destruction of the taints, a bhikkhu has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
Here, with the destruction of the taints, a bhikkhu has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
Here, with the destruction of the taints, a bhikkhu has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it; and he dwells having contacted with the body the eight emancipations.
Here, with the destruction of the taints, a bhikkhu has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it; yet he does not dwell having contacted with the body the eight emancipations.
Here, with the destruction of the taints, a bhikkhu realizes for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
Here, with the destruction of the taints, some person has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
Here, with the destruction of the taints, some person realizes for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it.
Here, with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, a bhikkhu becomes one of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without ever returning from that world.
Here, with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, a bhikkhu becomes one of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without ever returning from that world.
Here, with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, a bhikkhu becomes one of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without ever returning from that world.
Here, with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, a bhikkhu is of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without returning from that world.
Here, with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, a bhikkhu is one of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without ever returning from that world.
Here, with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, a bhikkhu is one of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without ever returning from that world.
Here, with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, a bhikkhu is one of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without returning from that world.
Here, with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, some person is of spontaneous birth, due to attain final nibbāna there without ever returning from that world.
Here, with the utter destruction of three fetters and with the diminishing of greed, hatred, and delusion, a bhikkhu is a once-returner who, after coming back to this world only one more time, will make an end of suffering.
Here, with the utter destruction of three fetters and with the diminishing of greed, hatred, and delusion, a bhikkhu is a once-returner who, after coming back to this world only one more time, will make an end of suffering.
Here, with the utter destruction of three fetters, a bhikkhu is a stream-enterer, no longer subject to the lower world, fixed in destiny, heading for enlightenment.
Here, with the utter destruction of three fetters, a bhikkhu is a stream-enterer, no longer subject to the lower world, fixed in destiny, heading for enlightenment.
Here, with wealth acquired by energetic striving, amassed by the strength of his arms, earned by the sweat of his brow, righteous wealth righteously gained, a clansman enjoys his wealth and does meritorious deeds.
He’s a nāga, truly a nāga.”
His actions are restrained by these five training rules.
His bhikkhu friends then approached the Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita and said to him: “Did the Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita encompass Citta Hatthisāriputta’s mind with his own mind and understand: ‘Citta Hatthisāriputta gains such and such meditative dwellings and attainments, yet he will give up the training and return to the lower life’?
His bodily kamma is crooked … His destination is crooked; his rebirth is crooked….
His bodily kamma is crooked; his verbal kamma is crooked; his mental kamma is crooked.
His bodily kamma is straight … His destination is straight; his rebirth is straight….
His bodily kamma is straight; his verbal kamma is straight; his mental kamma is straight.
His body was two or three times the size of the fields of a Magadhan village, but he did not obstruct either himself or others with that body.
His brahmin wife serves for sensual pleasure, amusement, and sensual delight, as well as for procreation.
His brahmin wife serves for sensual pleasure, amusement, and sensual delight, as well as for procreation.
His counselor is wise, competent, and intelligent, able to consider benefits pertaining to the past, future, and present.
His dealings in one case deviate from his dealings in another.
His dealings in one case do not deviate from his dealings in another.
His destination is crooked; his rebirth is crooked.
His destination is straight; his rebirth is straight.
His fellow monastics, those with whom he dwells, would usually behave toward him in agreeable ways by bodily, verbal, and mental action, seldom in disagreeable ways.
His fellow monks, those with whom he dwells, usually behave toward him in agreeable ways by body, speech, and mind, seldom in disagreeable ways.
His good qualities are not polished.
His good qualities are not polished.
His hand would not stick to it, adhere to it, or be fastened to it.
His hand would stick to it, adhere to it, and be fastened to it.
His mind is well consolidated by wisdom: ‘My mind is without lust.’
His mind is well consolidated by wisdom: ‘My mind is without hatred.’
His mind is well consolidated by wisdom: ‘My mind is without delusion.’
His mind is well consolidated by wisdom: ‘My mind is not subject to infatuation.’
His mind is well consolidated by wisdom: ‘My mind is not subject to animosity.’
His mind is well consolidated by wisdom: ‘My mind is not subject to confusion.’
His mind is well consolidated by wisdom: ‘My mind is not subject to return to sense-sphere existence.’
His mind is well consolidated by wisdom: ‘My mind is not subject to return to form-sphere existence.’
His mind is well consolidated by wisdom: ‘My mind is not subject to return to formless-sphere existence.’
His mind is well departed, well developed, well emerged, well liberated, and well detached from form.
His mind is well departed, well developed, well emerged, well liberated, and well detached from harming.
His mind is well departed, well developed, well emerged, well liberated, and well detached from ill will.
His mind is well departed, well developed, well emerged, well liberated, and well detached from personal existence.
His mind is well departed, well developed, well emerged, well liberated, and well detached from sensual pleasures.
His mother and his father.
His mother and his father.
His nurse would quickly attend to him and try to take it out.
His parents, being honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated, have compassion on him with a good heart, thinking: ‘May you live long and maintain a long life span.’
When a clansman’s parents have compassion for him, only growth is to be expected for him, not decline.
His relatives nurse him and look after him, and as a result he recovers from that injury.
His relatives nurse him and look after him, but while they are doing so he dies from that injury.
His sense of moral shame … his moral dread … his energy … his wisdom neither diminishes nor grows; it just stays put.
His sense of moral shame … moral dread … energy … wisdom does not become stable or grow but rather diminishes.
His thoughts then prosecute him;painful mental states born of remorsewhether in the village or the forest.
His wise fellow monks investigate him and say thus: ‘You have committed a particular unwholesome deed by speech.
His wise fellow monks investigate him and say thus: ‘You have committed a particular unwholesome deed with the body.
Homage to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One
Homage to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One
Homage to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One
Homage to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One
Homage to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One
Homage to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One
Homage to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One
Homage to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One
Homage to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One
Homage to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One
Homage to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One
Homage to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One!
Homage to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One!
Homage to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
Homage to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
Hospitality with material goods and hospitality with the Dhamma.
Householder, a noble disciple who gives food gives the recipients these four things.”
Householder, if a noble disciple’s wealth is exhausted when he has utilized it in these five ways, he thinks: ‘I have utilized wealth in these five ways and my wealth is exhausted.’
Thus he has no regret.
Householder, one who destroys life, with the destruction of life as condition, creates peril and enmity pertaining to the present life and peril and enmity pertaining to future lives and he also experiences mental pain and dejection.
Householders complain: ‘Just as we sing, so, too, do these ascetics who follow the son of the Sakyans.’
There is a disruption of concentration for one wanting to refine the intonation.
How are they Dhamma specialists?’
In this case, the meditators aren’t pleased, and the Dhamma specialists aren’t pleased, and they aren’t practicing for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
How can one understand the good Dhamma,so that the moment won’t slip by?For those who miss the moment grievewhen they are reborn in hell.
How can we treat him in a way that he would not like?
How can we treat him in a way that he would not like?
How can we treat him in a way that he would not like?
How can we treat him in a way that he would not like?
How can we treat him in a way that he would not like?
How do they meditate?’
In this case, the bhikkhus who are Dhamma specialists aren’t pleased, and the bhikkhus who are meditators aren’t pleased, and they aren’t practicing for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
How do you sustain this large retinue?”
How else could Nanda lead the complete and pure spiritual life unless he guarded the doors of the sense faculties, observed moderation in eating, was intent on wakefulness, and possessed mindfulness and clear comprehension?
How far, Bhante, can the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One convey his voice?”
How far, Bhante, can the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One convey his voice?”
How have you learned the Dhamma of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan son?
How many subjects of recollection are there, Ānanda?”
How much more of food and drink, snacks, meals, refreshments, and beverages?
How much more then for a human being!”
How much more then for a human being!”
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!”
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!”
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!”
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!”
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!”
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!” 
How much wealth and property does he have?”
How rude, how impudent, in that he thinks he can attack the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
How should conditioned phenomena be discerned by insight?’
The other then answers him as he has seen and understood the matter thus: ‘Conditioned phenomena should be seen in such a way, explored in such a way, discerned by insight in such a way.’
Then, some time later, he gains both internal serenity of mind and the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena.
How should conditioned phenomena be discerned by insight?’
The other then answers him as he has seen and understood the matter thus: ‘The mind should be steadied in such a way, composed in such a way, unified in such a way, concentrated in such a way.
How should conditioned phenomena be explored?
How should conditioned phenomena be explored?
How should conditioned phenomena be seen?
How should the mind be composed?
How should the mind be composed?
How should the mind be concentrated?
How should the mind be concentrated?’
The other then answers him as he has seen and understood the matter thus: ‘The mind should be steadied in such a way, composed in such a way, unified in such a way, concentrated in such a way.’
Then, some time later, he gains both the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena and internal serenity of mind.
How should the mind be unified?
How should the mind be unified?
How so?
How then could there have been such a discussion?
However … I do not see another ascetic or brahmin more accomplished in concentration than myself….
However … I do not see another ascetic or brahmin more accomplished in wisdom than myself….
However, a young deva teaches the Dhamma to an assembly of devas.
However, he does not investigate the meaning of the teachings he has retained in mind, and he has not understood the meaning and the Dhamma and does not practice in accordance with the Dhamma.
However, he does not investigate the meaning of the teachings he has retained in mind, and he has not understood the meaning and the Dhamma and does not practice in accordance with the Dhamma.
However, he investigates the meaning of the teachings he has retained in mind, and he has understood the meaning and the Dhamma and practices in accordance with the Dhamma.
However, he is a good speaker with a good delivery; he is gifted with speech that is polished, clear, articulate, expressive of the meaning; and he instructs, encourages, inspires, and gladdens his fellow monks.
However, he is capable of retaining in mind the teachings he has learned, he investigates the meaning of the teachings he has retained in mind, and he has understood the meaning and the Dhamma and practices in accordance with the Dhamma.
However, he is capable of retaining in mind the teachings he has learned; he investigates the meaning of the teachings he has retained in mind; he has understood the meaning and the Dhamma and practices in accordance with the Dhamma; he is a good speaker with a good delivery … expressive of the meaning; he is one who instructs, encourages, inspires, and gladdens his fellow monks.
However, he is not a good speaker with a good delivery, nor is he gifted with speech that is polished, clear, articulate, expressive of the meaning; and he is not one who instructs, encourages, inspires, and gladdens his fellow monks.
However, he is not a good speaker with a good delivery; he is not gifted with speech that is polished, clear, articulate, expressive of the meaning; and he does not instruct, encourage, inspire, and gladden his fellow monks.
However, I have spoken this Dhamma exposition for the purpose of answering your question.”
However, I say that what is given to one of virtuous behavior is more fruitful than to an immoral person.
However, in this very life Ānanda will attain final nibbāna.” 
However, in this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, among this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, I do not see another ascetic or brahmin more accomplished in liberation than myself whom I could honor, respect, and dwell in dependence on.
However, in this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, among this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, I do not see another ascetic or brahmin more accomplished in virtuous behavior than myself whom I could honor, respect, and dwell in dependence on.
However, listen and attend closely as I explain what it seems to mean to me.”
However, one being who has been spontaneously reborn reminds another who has been spontaneously reborn: ‘Do you remember, dear sir?
However, there are found in me eight astounding and amazing qualities.
However, there are found in me eight astounding and amazing qualities.
However, these are not sensual pleasures; in the Noble One’s discipline, these are called ‘objects of sensual pleasure.’
A person’s sensual pleasure is lustful intention.
However, Ugga, these seven kinds of wealth cannot be taken away by fire, water, kings, thieves, and displeasing heirs.
However, when a person to be tamed won’t submit to discipline by the gentle method, the stern method, or the method that is both gentle and stern, then the Tathāgata thinks he should not be spoken to and instructed, and his wise fellow monks, too, think he should not be spoken to and instructed.
However, when the boy has grown up and has enough sense, the nurse would be unconcerned about him, thinking: ‘The boy can now look after himself.
However, Ānanda, because women have gone forth from the household life into homelessness in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, now the spiritual life will not be of long duration; the good Dhamma will last only five hundred years.
I alone, or one like me, may pass judgment on people.
I alone, or one like me, may pass judgment on people.
I alone, or one like me, may pass judgment on people.
I alone, or one like me, may pass judgment on people.
I alone, or one like me, may pass judgment on people.
I alone, or one like me, may pass judgment on people.
I alone, or one like me, may pass judgment on people.
I am a donor, a munificent giver, and I have acquired a good reputation as a donor, sponsor, and supporter of the Saṅgha.
I am a donor, a munificent giver, and I have acquired a good reputation: ‘Sīha the general is a donor, a sponsor, a supporter of the Saṅgha.’
I am a donor, a munificent giver, and whatever assembly I approach—whether of khattiyas, brahmins, householders, or ascetics—I approach it confidently and composed.
I am a donor, a munificent giver, and many good persons resort to me.
I am a donor, a munificent giver, and the arahants first approach me.
I am a donor, a munificent giver, and the arahants first receive alms from me.
I am a donor, a munificent giver, and the arahants first teach the Dhamma to me.
I am a donor, a munificent giver, and whatever assembly I approach—whether of khattiyas, brahmins, householders, or ascetics—I approach it confidently and composed.
I am a reciter and preserver of the hymns, a master of the three Vedas with their vocabularies, ritual, phonology, and etymology, and the histories as a fifth; skilled in philology and grammar, I am fully versed in natural philosophy and in the marks of a great man.”
I am abandoning what exists, what has come to be.’
He obtains equanimity.
I am abandoning what exists, what has come to be.’
He obtains equanimity.
I am abandoning what exists, what has come to be.’
He obtains equanimity.
I am abandoning what exists, what has come to be.’
He obtains equanimity.
I am asking you which of those two practices appeals to you as being simpler and less harmful, and also as more fruitful and beneficial?”
I am asking you which of those two practices appeals to you as being simpler and less harmful, and also as more fruitful and beneficial?”
I am celibate, living apart, abstaining from sexual intercourse, the common person’s practice, and so too are these five hundred lay followers.
I am celibate, living apart, abstaining from sexual intercourse, the common person’s practice, and so too are these five hundred lay followers.
I am confident that there is not a single bhikkhu in this Saṅgha who has any doubt or uncertainty about the Buddha, the Dhamma, or the Saṅgha, about the path or the practice.”
I am developed in body, virtuous behavior, mind, and wisdom.’
If greed does not overcome that bhikkhu and persist; if hatred … delusion … anger … hostility … denigration … insolence … miserliness … evil envy … evil desire does not overcome that bhikkhu and persist, he should be understood thus: ‘This venerable one understands in such a way that he has no greed; thus greed does not overcome him and persist.
I am developed in body, virtuous behavior, mind, and wisdom.’
If greed does not overcome that bhikkhu and persist; if hatred … evil desire does not overcome that bhikkhu and persist, he should be understood thus: ‘This venerable one understands in such a way that he has no greed; thus greed does not overcome him and persist.
I am developed in body, virtuous behavior, mind, and wisdom.’
If, however, greed overcomes that bhikkhu and persists … evil desire overcomes that bhikkhu and persists, he should be understood thus: ‘This venerable one does not understand in such a way that he would have no greed; thus greed overcomes him and persists.
I am developed in body, virtuous behavior, mind, and wisdom.’
If, however, greed overcomes that bhikkhu and persists; if hatred … evil desire overcomes that bhikkhu and persists, he should be understood thus: ‘This venerable one does not understand in such a way that he would have no greed; thus greed overcomes him and persists.
I am handsome, attractive, graceful, possessing supreme beauty of complexion, so why shouldn’t I yearn for kingship?
I am handsome, attractive, graceful, possessing supreme beauty of complexion, so why shouldn’t I yearn to be the viceroy?
I am honest and open; I reveal myself as I really am to the Teacher and my wise fellow monks, so why shouldn’t I yearn for the destruction of the taints?
I am immersed in suffering, afflicted by suffering.
I am immersed in suffering, afflicted by suffering.
I am immersed in suffering, afflicted by suffering.
I am immersed in suffering, afflicted by suffering.
I am immersed in suffering, afflicted by suffering.
I am not afraid of a bad destination.
I am not afraid of death….
I am not afraid of timidity in assemblies….
I am not bearing up, Bhante, I am not getting better.
I am not bearing up….
I am not bearing up….
I am not bearing up….
I am one of the Blessed One’s white-robed female lay disciples who fulfill virtuous behavior.
I am one of the Blessed One’s white-robed female lay disciples who have attained a foothold, a firm stand, assurance in this Dhamma and discipline; I am one of those who have crossed over doubt, gotten rid of bewilderment, attained self-confidence, and become independent of others in the Teacher’s teaching.
I am one of the Blessed One’s white-robed female lay disciples who obtain internal serenity of mind.
I am one of those in the world who sleep well.’”
I am one of those in the world who sleep well.”
I am one whose Dhamma teaching is purified and I claim: ‘I am one whose Dhamma teaching is purified.
I am one whose explanations are purified and I claim: ‘I am one whose explanations are purified.
I am one whose knowledge and vision are purified and I claim: ‘I am one whose knowledge and vision are purified.
I am one whose livelihood is purified and I claim: ‘I am one whose livelihood is purified.
I am one whose mind is well established in the four establishments of mindfulness, so why shouldn’t I yearn for the destruction of the taints?
I am pleasing and agreeable to my parents, so why shouldn’t I yearn for kingship?
I am pleasing and agreeable to my parents, so why shouldn’t I yearn to be the viceroy?
I am pleasing and agreeable to the people of the towns and countryside, so why shouldn’t I yearn for kingship?
I am seldom ill or afflicted, possessing an even digestion that is neither too cool nor too hot but moderate and suitable for striving, so why shouldn’t I yearn for the destruction of the taints?
I am seldom ill.
I am seldom ill.
I am skilled at weaving cotton and knitting wool.
I am the sole person in the world who has awakened to the unsurpassed perfect enlightenment.
I am trained and proficient in the arts of head-anointed khattiya kings, whether elephant riding, horsemanship, driving a chariot, archery, or swordsmanship, so why shouldn’t I yearn for kingship?’
Possessing these five factors, the eldest son of a head-anointed khattiya king yearns for kingship.
I am very fortunate that my Teacher is so powerful and mighty.”
I am wise, competent, and intelligent, able to consider benefits pertaining to the past, future, and present, so why shouldn’t I yearn to be the viceroy?’
Possessing these five factors, the eldest son of a head-anointed khattiya king yearns to be the viceroy.
I am wise; I possess the wisdom …  leads to the complete destruction of suffering, so why shouldn’t I yearn for the destruction of the taints?’
I am wise; I possess the wisdom … leads to the complete destruction of suffering, so why shouldn’t I yearn for the destruction of the taints?’
I appeared just like them, and my voice became like their voice.
I appeared just like them, and my voice became like their voice.
I assert doing with regard to good bodily, verbal, and mental conduct; I assert doing with regard to the numerous kinds of wholesome qualities.
I ate whatever I wanted to eat and did not eat anything I did not wish to eat.
I attain and emerge from the cessation of feeling and perception.’
The Tathāgata or his disciple who is a jhāna-attainer—skilled in attainment, skilled in others’ minds, skilled in the ways of others’ minds—questions him, interrogates him, and cross-examines him.
I attain and emerge from the second jhāna … the third jhāna … the fourth jhāna … … the base of the infinity of space … the base of the infinity of consciousness … the base of nothingness … the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
I can both enjoy that wealth and do meritorious deeds.
I cannot maintain the spiritual life.
I cannot maintain the spiritual life.
I cannot maintain the spiritual life.
I cannot maintain the spiritual life.
I cannot maintain the spiritual life.
I cannot train in them.”
I collect some grass or leaves that I find there into a pile and then sit down.
I collect some grass or leaves that I find there into a pile and then sit down.
I collect some grass or leaves that I find there into a pile and then sit down.
I conclude about them: ‘Surely, those venerable ones have abandoned three things and cultivated three things.’
I conclude: ‘Surely, those venerable ones have abandoned three things and cultivated three things.’
I consumed, ate, tasted, and drank both what was allowable and what was not allowable.
I consumed, ate, tasted, and drank both within the proper time and outside the proper time.
I could then accomplish much!’ It is in this way that I develop mindfulness of death.”
I could then accomplish much!’ It is in this way that I develop mindfulness of death.”
I could then accomplish much!’ It is in this way that I develop mindfulness of death.”
I could then accomplish much!’ It is in this way that I develop mindfulness of death.”
I could then accomplish much!’ It is in this way that I develop mindfulness of death.”
I could then accomplish much!’ It is in this way that I develop mindfulness of death.”
I could then accomplish much!’ It is in this way that I develop mindfulness of death.”
I could then accomplish much!’ It is in this way that I develop mindfulness of death.”
I could then accomplish much!’ It is in this way that I develop mindfulness of death.”
I could then accomplish much!’ It is in this way that I develop mindfulness of death.”
I could then accomplish much!’ It is in this way that I develop mindfulness of death.”
I could then accomplish much!’ It is in this way that I develop mindfulness of death.”
I could then accomplish much!’ It is in this way that I develop mindfulness of death.”
I could then accomplish much!’ It is in this way that I develop mindfulness of death.”
I could then accomplish much!’: these are called bhikkhus who dwell heedfully.
I could then accomplish much!’: these are called bhikkhus who dwell heedfully.
I could then accomplish much!’: these are called bhikkhus who dwell heedlessly.
I could then accomplish much!’: these are called bhikkhus who dwell heedlessly.
I could then accomplish much!’; and the one who develops mindfulness of death thus: ‘May I live just a day so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
I could then accomplish much!’; and the one who develops mindfulness of death thus: ‘May I live just a day so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
I could then accomplish much!’; and the one who develops mindfulness of death thus: ‘May I live just half a day so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
I could then accomplish much!’; and the one who develops mindfulness of death thus: ‘May I live just the length of time it takes to breathe out after breathing in, or to breathe in after breathing out, so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
I could then accomplish much!’; and the one who develops mindfulness of death thus: ‘May I live just the length of time it takes to breathe out after breathing in, or to breathe in after breathing out, so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
I could then accomplish much!’; and the one who develops mindfulness of death thus: ‘May I live just the length of time it takes to chew and swallow four or five mouthfuls of food so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
I could then accomplish much!’; and the one who develops mindfulness of death thus: ‘May I live just the length of time it takes to chew and swallow four or five mouthfuls of food so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
I could then accomplish much!’; and the one who develops mindfulness of death thus: ‘May I live just the length of time it takes to eat a single alms meal so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
I could then accomplish much!’; and the one who develops mindfulness of death thus: ‘May I live just the length of time it takes to eat a single alms meal so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
I could then accomplish much!’; and the one who develops mindfulness of death thus: ‘May I live just the length of time it takes to eat half an alms meal so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
I developed the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to energy and activities of striving.
I developed the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to investigation and activities of striving.
I developed the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to mind and activities of striving.
I died insatiable and unquenchable in attending upon the Saṅgha.
I died insatiable and unquenchable in hearing the good Dhamma.
I died insatiable and unquenchable in seeing the Blessed One.
I died insatiable and unquenchable in these three things.
I do encompass with my own mind the mind of one who has attained a state of concentration that is without thought and examination such that I understand: ‘This person’s mental activities are so disposed that immediately afterward he will think this thought.’
And I do instruct thus: ‘Think in this way and not in that way!
I do not go by faith in the Blessed One concerning these four directly visible fruits of giving declared by him.
I do not go by faith in the Blessed One concerning these six directly visible fruits of giving declared by him.
I do not know this, I do not see this,’ he should be told: ‘Here, friend, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling.
I do not know this, I do not see this,’ he should be told: ‘Here, friend, by completely surmounting the base of nothingness, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
I do not know this, I do not see this,’ he should be told: ‘Here, friend, by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness, “there is nothing,” a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of nothingness.
I do not know this, I do not see this,’ he should be told: ‘Here, friend, by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of space, “consciousness is infinite,” a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of consciousness.
I do not know this, I do not see this,’ he should be told: ‘Here, friend, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna ….
I do not know this, I do not see this,’ he should be told: ‘Here, friend, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain … a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna ….
I do not know this, I do not see this,’ he should be told: ‘Here, friend, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, “space is infinite,” a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space.
I do not know this, I do not see this,’ he should be told: ‘Here, friend, with the fading away as well of rapture … he enters and dwells in the third jhāna ….
I do not know this, I do not see this,’ he should be told: ‘Here, friend, with the subsiding of thought and examination, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the second jhāna ….
I do not praise a violent sacrifice at which cattle, goats, rams, chickens, and pigs are slain, at which various creatures are led to slaughter.
I do not praise bonding with householders and monastics, but I do praise bonding with quiet and noiseless lodgings far from the flurry of people, remote from human habitation, and suitable for seclusion.”
I do not say that everything cognized should be spoken about, nor do I say that nothing cognized should be spoken about.
I do not say that everything heard should be spoken about, nor do I say that nothing heard should be spoken about.
I do not say that everything sensed should be spoken about, nor do I say that nothing sensed should be spoken about.
I do not see any difference between them.’ – ‘There is a difference, lord.
I do not see anyone, bhikkhus, in the world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, in this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, who could satisfy the mind with an answer to these questions apart from the Tathāgata or a disciple of the Tathāgata or one who has heard it from them.
I do not see even one other person, Ānanda, about whom I have made a declaration after giving him such full consideration as Devadatta.
I do not see even one other sound … … even one other odor … … even one other taste … … even one other touch that is as tantalizing, sensuous, intoxicating, captivating, infatuating, and as much of an obstacle to achieving the unsurpassed security from bondage as the touch of a woman.
I do not see, bhikkhus, any other prison that is as terrible and harsh, such an obstacle to attaining the unsurpassed security from bondage, as the prison of hell or the prison of the animal realm.”
I do wield the various kinds of psychic potency … exercise mastery with the body as far as the brahmā world.
I drank whatever I wanted to drink and did not drink anything I did not wish to drink.
I drink muddy water, and when I have come out from the pool, the female elephants go by brushing against my body.
I dwell pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with compassion … with a mind imbued with altruistic joy … with a mind imbued with equanimity, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter.
I eat grass with the tops broken off, and they eat my bent and twisted bundle of branches.
I eat grass without the tops broken off; they do not eat my bent and twisted bundle of branches; I drink clear water; and when I have come out from the pool, the female elephants do not go by brushing against my body.’
Having broken off a bundle of branches with his trunk, having rubbed his body with it, he happily relieves his itches.
I eat once a day, refraining from a night meal, abstaining from eating outside the proper time, and so too do these five hundred lay followers.
I gain at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
I gain at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
I gain at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
I had better leave Kapilavatthu.”
I had declared that the householder Ugga of Hatthigāma possesses these same eight astounding and amazing qualities that he rightly explained to you.
I had declared that the householder Ugga of Vesālī possesses the same eight astounding and amazing qualities that he rightly explained to you.
I had only one son, a dear and beloved boy named Nanda.
I had over a thousand sons who were heroes, vigorous, able to crush the armies of their enemies.
I had these seven gems, that is: the wheel-gem, the elephant-gem, the horse-gem, the jewel-gem, the woman-gem, the treasurer-gem, and the adviser-gem as the seventh.
I have abandoned delusion, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.’
I have abandoned hatred, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
I have abandoned those taints because of which I might have become a gandhabba … … might have become a yakkha … … might have become a human being; I have cut them off at the root, made them like palm stumps, obliterated them so that they are no longer subject to future arising.
I have aroused energy for the abandoning of unwholesome qualities … not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities, so why shouldn’t I yearn for the destruction of the taints?
I have aroused energy for the abandoning of unwholesome qualities … not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities, so why shouldn’t I yearn for the destruction of the taints?
I have clearly seen with wisdom just how far the danger in the world extends.
I have clearly seen with wisdom just how far the escape from the world extends.
I have clearly seen with wisdom just how far the gratification in the world extends.
I have declared definitively that deeds of bodily good conduct, verbal good conduct, and mental good conduct are to be done because in acting thus this benefit is to be expected.”
I have declared definitively that deeds of bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct are not to be done because in acting thus this danger is to be expected.
I have gone forth out of faith from the household life into homelessness, yet I am still stalked by these three kinds of bad unwholesome thoughts: sensual thoughts, thoughts of ill will, and thoughts of harming.’”
I have gone forth out of faith from the household life into homelessness, yet I am still stalked by these three kinds of bad unwholesome thoughts: sensual thoughts, thoughts of ill will, and thoughts of harming.”
I have heard that in this Dhamma and discipline there are very young bhikkhus, whose minds launch out upon renunciation and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, seeing it as peaceful.
I have learned much … and penetrated well by view, so why shouldn’t I yearn for the destruction of the taints?
I have loving-kindness for footless creatures;for those with two feet I have loving-kindness.
I have loving-kindness for the virūpakkha snakes;for the erāpatha snakes I have loving-kindness.I have loving-kindness for the chabyāputta snakes;for the black gotamakas I have loving-kindness.
I have loving-kindness for those with four feet;for those with many feet I have loving-kindness.
I have made a safeguard, I have made protection.
I have served the virtuous monks,the self-controlled celibate ones.“I have achieved whatever purposea wise person, dwelling at home,might have in desiring wealth;what I have done brings me no regret.”
I have the four powers: the power of wisdom, the power of energy, the power of blamelessness, and the power of sustaining a favorable relationship.
I have the four powers: the power of wisdom, the power of energy, the power of blamelessness, and the power of sustaining a favorable relationship.
I hope that your painful feelings are subsiding and not increasing, and that their subsiding, not their increase, is to be seen.”
I hope you are getting better.
I instructed, encouraged, inspired, and gladdened them with a Dhamma talk, and while I was speaking they did not recognize me but thought: ‘Who is it that is speaking, a deva or a human being?’
Having instructed, encouraged, inspired, and gladdened them with a Dhamma talk, I disappeared, and when I had disappeared they did not recognize me but thought: ‘Who was it that has disappeared, a deva or a human being?’
I instructed, encouraged, inspired, and gladdened them with a Dhamma talk, and while I was speaking they did not recognize me but thought: ‘Who is it that is speaking, a deva or a human being?’
Having instructed, encouraged, inspired, and gladdened them with a Dhamma talk, I disappeared, and when I had disappeared they did not recognize me but thought: ‘Who was it that has disappeared, a deva or a human being?’ 
I know and see.’
How, friend, should the meaning of this statement be understood?”
I know and see.”
I know them, too.
I know them, too.
I know them, too.
I know them, too.
I live the spiritual life dissatisfied and have doubt about the teachings.”
I live the spiritual life joyfully and have no doubt about the teachings.”
I might stumble and fall down, or my food might disagree with me, or my bile might become agitated, or my phlegm might become agitated, or sharp winds in me might become agitated, and I might die; that would be an obstacle for me.’
I might stumble and fall down, or my food might disagree with me, or my bile might become agitated, or my phlegm might become agitated, or sharp winds in me might become agitated, or people might attack me, or wild spirits might attack me, and I might die; that would be an obstacle for me.’
I myself and others derive our good words from him.’
I myself and others derive our good words from him.”
I myself was the brahmin Velāma who on that occasion gave that great alms offering.
I need to lie down.
I now go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
I now go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
I now go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
I now go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
I now go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
I now go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
I now go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
I now go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
I now go for refuge to the Blessed One, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
I pay homage to the Blessed One, homage to the seven Perfectly Enlightened Ones.
I praise only growth in wholesome qualities, not a standstill or deterioration.
I previously sat there, conversed, and held discussions.
I previously sat there, conversed, and held discussions.
I recollected my manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many eons of world-dissolution, many eons of world-evolution, many eons of world-dissolution and world-evolution thus: ‘There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn elsewhere, and there too I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn here.’
Thus I recollected my manifold past abodes with their aspects and details.
I reigned after conquering this earth as far as its ocean boundaries, not by force and weapons but by the Dhamma.
I remember.’
So too, a bhikkhu masters the Dhamma … The arising of his memory is sluggish, but then that being quickly reaches distinction.
I remember.’
The arising of his memory is sluggish, but then that being quickly reaches distinction.
I saw him doing so.
I say that perceptions result in expression.
I say that someone is a tormentor when he has abandoned the bad unwholesome qualities that are to be burned up; when he has cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them so that they are no more subject to future arising.
I say that someone is a tormentor when he has abandoned the bad unwholesome qualities that are to be burned up; when he has cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them so that they are no more subject to future arising.
I say that the destruction of the taints also occurs in dependence on the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
I say that the destruction of the taints also occurs in dependence on the base of nothingness.
I say that the destruction of the taints also occurs in dependence on the base of the infinity of consciousness.
I say that the destruction of the taints also occurs in dependence on the base of the infinity of space.
I say that the destruction of the taints also occurs in dependence on the cessation of perception and feeling.
I say that the destruction of the taints also occurs in dependence on the fourth jhāna.
I say that the destruction of the taints also occurs in dependence on the second jhāna.
I say that the destruction of the taints also occurs in dependence on the third jhāna.
I say that this excellent thoroughbred person is similar to the excellent thoroughbred horse that is stirred and acquires a sense of urgency as soon as it sees the shadow of the goad.
I say that this excellent thoroughbred person is similar to the excellent thoroughbred horse that is stirred and acquires a sense of urgency when its bone is struck by the goad.
I say that this excellent thoroughbred person is similar to the excellent thoroughbred horse that is stirred and acquires a sense of urgency when its hairs are struck by the goad.
I say that this excellent thoroughbred person is similar to the excellent thoroughbred horse that is stirred and acquires a sense of urgency when its hide is struck by the goad.
I say that this person is just like the warrior who can endure the cloud of dust and the crests of the standards, but when he hears the uproar, he sinks, founders, does not brace himself, and cannot enter the battle.
I say that this person is just like the warrior who can endure the cloud of dust, but when he sees the crests of the standards, he sinks, founders, does not brace himself, and cannot enter the battle.
I say that this person is just like the warrior who can endure the cloud of dust, the crests of the standards, and the uproar, but who is struck down and wounded by a blow.
I say that this person is just like the warrior who, when he sees the cloud of dust, sinks, founders, does not brace himself, and cannot enter the battle.
I say this person is similar to the wild colt that, when told: ‘Go forward!’ and when spurred and incited by its trainer, does not go forward or turn back but stands right there as still as a post.
I say this person is similar to the wild colt that, when told: ‘Go forward!’ and when spurred and incited by its trainer, does not heed its trainer or the goad but destroys the mouthbit with its teeth and sets out wherever it wishes.
I say this person is similar to the wild colt that, when told: ‘Go forward!’ and when spurred and incited by its trainer, leaps up with the front of its body and churns the air with its front feet.
I say this person is similar to the wild colt that, when told: ‘Go forward!’ and when spurred and incited by its trainer, takes a wrong path and leads the chariot off the track.
I say, bhikkhus, there is no injury against outsiders like that against fellow monks.
I say, Brahmin Dhammika, there is no injury against outsiders like that against fellow monks.
I say, brahmins, that by this kind of running one cannot know, see, or reach the end of the world.
I say, too, that it is not easy to repay these three persons by paying homage to them, by rising up for them, by reverential salutation, by proper conduct, and by presenting them with robes, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick.”
I set free the five hundred bullocks and allow them to live.
I set free the five hundred goats and allow them to live.
I set free the five hundred heifers and allow them to live.
I set free the five hundred rams and allow them to live.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.’
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.’
This is the eighth factor it possesses.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.’
This is the eighth factor it possesses.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.’
This is the eighth factor it possesses.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.’
This is the fifth factor it possesses.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.’
This is the fifth factor it possesses.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.’
This is the first factor it possesses I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.’
This is the first factor it possesses.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.’
This is the first factor it possesses.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.’
This is the fourth factor it possesses.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.’
This is the fourth factor it possesses.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.’
This is the second factor it possesses.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.’
This is the second factor it possesses.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.’
This is the seventh factor it possesses.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.’
This is the seventh factor it possesses.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.’
This is the sixth factor it possesses.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.’
This is the sixth factor it possesses.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.’
This is the third factor it possesses.
I shall imitate the arahants in this respect and the uposatha will be observed by me.’
This is the third factor it possesses.
I should correct an elder … and seeing I would make amends for it.’
It is in this way that there is co-residency among the good, and it is in this way that the good live together.”
I should correct an elder, one of middle standing, and a junior.
I should not correct an elder … … and even seeing I would not make amends for it.’
It is in this way that there is co-residency among the bad, and it is in this way that the bad live together.
I should not correct an elder, or one of middle standing or a junior.
I spent the four months of the rains in the rainy-season mansion, being entertained by musicians, none of whom were male, and I did not leave the mansion.
I strove indefatigably,: ‘Willingly, let only my skin, sinews, and bones remain, and let the flesh and blood dry up in my body, but I will not relax my energy so long as I have not attained what can be attained by manly strength, energy, and exertion.’
It was by heedfulness that I achieved enlightenment, bhikkhus; it was by heedfulness that I achieved the unsurpassed security from bondage.
I tasted whatever I wanted to taste and did not taste anything I did not wish to taste.
I teach the Dhamma that is antidotal, not one without antidotes.
I teach the Dhamma with a basis, not without a basis.
I then went to them and said: ‘Sisters, I have undertaken the training rules with celibacy as the fifth.
I then went to them … … But even while giving away my young wife, I don’t recall that any alteration took place in my mind.
I think what I want to think and do not think what I do not want to think; I intend what I want to intend and do not intend what I do not want to intend; thus I have attained to mental mastery over the ways of thought.
I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.
I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.
I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.
I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.
I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.
I too have not seen or heard of such a thing.
I too have not seen or heard of such a thing.
I too have not seen or heard of such a thing.
I too have not seen or heard of such a thing.
I too have not seen or heard of such a thing.
I too have such faith as those deities possessed because of which, when they passed away here, they were reborn there; I too have such virtuous behavior … such learning … such generosity … such wisdom as those deities possessed because of which, when they passed away here, they were reborn there.’
When a noble disciple recollects the faith, virtuous behavior, learning, generosity, and wisdom in himself and in those deities, his mind becomes placid, joy arises, and the defilements of the mind are abandoned in the same way that impure gold is cleansed by exertion.
I too have such faith as those deities possessed, because of which, when they passed away here, they were reborn there; I too have such virtuous behavior … such learning … such generosity … such wisdom as those deities possessed, because of which, when they passed away here, they were reborn there.’
When a noble disciple recollects the faith, virtuous behavior, learning, generosity, and wisdom in himself and in those deities, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight.
I too have such faith … such wisdom as those deities possessed because of which, when they passed away here, they were reborn there.’
When a noble disciple recollects the faith, virtuous behavior, learning, generosity, and wisdom in himself and in those deities, his mind becomes placid, joy arises, and the defilements of the mind are abandoned.
I too say thus:
I understood as it really is: ‘This is suffering’; I understood as it really is: ‘This is the origin of suffering’; I understood as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of suffering’; I understood as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
I understood as it really is: ‘These are the taints’; I understood as it really is: ‘This is the origin of the taints’; I understood as it really is: ‘This is the cessation of the taints’; I understood as it really is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of the taints.’
I used no sandalwood unless it came from Kāsi and my headdress, jacket, lower garment, and upper garment were made of cloth from Kāsi.
I want to depart on a tour of the countryside.”
I want to see him.”
I was concerned that on hearing this Dhamma exposition, they might take to the ways of heedlessness.
I was given to my young husband in marriage when I was a young girl, but I don’t recall ever transgressing against him even in thought, much less by deed.”
I was heedless.’
I was heedless.’
I was heedless.’
I was insane, out of my mind.’
I was Sakka, ruler of the devas, thirty-six times.
I will bathe and drink, come out, and set off wherever I want.’
He then enters the lake and playfully washes his ears and back.
I will bathe and drink, come out, and set off wherever I want.’
Then, without reflecting, it hastily enters the deep lake.
I will be one who has done his task.
I will come to possess knowledge not shared.
I will describe the holy ones,Sāriputta, listen to me.
I will fulfill the aggregate of concentration that I have not yet fulfilled or assist with wisdom in various respects the aggregate of concentration that I have fulfilled.
I will fulfill the aggregate of wisdom that I have not yet fulfilled or assist with wisdom in various respects the aggregate of wisdom that I have fulfilled.’
Therefore such a person is to be associated with, followed, and served with honor and respect.
I will have clearly seen causation.
I will see nibbāna as peaceful.
I will sit down there.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.”
I will speak.” 
I will teach you about one of good character and about one of still better character.
I will tell you about the deedsthat produce torment.Listen to them as they are,remote from those that are righteous:
I will visit him tomorrow.”
Then he paid homage to the Blessed One, circumambulated him keeping the right side toward him, and departed.
I won’t think I am unable to follow the training, give it up, and revert to the lower life.’
This person, I say, is just like the warrior who takes up a sword and shield, arms himself with a bow and quiver, and enters the fray of battle, who is wounded by his foes while he strives and exerts himself in the battle, and is then carried off and brought to his relatives, who nurse him and look after him, and who then recovers from that injury.
I would not be able to do my work, my enemies would be elated, and my friends would become saddened.’
Thus, when what is subject to loss is lost, he does not sorrow, languish, lament, weep beating his breast, and become confused.
I would not be able to do my work, my enemies would be elated, and my friends would become saddened.’
Thus, when what is subject to loss is lost, he sorrows, languishes, laments, weeps beating his breast, and becomes confused.
I would not be able to do my work, my enemies would be elated, and my friends would become saddened.’
Thus, when what is subject to old age grows old, he does not sorrow, languish, lament, weep beating his breast, and become confused.
I would not be able to do my work, my enemies would be elated, and my friends would become saddened.’
Thus, when what is subject to old age grows old, he sorrows, languishes, laments, weeps beating his breast, and becomes confused.
I would then say “Good!” to him and would not trouble him, and seeing I would make amends for it.
I would then say “No!” to him and would trouble him, and even seeing I would not make amends for it.
I would then say “No!” to him and would trouble him, and even seeing I would not make amends for it.’
I-makings will cease for me.
Idle chatter is non-Dhamma; abstention from idle chatter is the Dhamma….
Idle chatter is the near shore, abstention from idle chatter the far shore.
Idle chatter, I say, is also threefold: caused by greed, caused by hatred, and caused by delusion.
If a bhikkhu did not know moderation in accepting robes … and provisions for the sick, he would not be called ‘one who knows moderation.’
But because he knows moderation in accepting robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick, he is called ‘one who knows moderation.’
Thus he is one who knows the Dhamma, one who knows the meaning, one who knows himself, and one who knows moderation.
If a bhikkhu did not know the Dhamma—the discourses … questions-and-answers—he would not be called ‘one who knows the Dhamma.’
But because he knows the Dhamma—the discourses … questions-and-answers—he is called ‘one who knows the Dhamma.’
Thus he is one who knows the Dhamma.
If a man with good sight were to examine his own facial reflection in it, he would know and see it as it really is.
If a man with good sight were to examine his own facial reflection in it, he would know and see it as it really is.
If a man with good sight were to examine his own facial reflection in it, he would know and see it as it really is.
If a man with good sight were to examine his own facial reflection in it, he would know and see it as it really is.
If a man with good sight were to examine his own facial reflection in it, he would know and see it as it really is.
If a man with good sight were to examine his own facial reflection in it, he would not know and see it as it really is.
If a man with good sight were to examine his own facial reflection in it, he would not know and see it as it really is.
If a man with good sight were to examine his own facial reflection in it, he would not know and see it as it really is.
If a man with good sight were to examine his own facial reflection in it, he would not know and see it as it really is.
If a man with good sight were to examine his own facial reflection in it, he would not know and see it as it really is.
If a strong man were to remove the embankment on any side, would water come out?”
If a strong man would tip it in any direction, would water come out?”
If a violent rainstorm should come from the east, it could not make it quake, wobble, and tremble; if a violent rainstorm should come from the west … from the north … from the south, it could not make it quake, wobble, and tremble.
If a violent rainstorm should then arrive from the east, it would not shake it or make it quake, wobble, and tremble; if a violent rainstorm should then arrive from the west … from the north … from the south, it would not shake it or make it quake, wobble, and tremble.
If a wise person wants to talk,having known the time is right,without quarrelsomeness or pride,the sagely person should utterthe speech that the noble ones practice,which is connected with the Dhamma and meaning.
If all brahmins … vessas … suddas would be converted by this conversion toward the abandoning of unwholesome qualities and the acquisition of wholesome qualities, that would lead to their welfare and happiness for a long time.
If all brahmins … vessas … suddas would be converted by this conversion, that would lead to their welfare and happiness for a long time.”
If all brahmins … vessas … suddas would observe the uposatha complete in eight factors, that would lead to their welfare and happiness for a long time.
If all brahmins … vessas … suddas would observe the uposatha complete in eight factors, that would lead to their welfare and happiness for a long time.”
If all khattiyas would be converted by this conversion toward the abandoning of unwholesome qualities and the acquisition of wholesome qualities, that would lead to their welfare and happiness for a long time.
If all khattiyas would be converted by this conversion, that would lead to their welfare and happiness for a long time.
If all khattiyas would observe the uposatha complete in eight factors, that would lead to their welfare and happiness for a long time.
If all khattiyas would observe the uposatha complete in eight factors, that would lead to their welfare and happiness for a long time.
If an assigner of meals possesses these four qualities, he is deposited in heaven as if brought there.”
If an assigner of meals possesses these four qualities, he is deposited in hell as if brought there.
If an elder corrects me, he might do so sympathetically, not without sympathy.
If an elder corrects me, he might do so without sympathy, not sympathetically.
If any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī develops and cultivates these five things, one of two fruits is to be expected: either final knowledge in this very life or, if there is a residue remaining, the state of non-returning.”
If anyone has any doubt or uncertainty about this, the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One is dwelling among the Bhaggas at Suṃsumāragira, in the deer park at Bhesakalā Grove.
If anyone has any doubt or uncertainty about this, the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One is dwelling among the Bhaggas at Suṃsumāragira, in the deer park at Bhesakalā Grove.
If anyone has any doubt or uncertainty about this, the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One is dwelling among the Bhaggas at Suṃsumāragira, in the deer park at Bhesakalā Grove.
If anyone should say: ‘Where does the pleasure equanimity cease?
If he attends exclusively to the mark of equanimity, it is possible that his mind will not be properly concentrated for the destruction of the taints.
If he attends exclusively to the mark of equanimity, it is possible that his mind will not be properly concentrated for the destruction of the taints.
If he attends exclusively to the mark of exertion, it is possible that his mind will veer toward restlessness.
If he attends exclusively to the mark of exertion, it is possible that his mind will veer toward restlessness.
If he does not attain and penetrate this, with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, he is an attainer of nibbāna upon landing … an attainer of nibbāna without exertion … an attainer of nibbāna through exertion … one bound upstream, heading toward the Akaniṭṭha realm.
If he does not attain and penetrate this, with the utter destruction of three fetters, he is a family-to-family attainer who, after roaming and wandering on among good families two or three times, makes an end of suffering.
If he does not attain and penetrate this, with the utter destruction of three fetters, he is a one-seed attainer who, after being reborn once more in human existence, makes an end of suffering.
If he does not attain and penetrate this, with the utter destruction of three fetters, he is a seven-times-at-most attainer who, after roaming and wandering on among devas and humans seven times at most, makes an end of suffering.
If he does not get a robe he is not agitated, and if he gets one he uses it without being tied to it, infatuated with it, and blindly absorbed in it, seeing the danger in it and understanding the escape from it.
If he does not get almsfood he is not agitated, and if he gets some he uses it without being tied to it, infatuated with it, and blindly absorbed in it, seeing the danger in it and understanding the escape from it.
If he does not get lodging he is not agitated, and if he gets it he uses it without being tied to it, infatuated with it, and blindly absorbed in it, seeing the danger in it and understanding the escape from it.
If he does not meditate in dependence on earth … in dependence on what is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, and examined by the mind, and yet he meditates, just how does he meditate so that the devas … worship the excellent thoroughbred person from afar, saying:
If he does not reach final knowledge in this very life, having been reborn among a certain group of mind-made that transcend the company of devas that subsist on edible food, he might enter and emerge from the cessation of perception and feeling.
If he does not reach final knowledge in this very life, then, having been reborn among a certain group of mind-made that transcend the company of devas that subsist on edible food, he might enter and emerge from the cessation of perception and feeling.
If he does not see any disorderliness or distension of his body, he is pleased.
If he doesn’t teach me the Dhamma, then I teach him the Dhamma.
If he doesn’t teach me the Dhamma, then I teach him the Dhamma.
If he earns a hundred or a thousand kahāpaṇas day after day, deposits whatever he gains, and has a life span of a hundred years, living a hundred years, would he acquire a great mass of wealth?”
If he gives a blow to a buffalo … … to a cow … … to a leopard … If he gives a blow to any smaller animals, even a hare or a cat, he gives the blow respectfully, not disrespectfully.
If he is firm in it, focused on it, often dwells in it, and has not lost it when he dies, he is reborn in companionship with the devas in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
If he is firm in it, focused on it, often dwells in it, and has not lost it when he dies, he is reborn in companionship with the devas in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
If he is firm in it, focused on it, often dwells in it, and has not lost it when he dies, he is reborn in companionship with the devas of Brahmā’s company.
If he is firm in it, focused on it, often dwells in it, and has not lost it when he dies, he is reborn in companionship with the devas of Brahmā’s company.
If he is firm in it, focused on it, often dwells in it, and has not lost it when he dies, he is reborn in companionship with the devas of great fruit.
If he is firm in it, focused on it, often dwells in it, and has not lost it when he dies, he is reborn in companionship with the devas of great fruit.
If he is firm in it, focused on it, often dwells in it, and has not lost it when he dies, he is reborn in companionship with the devas of refulgent glory.
If he is firm in it, focused on it, often dwells in it, and has not lost it when he dies, he is reborn in companionship with the devas of refulgent glory.
If he is firm in it, focused on it, often dwells in it, and has not lost it when he dies, he is reborn in companionship with the devas of streaming radiance.
If he is firm in it, focused on it, often dwells in it, and has not lost it when he dies, he is reborn in companionship with the devas of streaming radiance.
If he is firm in it, focused on it, often dwells in it, and has not lost it when he dies, he is reborn in companionship with the devas of the base of nothingness.
If he is firm in it, focused on it, often dwells in it, and has not lost it when he dies, he is reborn in companionship with the devas of the base of the infinity of consciousness.
If he is firm in it, focused on it, often dwells in it, and has not lost it when he dies, he is reborn in companionship with the devas of the base of the infinity of space.
If he is summoned to a council, to an assembly, to his relatives’ presence, to his guild, or to the court, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ then, not knowing, he says, ‘I do not know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I do not see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I see.’
Thus he does not consciously speak falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
If he is summoned to a council, to an assembly, to his relatives’ presence, to his guild, or to the court, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ then, not knowing, he says, ‘I do not know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I do not see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I see.’
Thus he does not consciously speak falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
If he is summoned to a council, to an assembly, to his relatives’ presence, to his guild, or to the court, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ then, not knowing, he says, ‘I do not know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I do not see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I see.’
Thus he does not consciously speak falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
If he is summoned to a council, to an assembly, to his relatives’ presence, to his guild, or to the court, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ then, not knowing, he says, ‘I know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I do not know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I do not see.’
Thus he consciously speaks falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
If he is summoned to a council, to an assembly, to his relatives’ presence, to his guild, or to the court, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ then, not knowing, he says, ‘I know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I do not know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I do not see.’
Thus he consciously speaks falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
If he is summoned to a council, to an assembly, to his relatives’ presence, to his guild, or to the court, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ then, not knowing, he says, ‘I know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I do not know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I do not see.’
Thus he consciously speaks falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
If he so wished, the Tathāgata could live on for an eon or for the remainder of an eon.”
If he so wished, the Tathāgata could live on for an eon or for the remainder of an eon.”
If he thinks what I say should be rejected, let him reject it.”
If he were exclusively to just look on, it is possible the gold would not reach the right consistency.
If he were to exclusively sprinkle water on the gold, it is possible the gold would cool down.
If he wishes, the bhikkhu accepts.
If he wishes, the bhikkhu accepts.
If I am sitting, on that occasion my sitting is celestial.
If I am sitting, on that occasion my sitting is divine.
If I am sitting, on that occasion my sitting is noble.
If I am standing, on that occasion my standing is celestial.
If I am standing, on that occasion my standing is divine.
If I am standing, on that occasion my standing is noble.
If I had known, I wouldn’t have spoken so long.”
If I had not committed a particular unwholesome misdeed with the body, he would not have seen me doing so.
If I had realized that this was the Venerable Ānanda, I wouldn’t have spoken so much.
If I lie down, on that occasion this is my celestial high and luxurious bed.
If I lie down, on that occasion this is my divine high and luxurious bed.
If I lie down, on that occasion this is my noble high and luxurious bed.
If I try to drink it with my cupped hands or a vessel, I will stir it up, disturb it, and make it undrinkable.
If I were to sorrow, languish, lament, weep beating my breast, and become confused when what is subject to loss is lost, I would lose my appetite and my features would become ugly.
If I were to sorrow, languish, lament, weep beating my breast, and become confused when what is subject to loss is lost, I would lose my appetite and my features would become ugly.
If I were to sorrow, languish, lament, weep beating my breast, and become confused when what is subject to old age grows old, I would lose my appetite and my features would become ugly.
If I were to sorrow, languish, lament, weep beating my breast, and become confused when what is subject to old age grows old, I would lose my appetite and my features would become ugly.
If it saw land anywhere, it went straight for it.
If it were not possible to abandon the unwholesome, I would not say: ‘Bhikkhus, abandon the unwholesome!’ But because it is possible to abandon the unwholesome, I say: ‘Bhikkhus, abandon the unwholesome!’ If this abandoning of the unwholesome led to harm and suffering, I would not tell you to abandon it.
If it were not possible to develop the wholesome, I would not say: ‘Bhikkhus, develop the wholesome!’ But because it is possible to develop the wholesome, I say: ‘Bhikkhus, develop the wholesome!’ If this developing of the wholesome led to harm and suffering, I would not tell you to develop it.
If Master Gotama thinks what I say should be approved, let him approve it.
If my beloved relatives and family members would be converted by this conversion, that would lead to their welfare and happiness for a long time.
If of middle standing corrects me … If a junior corrects me, he might do so without sympathy, not sympathetically.
If of middle standing speaks to me … If a junior corrects me, he might do so sympathetically, not without sympathy, I would then say “Good!” to him and would not trouble him, and seeing I would make amends for it.’
If one attacks such a bhikkhu,one first harms oneself;then, having harmed oneself,one afterward harms the other.
If one could rightly say of anyone: ‘He is a delicate ascetic among ascetics,’ it is precisely of me that one might say this.
If one does not transgress the Dhammathrough desire, hate, fear, or delusion,one’s fame becomes full like the moonin the bright fortnight.
If one does not transgress the Dhammathrough desire, hate, fear, or delusion,one’s fame becomes full like the moonin the bright fortnight.
If one dwells with a heart overcome by ill will … by dullness and drowsiness … by restlessness and remorse … by doubt, one does what should be avoided and neglects one’s duty, so that one’s fame and happiness are spoiled.
If one dwells with a heart overcome by longing and unrighteous greed, one does what should be avoided and neglects one’s duty, so that one’s fame and happiness are spoiled.
If one engages in these ten courses of unwholesome kamma, then, if one gets up early and strokes the ground from one’s bed, one is impure, and if one doesn’t stroke the ground, one is impure.
If one engages in these ten courses of wholesome kamma, then, if one gets up early and strokes the ground from one’s bed, one is pure, and if one doesn’t stroke the ground, one is pure.
If one has directly encountered them, rarely gained in the world,if one has obtained the human state,and the good Dhamma is being taught,for a person desiring his own good,this is incentive enough to strive.
If one has little learningand is not settled in the virtues,they criticize him on both counts,virtuous behavior and learning.
If one has little learningbut is well settled in the virtues,they praise him for his virtuous behavior;his learning has succeeded.
If one immerses oneself in water three times including the evening, one is impure, and if one doesn’t immerse oneself in water three times including the evening, one is impure.
If one immerses oneself in water three times including the evening, one is pure, and if one doesn’t immerse oneself in water three times including the evening, one is pure.
If one is highly learnedand is settled in the virtues,they praise him on both counts,virtuous behavior and learning.
If one is highly learnedbut is not settled in the virtues,they criticize him for his lack of virtue;his learning has not succeeded.
If one is intent on renunciationand solitude of mind;if one is intent on non-afflictionand the destruction of clinging;if one is intent on craving’s destructionand non-confusion of mind:when one sees the sense bases’ arising,one’s mind is completely liberated.
If one knows of a country or region: ‘When I resort to this country or region, unwholesome qualities increase in me and wholesome qualities decline,’ one should not resort to such a country or region.
If one knows of a country or region: ‘When I resort to this country or region, unwholesome qualities increase in me and wholesome qualities decline,’ one should not resort to such a country or region.
If one knows of a lodging: ‘When I use this lodging, unwholesome qualities increase in me and wholesome qualities decline,’ one should not use such a lodging.
If one knows of a lodging: ‘When I use this lodging, unwholesome qualities increase in me and wholesome qualities decline,’ one should not use such a lodging.
If one knows of a person: ‘When I associate with this person, unwholesome qualities increase in me and wholesome qualities decline,’ one should not associate with such a person.
If one knows of a person: ‘When I associate with this person, unwholesome qualities increase in me and wholesome qualities decline; and the requisites of life that should be obtained by one gone forth—robes, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick—are obtained with difficulty; and the goal of the ascetic life for the sake of which I have gone forth from the household life into homelessness does not reach fulfillment by development for me,’ in that case one should depart from that person any time night or day, even without taking leave of him.
If one knows of a robe: ‘When I use this robe, unwholesome qualities increase in me and wholesome qualities decline,’ one should not use such a robe.
If one knows of a robe: ‘When I use this robe, unwholesome qualities increase in me and wholesome qualities decline,’ one should not use such a robe.
If one knows of a village or town: ‘When I resort to this village or town, unwholesome qualities increase in me and wholesome qualities decline,’ one should not resort to such a village or town.
If one knows of a village or town: ‘When I resort to this village or town, unwholesome qualities increase in me and wholesome qualities decline,’ one should not resort to such a village or town.
If one knows of some almsfood: ‘When I use this almsfood, unwholesome qualities increase in me and wholesome qualities decline,’ one should not use such almsfood.
If one knows of some almsfood: ‘When I use this almsfood, unwholesome qualities increase in me and wholesome qualities decline,’ one should not use such almsfood.
If one pays homage to the sun with reverential salutation, one is impure, and if one doesn’t pay homage to the sun with reverential salutation, one is impure.
If one pays homage to the sun with reverential salutation, one is pure, and if one doesn’t pay homage to the sun with reverential salutation, one is pure.
If one says: ‘Friend, with the remainderless fading away and cessation of the six bases for contact, there is both something else and nothing else,’ one proliferates that which is not to be proliferated.
If one says: ‘Friend, with the remainderless fading away and cessation of the six bases for contact, there is neither something else nor nothing else,’ one proliferates that which is not to be proliferated.
If one says: ‘Friend, with the remainderless fading away and cessation of the six bases for contact, there is nothing else,’ one proliferates that which is not to be proliferated.
If one strokes green grass, one is impure, and if one doesn’t stroke green grass, one is impure.
If one strokes green grass, one is pure, and if one doesn’t stroke green grass, one is pure.
If one strokes wet cow dung, one is impure, and if one doesn’t stroke wet cow dung, one is impure.
If one strokes wet cow dung, one is pure, and if one doesn’t stroke wet cow dung, one is pure.
If one tends the sacred fire, one is impure, and if one doesn’t tend the sacred fire, one is impure.
If one tends the sacred fire, one is pure, and if one doesn’t tend the sacred fire, one is pure.
If one were not to thank the Venerable Ānanda for his well-stated words, one’s head would split apart!”
If one were to become an end-maker by means of conduct, even one who still has clinging would become an end-maker.
If one were to become an end-maker by means of knowledge and conduct, even one who still has clinging would become an end-maker.
If one were to become an end-maker otherwise than by means of knowledge and conduct, then a worldling would be an end-maker; for a worldling is destitute of knowledge and conduct.
If one who possesses these five qualities is appointed an assigner of meals, he should not be sent.
If others should reprove me—whether at a proper time or at an improper time; whether about what is true or about what is false; whether gently or harshly; whether in a beneficial way or in a harmful way; whether with a mind of loving-kindness or while harboring hatred—I should still be established in two things: in truth and non-anger.
If she could not quickly take it out, she would brace the boy’s head with her left hand and, hooking a finger of her right hand, she would take it out even if she had to draw blood.
If someone were to approach that large crowd of people and ask them: ‘Where did you get this grain?’ what should they say?”
If that venerable one teaches me the Dhamma, I listen to it respectfully, not without respect.
If the Blessed One permits me, I will come back to this mango grove to strive.”
If the Blessed One permits me, I will go back to that mango grove to strive.’
So if the Blessed One would permit me, I will go back to that mango grove to strive.”
If the Blessed One would permit me, I will go back to that mango grove to strive.”
If the Blessed One would permit me, I will go back to that mango grove to strive.”
If the fool did not think badly, speak badly, and act badly, how would wise people know of him: ‘This fellow is a fool, a bad person’?
If the goldsmith or his apprentice were to exclusively blow on the gold, it is possible that the gold would just burn up.
If the lion sees any disorderliness or distension of his body, he is displeased.
If the Tathāgata teaches the Dhamma to bhikkhunīs … … to male lay followers … … to female lay followers, he teaches it respectfully, not disrespectfully.
If the Tathāgata teaches the Dhamma to bhikkhus, he teaches it respectfully, not disrespectfully.
If the Tathāgata teaches the Dhamma to worldlings, even to food-carriers and hunters, he teaches it respectfully, not disrespectfully.
If the wheel-turning monarch speaks to them, they are also elated by his speech, and that assembly of brahmins is still unsated when the wheel-turning monarch falls silent.
If the wheel-turning monarch speaks to them, they are also elated by his speech, and that assembly of householders is still unsated when the wheel-turning monarch falls silent.
If the wheel-turning monarch speaks to them, they are also elated by his speech, and that assembly of khattiyas is still unsated when the wheel-turning monarch falls silent.
If the wheelturning monarch speaks to them, they are also elated by his speech, and that assembly of ascetics is still unsated when the wheel-turning monarch falls silent.
If the wise person did not think well, speak well, and act well, how would wise people know of him: ‘This fellow is wise, a good person’?
If the world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, would be converted by this conversion toward the abandoning of unwholesome qualities and the acquisition of wholesome qualities, that would lead to the welfare and happiness of the world for a long time.
If the world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, would observe the uposatha complete in eight factors, that would lead to the welfare and happiness of the world for a long time.
If there were no danger in the world, beings would not become disenchanted with it; but because there is danger in the world, beings become disenchanted with it.
If there were no escape from the world, beings would not escape from it; but because there is an escape from the world, beings escape from it.
If there were no such meansof sustaining a favorable relationship,neither mother nor fatherwould be able to obtain esteemand veneration from their children.
If these five things do not slip away from a frail and sick bhikkhu, it can be expected of him: ‘In no long time, with the destruction of the taints, he will realize for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he will dwell in it.’”
If these five things that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and rarely gained in the world could be obtained by means of prayers or aspirations, who here would be lacking in anything?
If these great sal trees would be converted by this conversion toward the abandoning of unwholesome qualities and the acquisition of wholesome qualities, that would lead to the welfare and happiness even of these great sal trees for a long time, if they could choose.
If these great sal trees would observe the uposatha complete in eight factors, that would lead to the welfare and happiness of these great sal trees for a long time,.
If these three things were not found in the world, the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One would not arise in the world, and the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by him would not shine in the world.
If these two bright qualities did not protect the world, there would not be seen here one’s mother, aunts, or the wives of one’s teachers and respected people.
If they follow his example, this would lead to their harm and suffering for a long time.
If they follow his example, this would lead to their harm and suffering for a long time.
If they follow his example, this would lead to their welfare and happiness for a long time.
If they follow his example, this would lead to their welfare and happiness for a long time.
If they see any dust or blemish there, they will make an effort to remove it.
If they see any dust or blemish there, they will make an effort to remove it.
If they see any dust or blemish there, they will make an effort to remove it.
If this bhikkhu had not committed a particular unwholesome misdeed with the body, I would not have seen him doing so.
If this person is asked a question and he answers evasively, diverts the discussion to an irrelevant subject, and displays anger, hatred, and bitterness, in such a case this person is unfit to talk.
If this person is asked a question and he does not stand firm in regard to his position and the opposing position; if he does not stand firm in his stratagem; if he does not stand firm in an assertion about what is known; if he does not stand firm in the procedure, in such a case this person is unfit to talk.
If this person is asked a question and he overwhelms, crushes him, ridicules him, and seizes upon a slight error, in such a case this person is unfit to talk.
If this person is asked a question that should be answered categorically and he does not answer it categorically; a question that should be answered after making a distinction and he answers it without making a distinction; a question that should be answered with a counter-question and he answers it without asking a counter-question; a question that should be set aside and he does not set it aside, in such a case this person is unfit to talk.
If this venerable one resorts to congenial lodgings, relies on good friends, and harmonizes the spiritual faculties, perhaps he will realize for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, that unsurpassed consummation of the spiritual life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the household life into homelessness, and having entered upon it, dwell in it.’
It is in this way, too, that those devas know one who has a residue remaining as ‘one with a residue remaining’ and one who has no residue remaining as ‘one without residue remaining.’
If this venerable one resorts to congenial lodgings, relies on good friends, and harmonizes the spiritual faculties, perhaps he will realize for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, that unsurpassed consummation of the spiritual life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the household life into homelessness, and having entered upon it, dwell in it.’
It is in this way, too, that those devas know one who has a residue remaining as ‘one with a residue remaining’ and one who has no residue remaining as ‘one without residue remaining.’”
If this venerable one resorts to congenial lodgings, relies on good friends, and harmonizes the spiritual faculties, perhaps he will realize for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, that unsurpassed consummation of the spiritual life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the household life into homelessness, and having entered upon it, dwell in it.’
It is in this way, too, that those devas know one who has a residue remaining….
If through desire, hate, fear, or delusionone transgresses against the Dhamma,one’s fame diminishes like the moonin the dark fortnight.
If through desire, hate, fear, or delusionone transgresses against the Dhamma,one’s fame diminishes like the moonin the dark fortnight.
If unwholesome qualities then increase and wholesome qualities decline, such behavior and observances, lifestyle, and spiritual life, set up as the essence, are fruitless.
If wanderers of other sects were questioned thus, they would not be able to reply and, further, they would meet with distress.
If you censure and repudiate this Dhamma factor of good will, then you must regard as worthy of worship and praise those ascetics and brahmins who have minds of ill will and intentions of hate.
If you censure and repudiate this Dhamma factor of right concentration, then you must regard as worthy of worship and praise those ascetics and brahmins who are unconcentrated, with wandering minds.’
If you censure and repudiate this Dhamma factor of right mindfulness, then you must regard as worthy of worship and praise those ascetics and brahmins who are muddle-minded and lack clear comprehension.
If you don’t pay homage to the sun with reverential salutation, you should immerse yourself in water three times including the evening.’
It is in this way that the brahmins of the west prescribe their rites of purity.
If you don’t stroke green grass, you should tend the sacred fire.
If you don’t stroke the ground, you should stroke wet cow dung.
If you don’t stroke wet cow dung, you should stroke green grass.
If you don’t tend the sacred fire, you should pay homage to the sun with reverential salutation.
If you had approached me and asked me about this matter, I would have answered exactly as the bhikkhunī of Kajaṅgalā has answered.
If you had approached me and asked me the meaning of this, I would have explained it to you in the same way as Mahākaccāna.
If you had approached me and asked me the meaning of this, I would have explained it to you in the same way as Ānanda.
If you have not learned it completely, I will complete it.
If you have not learned it completely, I will complete it.
If you have not learned it completely, the ascetic Gotama will complete it for you.
If you want, you can enjoy wealth right here and do merits, or go back to your own family circle, or inform me if you want me to give you over to another man.’
My eldest wife then said to me: ‘Young sir, give me to such and such a man.’
I sent for that man, and with my left hand I took my wife, with my right hand I took the ceremonial vase, and I gave her to that man.
If Ānanda speaks to them on the Dhamma, they are also elated by his speech, and that assembly of bhikkhunīs is still unsated when Ānanda falls silent.
If Ānanda speaks to them on the Dhamma, they are also elated by his speech, and that assembly of bhikkhus is still unsated when Ānanda falls silent.
If Ānanda speaks to them on the Dhamma, they are also elated by his speech, and that assembly of female lay followers is still unsated when Ānanda falls silent.
If Ānanda speaks to them on the Dhamma, they are also elated by his speech, and that assembly of male lay followers is still unsated when Ānanda falls silent.
If, after learning the meaning and Dhamma of even a four-line verse, one practices in accordance with the Dhamma, that is enough for one to be called ‘a learned expert on the Dhamma.’”
If, bhikkhus, one could rightly say of anyone: ‘He is a delicate ascetic among ascetics,’ it is precisely of me that one might say this.”
If, bhikkhus, one could rightly say of anything: ‘Entirely a snare of Māra,’ it is precisely of women that one could say this.” 
If, bhikkhus, the noble disciple should pass away on that occasion, there is no fetter bound by which he might return to this world.”
If, bhikkhus, you perceive any such root of dispute either in yourselves or in others, you should strive to abandon this evil root of dispute.
If, bhikkhus, you perceive any such root of dispute either in yourselves or in others, you should strive to abandon this evil root of dispute.
If, supported by a sense of moral shame … … supported by moral dread … … supported by energy … … supported by wisdom, a bhikkhu abandons the unwholesome and develops the wholesome, that unwholesome is indeed abandoned by him.
If, when he wants to buy something, he can pay with money, grain, silver, or gold, they would know him as a rich, affluent, and wealthy person who claims to be rich, affluent, and wealthy.
If, when he wants to buy something, he cannot pay with money, grain, silver, or gold, they would know him as a poor, destitute, and needy person claiming to be rich, affluent, and wealthy.
If, when you check for them in the discourses and seek them in the discipline, they are included among the discourses and are to be seen in the discipline, you should draw the conclusion: ‘Surely, this is the word of the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
If, when you check for them in the discourses and seek them in the discipline, they are included among the discourses and are to be seen in the discipline, you should draw the conclusion: ‘Surely, this is the word of the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
If, when you check for them in the discourses and seek them in the discipline, they are not included among the discourses and are not to be seen in the discipline, you should draw the conclusion: ‘Surely, this is not the word of the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
If, when you check for them in the discourses and seek them in the discipline, they are not included among the discourses and are not to be seen in the discipline, you should draw the conclusion: ‘Surely, this is not the word of the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
If, when you check for them in the discourses and seek them in the discipline, they are not included among the discourses and are not to be seen in the discipline, you should draw the conclusion: ‘Surely, this is not the word of the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
If, when you check for them in the discourses and seek them in the discipline, they are not included among the discourses and are not to be seen in the discipline, you should draw the conclusion: ‘Surely, this is not the word of the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
If, while that bhikkhu is dwelling in this way, perception and attention accompanied by forms occur in him, he feels it as an affliction ….
If, while that bhikkhu is dwelling in this way, perception and attention accompanied by rapture occur in him, he feels it as an affliction ….
If, while that bhikkhu is dwelling in this way, perception and attention accompanied by sensuality occur in him, he feels it as an affliction.
If, while that bhikkhu is dwelling in this way, perception and attention accompanied by the base of nothingness occur in him, he feels it as an affliction.
If, while that bhikkhu is dwelling in this way, perception and attention accompanied by the base of the infinity of consciousness occur in him, he feels it as an affliction ….
If, while that bhikkhu is dwelling in this way, perception and attention accompanied by the base of the infinity of space occur in him, he feels it as an affliction ….
If, while that bhikkhu is dwelling in this way, perception and attention accompanied by the pleasure equanimity occur in him, he feels it as an affliction ….
If, while that bhikkhu is dwelling in this way, perception and attention accompanied by thought occur in him, he feels it as an affliction.
If, with a mind free from hate,one arouses love toward just one being,one thereby becomes good.Compassionate in mind toward all beings,the noble one generates abundant merit.
If, with a mind of hatred, one had insulted and reviled them and their communities of disciples, wouldn’t one have generated much demerit?”
If, with a mind of hatred, one had insulted and reviled them and their communities of disciples, wouldn’t one have generated much demerit?”
Ignorance and craving for existence.
Ignorance is abandoned.
Ignorance is dispelled, true knowledge has arisen; darkness is dispelled, light has arisen, as happens when one dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute.
Ignorance is dispelled, true knowledge has arisen; darkness is dispelled, light has arisen, as happens when one dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute.
Ignorance is dispelled, true knowledge has arisen; darkness is dispelled, light has arisen, as happens when one dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute.
Ignorance is dispelled, true knowledge has arisen; darkness is dispelled, light has arisen, as happens when one dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute.
Ignorance is their source and origin.
Ignorance was dispelled, true knowledge had arisen; darkness was dispelled, light had arisen, as happens when one dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute.
Ignorance was dispelled, true knowledge had arisen; darkness was dispelled, light had arisen, as happens when one dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute.
Ignorance was dispelled, true knowledge had arisen; darkness was dispelled, light had arisen, as happens when one dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute.
Ignorance, becoming full, fills up craving for existence.
Ignorance, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
Ill will is non-Dhamma; good will is the Dhamma….
Ill will is the near shore, good will the far shore.
Ill will … Dullness and drowsiness … Restlessness and remorse … Doubt is an obstruction, a hindrance, an encumbrance of the mind, a state that weakens wisdom.
Ill will, I say, is also threefold: caused by greed, caused by hatred, and caused by delusion.
Impure bodily action, impure verbal action, and impure mental action.
Impurity by mind is threefold.
Impurity by speech is fourfold.
In a certain place he saw a large block of wood and addressed the bhikkhus: “Do you see, friends, that large block of wood?”
In a state of health beings are intoxicated with their health, and when they are intoxicated with their health they engage in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
In a time of famine, people migrate to places where food is plentiful and living conditions there are congested and crowded.
In a time of peril, people migrate to places where there is safety and living conditions there are congested and crowded.
In brief and in detail.
In celestial life span, in celestial beauty, and in celestial happiness.
In consequence, he is reborn in a world that is both afflictive and unafflictive.
In consequence, he is reborn in an afflictive world.
In consequence, he is reborn in an unafflictive world.
In consequence, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
In consequence, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
In consequence, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
In consequence, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
In consequence, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
In consequence, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
In consequence, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
In consequence, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
In consequence, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
In dependence on attachment there is possessiveness.
In dependence on craving there is seeking.
In dependence on desire and lust there is attachment.
In dependence on gain there is judgment.
In dependence on judgment there is desire and lust.
In dependence on miserliness there is safeguarding.
In dependence on possessiveness there is miserliness.
In dependence on seeking there is gain.
In dependence on the six elements the descent of a embryo occurs.
In dependence on this emetic, beings subject to birth are freed from birth; beings subject to old age are freed from old age; beings subject to death are freed from death; beings subject to sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish are freed from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish.
In dependence on this purgative, beings subject to birth are freed from birth; beings subject to old age are freed from old age; beings subject to death are freed from death; beings subject to sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish are freed from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish.
In dependence on this washing, beings subject to birth are freed from birth; beings subject to old age are freed from old age; beings subject to death are freed from death; beings subject to sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish are freed from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish.
In dependence on this washing, beings subject to birth are freed from birth; beings subject to old age are freed from old age; beings subject to death are freed from death; beings subject to sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish are freed from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish.” 
In each case, with a mind that slants, slopes, and inclines to seclusion, withdrawn, delighting in renunciation, he gives them a talk invariably concerned with dismissing them.
In many ways I explain it, teach it, proclaim it, establish it, disclose it, analyze it, and elucidate it.
In many ways I explain it, teach it, proclaim it, establish it, disclose it, analyze it, and elucidate it.
In many ways I explain it, teach it, proclaim it, establish it, disclose it, analyze it, and elucidate it.
In many ways I explain it, teach it, proclaim it, establish it, disclose it, analyze it, and elucidate it.
In regard to this, I do not see any ground on the basis of which an ascetic, brahmin, deva, Māra, Brahmā, or anyone in the world could reasonably reprove me: ‘For such and such reasons, it is not the case that your assembly consists of many hundreds of disciples who have destroyed the taints and realized for themselves with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwell in it.’
Since I do not see any such ground, I dwell secure, fearless, and self-confident.
In regard to this, I do not see any ground on the basis of which an ascetic, brahmin, deva, Māra, Brahmā, or anyone in the world could reasonably reprove me: ‘For such and such reasons, you have not well proclaimed to your disciples the practice leading to nibbāna in such a way that, practicing in accordance with it the destruction of the taints, they realize for themselves with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwell in it.’
Since I do not see any such ground, I dwell secure, fearless, and self-confident.
In regard to this, I do not see any ground on the basis of which an ascetic, brahmin, deva, Māra, Brahmā, or anyone in the world could reasonably reprove me: ‘For such and such reasons, your Dhamma is not well expounded.’
Since I do not see any such ground, I dwell secure, fearless, and self-confident.
In such a case the bhikkhu might think: ‘Who has turned this family against me?
In such a case, he engages in a meritorious practice that extends to only one person, that is, one based on going forth.”
In such a case, it could be expected that this reservoir’s embankment would break.
In such a case, it could not be expected that this reservoir’s embankment would break.
In such a case, the current in the middle of the river would be dispersed, spread out, and divided, so that the river would no longer travel a long distance, with a swift current, carrying along much flotsam.
In such a case, the current in the middle of the river would not be dispersed, spread out, and divided, so that the river could travel a long distance, with a swift current, carrying along much flotsam.
In such a way the offering possesses six factors.
In such a way this evil root of dispute is abandoned and does not emerge in the future.
In such a way this evil root of dispute is abandoned and does not emerge in the future.
In such a way, a person is one of little learning who is intent on what he has learned.
In such a way, a person is one of little learning who is not intent on what he has learned.
In such a way, a person is one of much learning who is intent on what he has learned.
In such a way, a person is one of much learning who is not intent on what he has learned.
In that acquisition of individuality in which both one’s own volition and the volition of others operate, it is by reason of both one’s own volition and the volition of others that beings pass away from that group.
In that acquisition of individuality in which one’s own volition operates but not the volition of others, it is by reason of their own volition that beings pass away from that group.
In that acquisition of individuality in which the volition of others operates but not one’s own volition, it is by reason of the volition of others that beings pass away from that group.
In that battle, the asuras were victorious and the devas were defeated.
In that battle, the devas were victorious and the asuras were defeated.
In that case, Subhūti, you may dwell together with this bhikkhu Saddha, and when you want to see the Tathāgata, you may bring him along.” 
In that thousandfold world system there are a thousand moons, a thousand suns, a thousand Sinerus king of mountains, a thousand Jambudīpas, a thousand Aparagoyānas, a thousand Uttarakurus, a thousand Pubbavidehas, and a thousand four great oceans; a thousand four great kings, a thousand of devas the four great kings, a thousand Tāvatiṃsa, a thousand Yāma, a thousand Tusita, a thousand of devas who delight in creation, a thousand of devas who control what is created by others, a thousand brahmā worlds.
In that thousandfold world system there are a thousand moons, a thousand suns, a thousand Sinerus king of mountains, a thousand Jambudīpas, a thousand Aparagoyānas, a thousand Uttarakurus, a thousand Pubbavidehas, and a thousand four great oceans; a thousand four great kings, a thousand the four great kings, a thousand Tāvatiṃsa, a thousand Yāma, a thousand Tusita, a thousand of devas who delight in creation, a thousand of devas who control what is created by others, a thousand brahmā worlds.
In the course of the night, they get up three times, and with reverential salutation pay homage to the fire: ‘We descend in honor of the revered one.
In the course of the night, they get up three times, and with reverential salutation pay homage to the fire: ‘We descend in honor of the revered one.
In the evening, the Venerable Sāriputta, too, emerged from seclusion and went to the meeting hall, where he paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down to one side.
In the evening, when an esteemed bhikkhu has emerged from seclusion and is sitting in the shade of his dwelling with his legs crossed, holding his body straight, having established mindfulness before him, the object of concentration that he attended to during the day is still present to him.
In the first watch of the night, while walking back and forth and sitting, he purifies his mind of obstructive qualities.
In the first watch of the night, while walking back and forth and sitting, he purifies his mind of obstructive qualities.
In the first watch of the night, while walking back and forth and sitting, he purifies his mind of obstructive qualities.
In the higher virtuous behavior, in the higher mind, and in the higher wisdom.
In the middle watch of the night he lies down on the right side in the lion’s posture, with one foot overlapping the other, mindful and clearly comprehending, after noting in his mind the idea of rising.
In the middle watch of the night he lies down on the right side in the lion’s posture, with one foot overlapping the other, mindful and clearly comprehending, after noting in his mind the idea of rising.
In the middle watch of the night he lies down on the right side in the lion’s posture, with one foot overlapping the other, mindful and clearly comprehending, after noting in his mind the idea of rising.
In the morning, he dresses, takes his robe and bowl, and enters that village or town for alms with body, speech, and mind guarded, mindfulness established, and sense faculties restrained.
In the morning, he dresses, takes his robe and bowl, and enters that village or town for alms … lust invades his mind.
In the morning, he dresses, takes his robe and bowl, and enters that village or town for alms … lust invades his mind.
In the morning, he dresses, takes his robe and bowl, and enters that village or town for alms … lust invades his mind.
In the morning, he dresses, takes his robe and bowl, and enters that village or town for alms, with body, speech, and mind unguarded, without having established mindfulness, his sense faculties unrestrained.
In the Noble One’s discipline, dancing is madness.
In the Noble One’s discipline, to laugh excessively, displaying one’s teeth, is childishness.
In the past one did an evil deed whose result has not yet ripened.
In the past, Brahmin Dhammika, some seafaring merchants set out to sea in a ship, taking along a land-spotting bird.
In the past, Sajjha, and also now I say thus: ‘A bhikkhu who is an arahant—one whose taints are destroyed … one completely liberated through final knowledge—is incapable of transgression in nine cases.
In the past, Sutavā, and also now I say thus: ‘A bhikkhu who is an arahant—one whose taints are destroyed … one completely liberated through final knowledge—is incapable of transgression in nine cases.
In the presence of that elder I heard this; in his presence I learned this: “This is the Dhamma; this is the discipline; this is the Teacher’s teaching!”’ That bhikkhu’s statement should neither be approved nor rejected.
In the presence of that elder I heard this; in his presence I learned this: “This is the Dhamma; this is the discipline; this is the Teacher’s teaching!”’ That bhikkhu’s statement should neither be approved nor rejected.
In the presence of that Saṅgha I heard this; in its presence I learned this: “This is the Dhamma; this is the discipline; this is the Teacher’s teaching.”’ That bhikkhu’s statement should neither be approved nor rejected.
In the presence of those elders I heard this; in their presence I learned this: “This is the Dhamma; this is the discipline; this is the Teacher’s teaching!”’ That bhikkhu’s statement should neither be approved nor rejected.
In the same way, I accept these eight principles of respect as not to be transgressed as long as life lasts.”
In the same way, when you have been banished from those places, you’ve come to me.” 
In the vast abode of the world there are ascetics and brahmins with psychic potency and the divine eye who know the minds of others.
In their youth beings are intoxicated with their youth, and when they are intoxicated with their youth they engage in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
In these three cases ardor should be exercised.
In these three cases talk flows smoothly.”
In these three cases, one may be understood to have faith and confidence.”
In these three respects the people of Jambudīpa surpass the people of Uttarakuru and the Tāvatiṃsa devas.” 
In these three respects the people of Uttarakuru surpass the Tāvatiṃsa devas and the people of Jambudīpa.
In these three respects the Tāvatiṃsa devas surpass the people of Uttarakuru and the people of Jambudīpa.
In this case, the bhikkhus who are Dhamma specialists aren’t pleased, and those who are meditators aren’t pleased, and they aren’t practicing for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
In this case, the bhikkhus who are meditators aren’t pleased, and those who are Dhamma specialists aren’t pleased, and they aren’t practicing for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
In this connection, this is the straight path: right view … right concentration.
In this context, this is alteration: that this noble disciple who possesses unwavering confidence in the Buddha could be reborn in hell, in the animal realm, or in the sphere of afflicted spirits.
In this context, this is alteration: that this noble disciple who possesses unwavering confidence in the Saṅgha could be reborn in hell, in the animal realm, or in the sphere of afflicted spirits.
In this court there are girls of khattiya, brahmin, and householder families over whom I exercise command.
In this manner the Kosalan cartload of twenty measures of sesamum seed might be depleted and eliminated more quickly than a life in a single abbuda hell would go by.
In this very life he enters and dwells in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
In this very life he enters and dwells in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
In this very life, hungerless, quenched, and cooled, I proclaim final nibbāna through non-clinging.”
In this way a brahmin is similar to a deva.
In this way a brahmin is similar to Brahmā.
In this way a person is one who has gone under once and remains under.
In this way a person is one who has risen up and stays put.
In this way a person is one who has risen up and then goes under.
In this way a person who is like a good horse possesses speed and beauty but not the right proportions.
In this way a person who is like a good horse possesses speed but not beauty or the right proportions.
In this way a person who is like a good horse possesses speed, beauty, and the right proportions.
In this way a person who is like a good horse possesses speed, beauty, and the right proportions.
In this way a person who is like a wild colt possesses speed and beauty but not the right proportions.
In this way a person who is like a wild colt possesses speed and beauty but not the right proportions.
In this way a person who is like a wild colt possesses speed but not beauty or the right proportions.
In this way a person who is like a wild colt possesses speed but not beauty or the right proportions.
In this way a person who is like a wild colt possesses speed, beauty, and the right proportions.
In this way a person who is like a wild colt possesses speed, beauty, and the right proportions.
In this way an excellent thoroughbred person possesses speed, beauty, and the right proportions.
In this way an excellent thoroughbred person possesses speed, beauty, and the right proportions.
In this way it can be understood how nibbāna is happiness.
In this way resentment toward that person should be removed.
In this way resentment toward that person should be removed.
In this way resentment toward that person should be removed.
In this way resentment toward that person should be removed.
In this way there is the production of renewed existence in the future.
In this way there is the production of renewed existence in the future.
In this way there is the production of renewed existence in the future.
In this way there is the production of renewed existence in the future.
In this way there is the production of renewed existence in the future.
In this way there is the production of renewed existence in the future.
In this way you will be exactly the same as the fifth type of person.’
In this way you will be exactly the same as the fifth type of person.’
In this way you will be exactly the same as the fifth type of person.’
In this way you will be exactly the same as the fifth type of person.’
In this way, friend Sāriputta, a bhikkhu is one of quick apprehension concerning wholesome teachings, one who grasps well what he has learned, learns abundantly, and does not forget what he has learned.”
In this way, he delights an assembly contrary to the Dhamma.
In this way, he delights an assembly contrary to the Dhamma.
In this way, he delights an assembly contrary to the Dhamma.
In this way, he delights an assembly contrary to the Dhamma.
In this way, he delights an assembly that accords with the Dhamma.
In this way, in dependence on the right course, there is success, not failure.”
In this way, in dependence on the wrong course, there is failure, not success.
In this way, the farmer’s grains of rice would be foremost, attained the core, pure, and established in the core.
In this way, the overcoming takes place through this directly visible purification by wearing away.
In this way, the Tathāgata has knowledge of a person’s faculties, acquired by encompassing his mind with his own mind.
In this way, the Tathāgata has knowledge of a person’s faculties, acquired by encompassing his mind with his own mind.
In this way, the Tathāgata has knowledge of a person’s faculties, acquired by encompassing his mind with his own mind.
In this way, the Tathāgata has knowledge of a person’s faculties, acquired by encompassing his mind with his own mind.
In this way, the Tathāgata has knowledge of a person’s faculties, acquired by encompassing his mind with his own mind.
In this way, the Tathāgata has knowledge of a person’s faculties, acquired by encompassing his mind with his own mind.
In this way, the Tathāgata knows the future origination of qualities by encompassing mind with his own mind.
In this way, the Tathāgata knows the future origination of qualities by encompassing mind with his own mind.
In this way, the Tathāgata knows the future origination of qualities by encompassing mind with his own mind.
In this way, the Tathāgata knows the future origination of qualities by encompassing mind with his own mind.
In this way, the Tathāgata knows the future origination of qualities by encompassing mind with his own mind.
In this way, the Tathāgata knows the future origination of qualities by encompassing mind with his own mind.”
In this way, those māluvā creepers would be cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated so that they are no more subject to future arising.
In this way, those seeds would be cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated so that they are no more subject to future arising.
In this way, too, it can be understood how nibbāna is happiness.
In this way, too, it can be understood how nibbāna is happiness.
In this way, too, it can be understood how nibbāna is happiness.
In this way, too, it can be understood how nibbāna is happiness.
In this way, too, it can be understood how nibbāna is happiness.
In this way, too, it can be understood how nibbāna is happiness.
In this way, too, it can be understood how nibbāna is happiness.”
In this way, Ānanda, these two persons were each deficient in one respect.”
In this way, Ānanda, these two persons were each deficient in one respect.”
In this world together with its devasabove, across, and below,as far as the world extends,the Buddha is declared foremost.
In this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, among this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One is declared foremost.
In what do they culminate?
In what three trainings is one to train?
In what way are they Dhamma specialists?
In what way do they meditate?
In whatever way one exists such that immediately afterward the destruction of the taints occurs: this is the foremost state of existence.” 
In whatever way one hears such that immediately afterward the destruction of the taints occurs: this is the foremost kind of hearing.
In whatever way one is happy such that immediately afterward the destruction of the taints occurs: this is the foremost happiness.
In whatever way one perceives something, in just that way one expresses oneself, ‘I was percipient of such and such.’
This is called the result of perception.
In whatever way one perceives such that immediately afterward the destruction of the taints occurs: this is the foremost perception.
In whatever way the bhikkhu has grasped well a certain object of concentration, attended to it well, sustained it well, and penetrated it well with wisdom, in just that way, in relation to that Dhamma, he experiences inspiration in the meaning and inspiration in the Dhamma.
In whatever way the bhikkhu ponders, examines, and mentally inspects the Dhamma as he has heard it and learned it, in just that way, in relation to that Dhamma, he experiences inspiration in the meaning and inspiration in the Dhamma.
In whatever way the bhikkhu recites the Dhamma in detail as he has heard it and learned it, in just that way, in relation to that Dhamma, he experiences inspiration in the meaning and inspiration in the Dhamma.
In whatever way the bhikkhu teaches the bhikkhus the Dhamma that is good in the beginning … reveals the spiritual life that is perfectly complete and pure, in just that way he sees in that Dhamma a deep and pithy matter after piercing it through with wisdom.
In whatever way the bhikkhu teaches the bhikkhus the Dhamma that is good in the beginning … reveals the spiritual life that is perfectly complete and pure, in just that way his fellow monks esteem him more highly,: ‘Surely, this venerable has attained or will attain.’
This is the fourth benefit in timely listening to the Dhamma, in timely discussion on the Dhamma.
In whatever way the bhikkhu teaches the bhikkhus the Dhamma that is good in the beginning … reveals the spiritual life that is perfectly complete and pure, in just that way the Teacher becomes pleasing and agreeable to him, respected and esteemed by him.
In whatever way the bhikkhu teaches the bhikkhus the Dhamma that is good in the beginning … reveals the spiritual life that is perfectly complete and pure, in just that way, in relation to that Dhamma, he experiences inspiration in the meaning and inspiration in the Dhamma.
In whatever way the bhikkhu teaches the bhikkhus the Dhamma that is good in the beginning … reveals the spiritual life that is perfectly complete and pure, on hearing that Dhamma those bhikkhus there who are trainees, who have not attained their heart’s ideal, who dwell aspiring for the unsurpassed security from bondage, arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
In whatever way the bhikkhu teaches the Dhamma to others in detail as he has heard it and learned it, in just that way, in relation to that Dhamma, he experiences inspiration in the meaning and inspiration in the Dhamma.
In whatever way the Teacher or that fellow monk in the position of a teacher teaches the Dhamma to the bhikkhu, in just that way he experiences inspiration in the meaning and inspiration in the Dhamma.
In-and-out breathing is a thorn to the fourth jhāna.
Indeed, I am practicing for the welfare and happiness of many people; I have established many people in the noble method, that is, in the goodness of the Dhamma, in the wholesomeness of the Dhamma.
Indeed, I should never do such an evil deed, reprehensible, punishable by beheading.’
Indeed, sir, you the witnessdespise your good self;you conceal the evil selfexisting within yourself.
Indeed, Sāriputta, it is impossible that a bhikkhu who lacks reverence for the Teacher could have reverence for the Dhamma….
Indeed, that Blessed One has overcome this adherence to lust for sensual pleasures, bondage, fixation, obsession, holding firmly, and he has overcome this adherence to lust for views, bondage, fixation, obsession, holding firmly.
Indeed, this world is burning with old age, illness, and death.
Indeed, this world is swept away by old age, illness, and death.
Indolence and lack of initiative are obstructions to wealth.
Inferior sensual pleasures, middling sensual pleasures, and superior sensual pleasures are all reckoned simply as sensual pleasures.
Ingratitude and unthankfulness belong entirely to the plane of the bad person.
Inquire whether he is fit and healthy, agile and strong, and feeling at ease.
Insofar as they are accomplished in faith, he emulates them with respect to their accomplishment in faith; insofar as they are accomplished in virtuous behavior, he emulates them with respect to their accomplishment in virtuous behavior; insofar as they are accomplished in generosity, he emulates them with respect to their accomplishment in generosity; insofar as they are accomplished in wisdom, he emulates them with respect to their accomplishment in wisdom.
Insofar as they are accomplished in faith, he emulates them with respect to their accomplishment in faith; insofar as they are accomplished in virtuous behavior, he emulates them with respect to their accomplishment in virtuous behavior; insofar as they are accomplished in generosity, he emulates them with respect to their accomplishment in generosity; insofar as they are accomplished in wisdom, he emulates them with respect to their accomplishment in wisdom.
Instead, direct your mind to the deathless element.”
Instead, he directed his mind to the deathless element.
Instruct your fellow monks, Sāriputta, ‘I will cause my fellow monks to emerge from what is contrary to the good Dhamma and will establish them in the good Dhamma.’
Thus, Sāriputta, should you train yourself.”
Intoxication with youth, intoxication with health, and intoxication with life.
Inundated by rain from a rain cloud, the lashings would readily deteriorate and rot away.
Iron, copper, tin, lead, and silver.
Is my body often agitated or unagitated?
Is my mind often defiled or undefiled?
Is my mind often undefiled?
Is the Dhamma of those who teach the abandoning of lust, hatred, and delusion well expounded or not, or how do you take it?” 
Is the goal of these three kinds of teachers the same or different?”
Is the new pair of wheels finished?’ ‘In the past six months less six days, lord, I have finished one wheel.’ – ‘But, friend chariotmaker, can you finish a second wheel for me in the next six days?’ – ‘I can, lord,’ the chariotmaker replied.
Is there any fragrance that spreads with the wind, against the wind, and both with and against the wind?”
Is this alone true and anything else wrong?’ you said: ‘Uttiya, I also have not declared: “The Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death; this alone is true, anything else is wrong.”’ What, then, has Master Gotama declared?”
Is this alone true and anything else wrong?’ you said: ‘Uttiya, I also have not declared: “The world is not eternal; this alone is true, anything else is wrong.”’ When I asked you: ‘How is it then, Master Gotama, is the world finite?
Is this alone true and anything else wrong?’ you said: ‘Uttiya, I have not declared: “The world is eternal; this alone is true, anything else is wrong.”’ But when I asked you: ‘Then, Master Gotama, is the world not eternal?
Is this alone true and anything else wrong?”
Is this alone true and anything else wrong?”
Is this alone true and anything else wrong?”
Isn’t being reproved, too, suffering in the world for one who enjoys sensual pleasures?”
Isn’t imprisonment, too, suffering in the world for one who enjoys sensual pleasures?”
Isn’t prosecution, too, suffering in the world for one who enjoys sensual pleasures?”
It can be expected that it will either sink or float away.
It can be expected that one who says ‘I do not gain concentration, yet I will resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves’ will either sink or float away.
It can be expected that the sal sapling will not sink and the man will safely reach the other shore.”
It can be expected that the sal sapling will sink and the man will meet with calamity and disaster.”
It can be understood: ‘This fellow is a bad person.’
It can be understood: ‘This fellow is a bad person.’
It can be understood: ‘This fellow is a bad person.’
It can be understood: ‘This fellow is a bad person.’
It can be understood: ‘This fellow is a good person.’
It can be understood: ‘This fellow is a good person.’
It can be understood: ‘This fellow is a good person.’
It can be understood: ‘This fellow is a good person.’
It cannot patiently endure forms, cannot patiently endure sounds, cannot patiently endure odors, cannot patiently endure tastes, and cannot patiently endure tactile objects.
It cannot patiently endure forms, cannot patiently endure sounds, cannot patiently endure odors, cannot patiently endure tastes, and cannot patiently endure tactile objects.
It does not lack a means of avoidance.
It does not occur to him: ‘How good, indeed, that this householder or householder’s son, with his own hand, serves and satisfies me with various kinds of delicious food!’ It also does not occur to him: ‘Oh, in the future too may this householder or householder’s son, with his own hand, serve and satisfy me with a similar variety of delicious food!’ He uses that food without being tied to it, infatuated with it, and blindly absorbed in it, but seeing the danger in it and understanding the escape from it.
It has been badly learned by that elder.’
Thus you should discard it.
It has been badly learned by that Saṅgha.’
Thus you should discard it.
It has been badly learned by this bhikkhu.’
Thus you should discard it.
It has been badly learned by those elders.’
Thus you should discard it.
It has been known by the Tathāgata, but the Tathāgata did not become subservient to it.
It has been learned well by that elder.’
You should remember this fourth great reference.
It has been learned well by that Saṅgha.’
You should remember this second great reference.
It has been learned well by this bhikkhu.’
You should remember this first great reference.
It has been learned well by those elders.’
You should remember this third great reference.
It has been long since you took the opportunity to come here.
It has been long since you took the opportunity to come here.
It has nine wound orifices, nine natural orifices.
It in this way that a bhikkhu is one beyond training.” 
It is an occasion to make merit.’
He gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
It is an occasion to make merit.’
He himself eats whatever food they give him, whether coarse or excellent; he does not squander what has been given out of faith.
It is bad for one’s eyes; one’s breath stinks; one’s taste buds are not purified; bile and phlegm envelop one’s food; and one’s food does not agree with one.
It is because it is righteous that in this assembly disciplinary acts that accord with the Dhamma are enacted … and disciplinary acts contrary to the discipline are not explained.
It is because it is unrighteous that in this assembly disciplinary acts contrary to the Dhamma are enacted … … and disciplinary acts in accordance with the discipline are not explained.
It is because of a disaster regarding virtuous behavior and a disaster regarding view that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
It is because of accomplishment in virtuous behavior and accomplishment in view that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
It is because of mental corruption that with the breakup of the body, after death, some beings here are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.”
It is because of mental placidity that with the breakup of the body, after death, some beings here are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.”
It is because people engage in these ten courses of unwholesome kamma that hell, the animal realm, the sphere of afflicted spirits, and other bad destinations are seen.
It is because people engage in these ten courses of wholesome kamma that the devas, human beings, and other good destinations are seen.”
It is because the Tathāgata is released, detached, and emancipated from form that he dwells with a mind free from boundaries.
It is by possessing these five qualities that a bhikkhu is a delicate ascetic among ascetics.
It is destructive and impudent, ravenous and voracious, cruel and pitiless, weak and raucous, muddle-minded and acquisitive.
It is enough for you to rejoice, enough for you to be elated, enough for you to be joyful: ‘The Blessed One is perfectly enlightened!
It is enough to be liberated from them.
It is enough to be liberated from them.
It is enough to be liberated from them.
It is enough to be liberated from them.
It is enough to be liberated from them.
It is enough to become disenchanted with all conditioned phenomena, enough to become dispassionate toward them, enough to be liberated from them.
It is enough to become disenchanted with all conditioned phenomena, enough to become dispassionate toward them, enough to be liberated from them.
It is enough to become disenchanted with all conditioned phenomena, enough to become dispassionate toward them, enough to be liberated from them.
It is enough, friend Ānanda, to be heedful.”
It is fitting for you clansmen to approach the Tathāgata and ask: ‘Bhante, with all our various engagements, how should we dwell?’
It is fitting for you clansmen to approach the Tathāgata and ask: ‘Bhante, with all our various engagements, how should we dwell?’
It is for the good, welfare, and happiness of his mother and father … ascetics and brahmins.”
It is for the good, welfare, and happiness of his mother and father … … ascetics and brahmins.”
It is for the good, welfare, and happiness of his mother and father, his wife and children, his slaves, workers, and servants, his friends and companions, and ascetics and brahmins.
It is for the good, welfare, and happiness of his mother and father, his wife and children, his slaves, workers, and servants, his friends and companions, his departed ancestors, the king, the deities, and ascetics and brahmins.
It is for the sake of this benefit that a woman or a man, a householder or one gone forth, should often reflect thus: ‘I am subject to death; I am not exempt from death.’
It is for the sake of this benefit that a woman or a man, a householder or one gone forth, should often reflect thus: ‘I am subject to illness; I am not exempt from illness.’
It is for the sake of this benefit that a woman or a man, a householder or one gone forth, should often reflect thus: ‘I am subject to old age; I am not exempt from old age.’
It is for the sake of this benefit that a woman or a man, a householder or one gone forth, should often reflect thus: ‘I am the owner of my kamma, the heir of my kamma; I have kamma as my origin, kamma as my relative, kamma as my resort; I will be the heir of whatever kamma, good or bad, that I do.’
It is for the sake of this benefit that a woman or a man, a householder or one gone forth, should often reflect thus: ‘I must be parted and separated from everyone and everything dear and agreeable to me.’
It is for these two reasons that the Tathāgata has prescribed the covering over with grass.”
It is for these two reasons that the Tathāgata has prescribed the training rules for his disciples.”
It is good for a bhikkhu from time to time to dwell equanimous, mindful and clearly comprehending, having turned away from both the repulsive and the unrepulsive.
It is good for a bhikkhu from time to time to dwell perceiving the repulsive in both the unrepulsive and the repulsive.
It is good for a bhikkhu from time to time to dwell perceiving the unrepulsive in both the repulsive and the unrepulsive.
It is good for a bhikkhu from time to time to dwell perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive.
It is good for a bhikkhu from time to time to review his own achievements.
It is good for a bhikkhu from time to time to review the achievements of others.”
It is good for a bhikkhu from time to time to review the failings of others.
It is good for him from time to time to review his own achievements.
It is good for him from time to time to review the achievements of others.
It is good for him from time to time to review the failings of others.
It is good for him to overcome loss whenever it arises … to overcome fame … disrepute … honor … lack of honor … evil desires … bad friendship whenever it arises.
It is good for one’s eyes; one’s breath does not stink; one’s taste buds are purified; bile and phlegm do not envelop one’s food; and one’s food agrees with one.
It is good for such well-known people like yourself to make an investigation.’
For if the members of other sects were to gain me as their disciple, they would carry a banner all over Vesālī announcing: ‘Sīha the general has become our disciple.’
But the Blessed One rather tells me: ‘Make an investigation, Sīha!
It is good for such well-known people like yourself to make an investigation.’
So for the second time, Bhante, I go to the Blessed One for refuge, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
It is good for such well-known people like yourself to make an investigation.”
It is good that you have reflected on these thoughts of a great person, namely: ‘This Dhamma is for one with few desires, not for one with strong desires….
It is good that you instruct, exhort, inspire, and gladden the bhikkhus in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk, with speech that is polished, clear, articulate, expressive of the meaning, comprehensive, and unhindered.”
It is good that you understand in detail the meaning of this statement that I have spoken in brief in such a way.
It is good that you understand in detail the meaning of this statement that I have spoken in brief in such a way.
It is good that you understand in detail the meaning of this statement that I have spoken in brief in such a way.”
It is impossible and inconceivable that one who possesses the four analytical knowledges will exhaust either the meaning or the phrasing.”
It is impossible and inconceivable that the Tathāgata could conduct the uposatha and recite the Pātimokkha in an impure assembly.
It is impossible and inconceivable, friend, that one might develop and cultivate the liberation of the mind by altruistic joy, make it one’s vehicle and basis, carry it out, consolidate it, and properly undertake it, yet discontent could still obsess one’s mind.
It is impossible and inconceivable, friend, that one might develop and cultivate the liberation of the mind by compassion, make it one’s vehicle and basis, carry it out, consolidate it, and properly undertake it, yet the thought of harming could still obsess one’s mind.
It is impossible and inconceivable, friend, that one might develop and cultivate the liberation of the mind by equanimity, make it one’s vehicle and basis, carry it out, consolidate it, and properly undertake it, yet lust could still obsess one’s mind.
It is impossible and inconceivable, friend, that one might develop and cultivate the liberation of the mind by loving-kindness, make it one’s vehicle and basis, carry it out, consolidate it, and properly undertake it, yet ill will could still obsess one’s mind.
It is impossible and inconceivable, friend, that one might develop and cultivate the markless liberation of the mind, make it one’s vehicle and basis, carry it out, consolidate it, and properly undertake it, yet one’s consciousness could still follow after marks.
It is impossible and inconceivable, friend, that when “I am” has been discarded, and one does not regard “This I am,” the dart of doubt and bewilderment could still obsess one’s mind.
It is impossible that a bhikkhu who possesses these ten qualities will achieve growth, progress, and maturity in this Dhamma and discipline.
It is impossible that an immoral bhikkhu … … a bhikkhu of little learning … … a bhikkhu who is difficult to correct …  … a bhikkhu who has bad friends … … a lazy bhikkhu … … a muddle-minded bhikkhu … … a bhikkhu who is not content … … a bhikkhu of evil desires … … a bhikkhu who holds wrong view will achieve growth, progress, and maturity in this Dhamma and discipline.
It is impossible that he could recollect his manifold past abodes … with their aspects and details.
It is impossible that he could understand the minds of other beings and persons, having encompassed them with his own mind; that he could understand a mind with lust as a mind with lust … an unliberated mind as unliberated.
It is impossible that it would pierce the hand or the foot and draw blood.
It is impossible that one who does not acquire the object of the mind will fulfill right view.
It is impossible that one who does not enter upon the fixed course of rightness will realize the fruit of stream-entry, the fruit of once-returning, the fruit of non-returning, or arahantship.
It is impossible that one who does not enter upon the fixed course of rightness will realize the fruit of stream-entry, the fruit of once-returning, the fruit of non-returning, or arahantship.
It is impossible that one who does not enter upon the fixed course of rightness will realize the fruit of stream-entry, the fruit of once-returning, the fruit of non-returning, or arahantship.
It is impossible that one who does not enter upon the fixed course of rightness will realize the fruit of stream-entry, the fruit of once-returning, the fruit of non-returning, or arahantship.
It is impossible that one who does not find delight in solitude when he is alone will acquire the object of the mind.
It is impossible that one who does not fulfill right concentration will abandon the fetters.
It is impossible that one who does not fulfill right view will fulfill right concentration.
It is impossible that one who does not possess a conviction in conformity will enter upon the fixed course of rightness.
It is impossible that one who does not possess a conviction in conformity will enter upon the fixed course of rightness.
It is impossible that one who does not possess a conviction in conformity will enter upon the fixed course of rightness.
It is impossible that one who does not possess a conviction in conformity will enter upon the fixed course of rightness.
It is impossible that with the destruction of the taints, he could realize for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, could dwell in it.
It is impossible that with the divine ear element, which is purified and surpasses the human, he could hear both kinds of sounds, the divine and human, those that are far as well as near.
It is impossible that with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he could see beings passing away and being reborn … and could understand how beings fare in accordance with their kamma.
It is impure, foul-smelling, dangerous, the abode of wild spirits, many people weep.
It is impure, foul-smelling, frightening, dangerous, and it betrays friends.
It is in such a way that a deva lives together with a female deva.
It is in such a way that a deva lives together with a wretch.
It is in such a way that a dirty cloth is cleansed by exertion.
It is in such a way that a dirty mirror is cleansed by exertion.
It is in such a way that a wretch lives together with a female deva.
It is in such a way that a wretch lives together with a wretch.
It is in such a way that impure gold is cleansed by exertion.
It is in such a way that one’s body, when dirty, is cleansed by exertion.
It is in such a way that one’s head, when dirty, is cleansed by exertion.
It is in such a way that someone of the black class produces a black state.
It is in such a way that someone of the black class produces a white state.
It is in such a way that someone of the black class produces nibbāna, which is neither black nor white.
It is in such a way that someone of the white class produces a black state.
It is in such a way that someone of the white class produces a white state.
It is in such a way that someone of the white class produces nibbāna, which is neither black nor white.
It is in such a way that the cowherds’ uposatha is observed.
It is in such a way that the meaning of this statement that I spoke in brief should be understood in detail.”
It is in such a way that the Nigaṇṭhas’ uposatha is observed.
It is in such a way that those hollow men should from time to time be thoroughly refuted with reasoned argument.”
It is in such a way that those hollow men should from time to time be thoroughly refuted with reasoned argument.”
Then the Blessed One instructed, encouraged, inspired, and gladdened the householder Anāthapiṇḍika with a Dhamma talk.
It is in such a way, Bhante, that I understand in detail the meaning of this statement that the Blessed One has spoken in brief.”
It is in such a way, Bhante, that I understand in detail the meaning of this statement that the Blessed One has spoken in brief.”
It is in such a way, Ānanda, that the Tathāgata can convey his voice as far as he wants in a thousand-to-the-third-power great world system.”
It is in this case that one can understand who is a fool and who is a wise person in regard to manly strength, manly energy, and manly exertion.
It is in this case, too, that one can understand who is a fool and who is a wise person in regard to manly strength, manly energy, and manly exertion.
It is in this fathom-long body endowed with perception and mind that I proclaim the world, the origin of the world, the cessation of the world, and the way leading to the cessation of the world.” 
It is in this way that a bhikkhu cannot patiently endure forms.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu cannot patiently endure odors.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu cannot patiently endure sounds.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu cannot patiently endure tactile objects.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu cannot patiently endure tastes.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu directly knows what should be directly known … in this very life he makes an end of suffering.”
It is in this way that a bhikkhu directly knows what should be directly known … in this very life he makes an end of suffering.”
It is in this way that a bhikkhu directly knows what should be directly known … in this very life he makes an end of suffering.”
It is in this way that a bhikkhu directly knows what should be directly known … in this very life he makes an end of suffering.”
It is in this way that a bhikkhu directly knows what should be directly known; fully understands what should be fully understood; and by doing so, in this very life he makes an end of suffering.”
It is in this way that a bhikkhu directly knows what should be directly known; fully understands what should be fully understood; and by doing so, in this very life he makes an end of suffering.”
It is in this way that a bhikkhu directly knows what should be directly known; fully understands what should be fully understood; and by doing so, in this very life he makes an end of suffering.”
It is in this way that a bhikkhu does not know the road.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu does not know the watering place.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu does not know what it is to have drunk.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu does not milk dry.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu does not pick up.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu does not push away.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu does not ruminate.” 
It is in this way that a bhikkhu dresses wounds.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu fails to dress wounds.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu fails to pick out flies’ eggs.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu fails to smoke out the sheds.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu guards the doors of the sense faculties.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu guards the doors of the sense faculties.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has a single guard.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has abandoned five factors.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has abandoned five factors.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has attained the imperturbable.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has attained the state of a brahmā.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has attained the state of a deva.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has benefactors.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has dispelled personal truths.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has dispelled personal truths.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has drawn back.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has filled in the moat.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has four supports.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has pulled out the pillar.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has purified his intentions.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has removed the crossbar.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has totally renounced seeking.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has totally renounced seeking.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has tranquilized bodily activity.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu has tranquilized bodily activity.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is a boltless one.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is a noble one with banner lowered, with burden dropped, detached.”
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is accomplished in virtuous behavior.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is intent on wakefulness.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is intent on wakefulness.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is one who destroys.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is one who destroys.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is one who dwells in the Dhamma.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is one who dwells in the Dhamma.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is one who goes.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is one who goes.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is one who guards.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is one who knows the superior and inferior kinds of persons.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is one who listens.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is one who listens.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is one who patiently endures.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is one who splits a great body.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is one who splits a great body.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is responsible.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is skilled in pastures.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is skilled in places.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is unskilled in pastures.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is well liberated in mind.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu knows the road.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu knows the watering place.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu knows what it is to have drunk.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu milks dry.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu patiently endures forms.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu patiently endures odors.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu patiently endures sounds.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu patiently endures tactile objects.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu patiently endures tastes.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu picks out flies’ eggs.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu picks up.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu possesses beauty.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu possesses beauty.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu possesses five factors.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu possesses six factors.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu possesses speed.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu possesses speed.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu possesses speed.” 
It is in this way that a bhikkhu possesses strength.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu possesses strength.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu possesses the right proportions.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu pushes away.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu ruminates.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu shows extra veneration to those elder bhikkhus of long-standing who have long gone forth, the fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu shows no extra veneration to those elder bhikkhus of long-standing who have long gone forth, the fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.
It is in this way that a bhikkhu smokes out the sheds.
It is in this way that a brahmin is a caṇḍāla of a brahmin.
It is in this way that a brahmin is one who has crossed the boundary.
It is in this way that a brahmin is one who remains within the boundary.
It is in this way that a king’s bull elephant cannot patiently endure forms.
It is in this way that a king’s bull elephant cannot patiently endure odors.
It is in this way that a king’s bull elephant cannot patiently endure sounds.
It is in this way that a king’s bull elephant cannot patiently endure tactile objects.
It is in this way that a king’s bull elephant cannot patiently endure tastes.
It is in this way that a king’s bull elephant is one who destroys.
It is in this way that a king’s bull elephant is one who destroys.
It is in this way that a king’s bull elephant is one who goes.
It is in this way that a king’s bull elephant is one who goes.
It is in this way that a king’s bull elephant is one who guards.
It is in this way that a king’s bull elephant is one who listens.
It is in this way that a king’s bull elephant is one who listens.
It is in this way that a king’s bull elephant is one who patiently endures.
It is in this way that a king’s bull elephant is one who patiently endures.
It is in this way that a king’s bull elephant patiently endures forms.
It is in this way that a king’s bull elephant patiently endures odors.
It is in this way that a king’s bull elephant patiently endures sounds.
It is in this way that a king’s bull elephant patiently endures tactile objects.
It is in this way that a king’s bull elephant patiently endures tastes.
It is in this way that a man does not transcend his masculinity.
It is in this way that a man transcends his masculinity.
It is in this way that a master thief depends on powerful people.
It is in this way that a master thief depends on powerful people.
It is in this way that a master thief depends on the uneven.
It is in this way that a master thief depends on the uneven.
It is in this way that a master thief depends on thickets.
It is in this way that a master thief depends on thickets.
It is in this way that a master thief offers bribes.
It is in this way that a person despises as a result of living together.
It is in this way that a person has gone on retreat both by body and by mind.
It is in this way that a person has gone on retreat by body but has not gone on retreat by mind.
It is in this way that a person has gone on retreat neither by body nor by mind.
It is in this way that a person has not gone on retreat by body but gone on retreat by mind.
It is in this way that a person is a delicate ascetic among ascetics.
It is in this way that a person is a delicate ascetic among ascetics.
It is in this way that a person is a red-lotus ascetic.
It is in this way that a person is a red-lotus ascetic.
It is in this way that a person is a red-lotus ascetic.
It is in this way that a person is a red-lotus ascetic.
It is in this way that a person is a white-lotus ascetic.
It is in this way that a person is a white-lotus ascetic.
It is in this way that a person is a white-lotus ascetic.
It is in this way that a person is a white-lotus ascetic.
It is in this way that a person is an ascetic unshaken.
It is in this way that a person is an ascetic unshaken.
It is in this way that a person is an ascetic unshaken.
It is in this way that a person is an ascetic unshaken.
It is in this way that a person is blameless.
It is in this way that a person is blameworthy.
It is in this way that a person is capricious.
It is in this way that a person is dull and stupid.
It is in this way that a person is gullible for gossip.
It is in this way that a person is heading from darkness to darkness.
It is in this way that a person is heading from darkness to light.
It is in this way that a person is heading from light to darkness.
It is in this way that a person is heading from light to light.
It is in this way that a person is made of hardwood and surrounded by hardwood.
It is in this way that a person is made of hardwood but surrounded by softwood.
It is in this way that a person is made of softwood and surrounded by softwood.
It is in this way that a person is made of softwood but surrounded by hardwood.
It is in this way that a person is mostly blameworthy.
It is in this way that a person is one who both thunders and rains.
It is in this way that a person is one who gives and then despises.
It is in this way that a person is one who has risen up and gained a firm foothold.
It is in this way that a person is one who has risen up and is crossing over.
It is in this way that a person is one who has risen up, crossed over, and gone beyond, a brahmin who stands on high ground.
It is in this way that a person is one who has risen up, sees clearly, and looks around.
It is in this way that a person is one who neither thunders nor rains.
It is in this way that a person is one who rains but does not thunder.
It is in this way that a person is one who thunders but does not rain.
It is in this way that a person is one who torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself and who also torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others.
It is in this way that a person is one who torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others.
It is in this way that a person is one whose venom is both quick to come up and virulent.
It is in this way that a person is one whose venom is neither quick to come up nor virulent.
It is in this way that a person is one whose venom is quick to come up but not virulent.
It is in this way that a person is one whose venom is virulent but not quick to come up.
It is in this way that a person is practicing both for his own welfare and for the welfare of others.
It is in this way that a person is practicing both for his own welfare and for the welfare of others.
It is in this way that a person is practicing for his own welfare but not for the welfare of others.
It is in this way that a person is practicing for his own welfare but not for the welfare of others.
It is in this way that a person is practicing for his own welfare but not for the welfare of others.
It is in this way that a person is practicing for the welfare of others but not for his own welfare.
It is in this way that a person is practicing for the welfare of others but not for his own welfare.
It is in this way that a person is practicing for the welfare of others but not for his own welfare.
It is in this way that a person is practicing neither for his own welfare nor for the welfare of others.
It is in this way that a person is practicing neither for his own welfare nor for the welfare of others.
It is in this way that a person is practicing neither for his own welfare nor for the welfare of others.
It is in this way that a person is slightly blameworthy.
It is in this way that a person is wrathful both toward his own cattle and toward the cattle of others.
It is in this way that a person is wrathful neither toward his own cattle nor toward the cattle of others.
It is in this way that a person is wrathful toward his own cattle, not toward the cattle of others.
It is in this way that a person is wrathful toward the cattle of others, not toward his own cattle.
It is in this way that a person torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself.
It is in this way that a shopkeeper is responsible.
It is in this way that a woman behaves agreeably to her husband.
It is in this way that a woman does not transcend her femininity.
It is in this way that a woman is accomplished in generosity.
It is in this way that a woman is accomplished in virtuous behavior.
It is in this way that a woman is accomplished in wisdom.
It is in this way that a woman is capable at her work.
It is in this way that a woman manages the domestic help.
It is in this way that a woman safeguards his earnings.
It is in this way that a woman transcends her femininity.
It is in this way that affection is born from affection.
It is in this way that affection is born from hatred.
It is in this way that an evil bhikkhu depends on the powerful people.
It is in this way that an evil bhikkhu depends on the powerful.
It is in this way that an evil bhikkhu depends on the uneven.
It is in this way that an evil bhikkhu depends on the uneven.
It is in this way that an evil bhikkhu depends on thickets.
It is in this way that an evil bhikkhu depends upon thickets.
It is in this way that an evil bhikkhu moves alone.
It is in this way that an evil bhikkhu offers bribes.
It is in this way that an offering is not purified through either the donor or the recipients.
It is in this way that an offering is purified through both the donor and the recipients.
It is in this way that an offering is purified through the donor but not through the recipients.
It is in this way that an offering is purified through the recipients but not through the donor.
It is in this way that desire arises with reference to things in the future that are the basis for desire and lust.
It is in this way that desire arises with reference to things in the past that are the basis for desire and lust.
It is in this way that desire arises with reference to things presently existing that are the basis for desire and lust.
It is in this way that desire does not arise with reference to things in the future that are the basis for desire and lust.
It is in this way that desire does not arise with reference to things in the past that are the basis for desire and lust.
It is in this way that desire does not arise with reference to things presently existing that are the basis for desire and lust.
It is in this way that hatred is born from affection.
It is in this way that hatred is born from hatred.
It is in this way that he is practicing both for his own welfare and for the welfare of others.
It is in this way that liberation is its core.
It is in this way that nibbāna is directly visible.
It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a consoler, one who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of consolation and thereby guides his disciples.’”
It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a proponent of deeds who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of deeds and thereby guides his disciples.’
It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a proponent of non-doing who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of non-doing and thereby guides his disciples.’
It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a proponent of non-doing.’
But you did not speak with reference to this.”
It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a repeller who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of repulsion and thereby guides his disciples.’
It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a repeller.’
But you did not speak with reference to this.”
It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a tormentor who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of tormenting and thereby guides his disciples.’
It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a tormentor.’
But you did not speak with reference to this.”
It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is an abolitionist who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of abolition and thereby guides his disciples.’
It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is an abolitionist.’
But you did not speak with reference to this.”
It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is an annihilationist who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of annihilation and thereby guides his disciples.’
It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is an annihilationist.’
But you did not speak with reference to this.”
It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is not convivial.’
But you did not speak with reference to this.”
It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is retiring, one who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of retiring and thereby guides his disciples.’
It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is retiring.’
But you did not speak with reference to this.
It is in this way that one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama lacks taste.’
But you did not speak with reference to this.” 
It is in this way that one is a wise person of great wisdom.”
It is in this way that one is learned, of penetrative wisdom.”
It is in this way that someone is a deva with a retinue of asuras.
It is in this way that someone is a deva with a retinue of devas.
It is in this way that someone is an asura with a retinue of asuras.
It is in this way that someone is an asura with a retinue of devas.
It is in this way that the Blessed One has said a person is not subject to decline.
It is in this way that the Blessed One has said a person is subject to decline.
It is in this way that the brahmins describe a brahmin who is a master of the threefold knowledge.”
It is in this way that the brahmins describe a master of the threefold knowledge.”
It is in this way that the defiled mind is cleansed by exertion.
It is in this way that the defiled mind is cleansed by exertion.
It is in this way that the defiled mind is cleansed by exertion.
It is in this way that the defiled mind is cleansed by exertion.
It is in this way that the defiled mind is cleansed by exertion.
It is in this way that the Dhamma is directly visible….
It is in this way that the training is its benefit.
It is in this way that they have been emancipated or are being emancipated or will be emancipated from the world.
It is in this way that wisdom is its supervisor.
It is in this way, brahmin, that I assert a doctrine of deeds and a doctrine of non-doing.”
It is in this way, brahmin, that the Dhamma is directly visible … to be personally experienced by the wise.
It is in this way, friend Sāriputta, that a bhikkhu gets to hear a teaching he has not heard before, does not forget those teachings he has already heard, brings to mind those teachings with which he is already familiar, and understands what he has not understood.”
It is in this way, I say, that beings are the heirs of their kamma.
It is in this way, I say, that beings are the heirs of their kamma.
It is in this way, I say, that beings are the heirs of their kamma.
It is in this way, I say, that beings are the heirs of their kamma.
It is in this way, Master Gotama, that the brahmins observe the paccorohaṇī festival.”
It is in this way, Master Gotama, that the brahmins observe the paccorohaṇī festival.”
It is in this way, too, that nibbāna is directly visible.
It is in this way, too, that the Dhamma is directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.”
It is in this way, too, that the Dhamma is directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.”
It is in this way, too, that the Dhamma is directly visible….
It is in this way, Upāli, that there is concord in the Saṅgha.” 
It is in this way, Upāli, that there is schism in the Saṅgha.”
It is in this way, Ānanda, that there is concord in the Saṅgha.”
It is in this way, Ānanda, that there is schism in the Saṅgha.” “But, Bhante, when one causes schism in a harmonious Saṅgha, what does one generate?”
It is inevitable, bhikkhu, that flies will pursue and attack one who has polluted himself and been tainted by a stench.’
Then, being exhorted thus by me, that bhikkhu acquired a sense of urgency.”
It is inevitable, bhikkhu, that flies will pursue and attack one who has polluted himself and been tainted by a stench.”
It is just as if a woman or a man—young, youthful, and fond of ornaments—would look at her or his own facial reflection in a clean and bright mirror or in a bowl of clear water.
It is just as if a woman or a man—young, youthful, and fond of ornaments—would look at her or his own facial reflection in a clean bright mirror or in a bowl of clear water.
It is just as if a woman or a man—young, youthful, and fond of ornaments—would look at her or his own facial reflection in a clean bright mirror or in a bowl of clear water.
It is just suffering that he is attached to and holds to.
It is just suffering that he is attached to and holds to.
It is just suffering that he is attached to and holds to.” 
It is just suffering that you are attached to and hold to.”
It is just this noble eightfold path; that is, right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
It is just this noble eightfold path; that is, right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
It is limited and fleeting; it has much suffering, much misery.
It is limited and fleeting; it has much suffering, much misery.
It is limited … for none who are born can escape death.
It is limited … for none who are born can escape death.
It is limited … for none who are born can escape death.
It is limited … for none who are born can escape death.
It is limited … for none who are born can escape death.
It is mindfulness directed to the body.
It is mindfulness directed to the body.
It is not because of a disaster due to relatives, or a disaster due to wealth, or a disaster due to illness that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
It is not because of accomplishment in relatives, accomplishment in wealth, or accomplishment in health that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
It is not delusion that originates from non-delusion; rather, it is just non-delusion that originates from non-delusion.
It is not easy to count it and say it is so many years, or so many hundreds of years, or so many thousands of years, or so many hundreds of thousands of years.”
It is not easy to give a simile for how quickly the mind changes.”
It is not easy to measure the merit of such an offering thus: ‘Just so much is the stream of merit, stream of the wholesome, nutriment of happiness—heavenly, ripening in happiness, conducive to heaven—that leads to what is wished for, desired, and agreeable, to one’s welfare and happiness’; rather, it is reckoned simply as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit.
It is not easy, while living at home, to lead the spiritual life that is utterly perfect and pure as a polished conch shell.
It is not easy, while living at home, to lead the spiritual life that is utterly perfect and pure as a polished conch shell.
It is not good for the eyes; it causes a bad complexion; it causes weakness; it promotes fondness of company; and it conduces to pointless talk.
It is not hatred that originates from non-hatred; rather, it is just non-hatred that originates from non-hatred.
It is not non-delusion that originates from delusion; rather, it is just delusion that originates from delusion.
It is not non-hatred that originates from hatred; rather, it is just hatred that originates from hatred.
It is one who holds right view and has a correct perspective.
It is one who holds wrong view and has an incorrect perspective.
It is possible that a bhikkhu who possesses these ten qualities will achieve growth, progress, and maturity in this Dhamma and discipline.”
It is possible that a virtuous bhikkhu … … a bhikkhu of much learning … … a bhikkhu who is easy to correct … … a bhikkhu who has good friends … … an energetic bhikkhu … … a mindful bhikkhu …  … a contented bhikkhu … … a bhikkhu of few desires … … a bhikkhu who holds right view will achieve growth, progress, and maturity in this Dhamma and discipline.
It is possible that it would pierce the hand or the foot and draw blood.
It is possible that my illness will return.
It is possible that one who acquires the object of the mind will fulfill right view.
It is possible that one who enters upon the fixed course of rightness will realize the fruit of stream-entry, the fruit of once-returning, the fruit of non-returning, or arahantship.”
It is possible that one who enters upon the fixed course of rightness will realize the fruit of stream-entry, the fruit of once-returning, the fruit of non-returning, or arahantship.”
It is possible that one who enters upon the fixed course of rightness will realize the fruit of stream-entry, the fruit of once-returning, the fruit of non-returning, or arahantship.”
It is possible that one who enters upon the fixed course of rightness will realize the fruit of stream-entry, the fruit of once-returning, the fruit of non-returning, or arahantship.”
It is possible that one who finds delight in solitude when he is alone will acquire the object of the mind.
It is possible that one who fulfills right concentration will abandon the fetters.
It is possible that one who fulfills right view will fulfill right concentration.
It is possible that one who possesses a conviction in conformity will enter upon the fixed course of rightness.
It is possible that one who possesses a conviction in conformity will enter upon the fixed course of rightness.
It is possible that one who possesses a conviction in conformity will enter upon the fixed course of rightness.
It is possible to abandon the unwholesome.
It is possible to develop the wholesome.
It is possible, bhikkhus, for a woman or man who observes the uposatha complete in these eight factors, with the breakup of the body, after death, to be reborn in companionship with the devas the four great kings.
It is possible, bhikkhus, for a woman or man who observes the uposatha complete in these eight factors, with the breakup of the body, after death, to be reborn in companionship with the devas who control what is created by others.
It is possible, bhikkhus, for a woman or man who observes the uposatha complete in these eight factors, with the breakup of the body, after death, to be reborn in companionship with the devas who delight in creation.
It is possible, bhikkhus, for a woman or man who observes the uposatha complete in these eight factors, with the breakup of the body, after death, to be reborn in companionship with the Tusita devas.
It is possible, bhikkhus, for a woman or man who observes the uposatha complete in these eight factors, with the breakup of the body, after death, to be reborn in companionship with the Tāvatiṃsa devas.
It is possible, bhikkhus, for a woman or man who observes the uposatha complete in these eight factors, with the breakup of the body, after death, to be reborn in companionship with the Yāma devas.
It is possible, Visākhā, that a woman or man here who observes the uposatha complete in these eight factors will, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in companionship with the devas the four great kings.
It is possible, Visākhā, that a woman or man here who observes the uposatha complete in these eight factors will, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in companionship with the devas who control what is created by others.
It is possible, Visākhā, that a woman or man here who observes the uposatha complete in these eight factors will, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in companionship with the devas who delight in creation.
It is possible, Visākhā, that a woman or man here who observes the uposatha complete in these eight factors will, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in companionship with the Tusita devas.
It is possible, Visākhā, that a woman or man here who observes the uposatha complete in these eight factors will, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in companionship with the Tāvatiṃsa devas.
It is possible, Visākhā, that a woman or man here who observes the uposatha complete in these eight factors will, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in companionship with the Yāma devas.
It is proper for clansmen like you who have gone forth out of faith from the household life into homelessness to sit together for the sake of a Dhamma talk.
It is rare to find one gone forth in old age who is astute; who has the proper manner; who is learned; who can speak on the Dhamma; and who is an expert on the discipline.
It is rare to find one gone forth in old age who is easy to correct;  who firmly retains in mind what he has learned; who accepts instruction respectfully; who can speak on the Dhamma; and who is an expert on the discipline.
It is rare to find one gone forth in old age who possesses these five qualities.”
It is rare to find one gone forth in old age who possesses these five qualities.”
It is shared by fire, water, kings, thieves, and displeasing heirs.
It is spoken at the proper time; what is said is true; it is spoken gently; what is said is beneficial; it is spoken with a mind of loving-kindness.
It is the eight-day interval, the time when snow falls.
It is the person endowed with faith, a munificent giver who delights in charity, who would acquire a good reputation.”
It is the person endowed with faith, a munificent giver who delights in charity, who would approach any assembly … confidently and composed.”
It is the person endowed with faith, a munificent giver who delights in charity, who would be reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world, with the breakup of the body, after death.
It is the time for this, Fortunate One!
It is the time for this, Fortunate One!
It is the time for this, Fortunate One.
It is the time for this, Fortunate One.
It is their rites of purity that I prefer.”
It is this way that a bhikkhu is one who patiently endures.
It is those who can understand that are rare.”
It is through the breaking of these seven things that one is a bhikkhu.”
It is through the remoteness of these seven things that one is an arahant.”
It is to be expected that one who is fearful of faults and sees peril in faults will be freed from all faults.”
It is truly your good fortune and gain, householder, that the housewife Nakulamātā has compassion for you, desires your good, and exhorts and instructs you.”
It is uneven; it is dusty; its dogs are fierce; it has wild spirits; and it is difficult to gain almsfood there.
It is wrathful, hostile, of virulent venom, double-tongued, and it betrays friends.
It isn’t easy, Sāriputta, to make a definitive declaration about this matter and say: ‘Of these three kinds of persons, this one is the most excellent and sublime.’
It isn’t easy, Sāriputta, to make a definitive declaration about this matter and say: ‘Of these three kinds of persons, this one is the most excellent and sublime.’
It isn’t easy, Sāriputta, to make a definitive declaration about this matter and say: ‘Of these three kinds of persons, this one is the most excellent and sublime.’”
It isn’t easy, Ānanda, to teach the Dhamma to others.
It isn’t right that I who cook should not give to those who do not cook.’
He does not give a gift,: ‘Just as the seers of old … held those great sacrifices, so I will share a gift.’
He does not give a gift,: ‘When I am giving a gift my mind becomes placid, and elation and joy arise.’
But rather, he gives a gift,: ‘It’s an ornament of the mind, an accessory of the mind.’
Having given such a gift, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in companionship with the devas of Brahmā’s company.
It isn’t right that I who cook should not give to those who do not cook.’
One gives a gift,: ‘Because I have given this gift, I will gain a good reputation.’
One gives a gift for the purpose of ornamenting the mind, equipping the mind.”
It isn’t right that I who cook should not give to those who do not cook.’It may be, Moggallāna, that a bhikkhu approaches families with a head swollen with pride.
It may be, Sāriputta, that you think: ‘Surely, it was there that those deities developed their minds in such a way that ten … and even sixty in number stand in an area even as small as the tip of an awl yet do not encroach upon one another.’
But this should not be regarded in such a way.
It might occur to her: ‘I should go to a region where I have never gone before, eat grass that I have never eaten before, drink water that I have never drunk before.’
She would set down a front foot, and while it is not yet firmly planted, lift up a hind foot.
It might occur to her: ‘I should go to a region where I have never gone before, eat grass that I have never eaten before, drink water that I have never drunk before.’
When setting down a front foot, she would firmly plant it, and only then lift up a hind foot.
It might occur to him: ‘This golden nugget of mine is purified and cleansed.
It might think: ‘How is a bull elephant different from myself?
It must be that he is unable to do so.’
This would lead to the wanderer Uttiya’s harm and suffering for a long time.”
It occurred to him: “This mango grove is truly lovely and delightful, suitable for the striving of a clansman intent on striving.
It occurred to me: ‘Why is it that my mind does not launch out upon renunciation and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, though I see it as peaceful?’
Then it occurred to me: ‘I have not seen the danger in sensual pleasures and have not cultivated that; I have not achieved the benefit in renunciation and have not pursued it.
It occurred to me: ‘Why is it that my mind does not launch out upon the absence of pleasure and pain and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, though I see it as peaceful?’
Then it occurred to me: ‘I have not seen the danger in the pleasure equanimity and have not cultivated that; I have not achieved the benefit in the absence of pleasure and pain and have not pursued it.
It occurred to me: ‘Why is it that my mind does not launch out upon the absence of rapture and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, though I see it as peaceful?’
Then it occurred to me: ‘I have not seen the danger in rapture and have not cultivated that; I have not achieved the benefit in the absence of rapture and have not pursued it.
It occurred to me: ‘Why is it that my mind does not launch out upon the absence of thought and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, though I see it as peaceful?’
Then it occurred to me: ‘I have not seen the danger in thoughts and have not cultivated that; I have not achieved the benefit in the absence of thought and have not pursued it.
It occurred to me: ‘Why is it that my mind does not launch out upon the base of neither-perceptionnor-non-perception and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, though I see it as peaceful?’
Then it occurred to me: ‘I have not seen the danger in the base of nothingness and have not cultivated that; I have not achieved the benefit in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception and have not pursued it.
It occurred to me: ‘Why is it that my mind does not launch out upon the base of nothingness and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, though I see it as peaceful?’
Then it occurred to me: ‘I have not seen the danger in the base of the infinity of consciousness and have not cultivated that; I have not achieved the benefit in the base of nothingness and have not pursued it.
It occurred to me: ‘Why is it that my mind does not launch out upon the base of the infinity of consciousness and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, though I see it as peaceful?’
Then it occurred to me: ‘I have not seen the danger in the base of the infinity of space and have not cultivated that; I have not achieved the benefit in the base of the infinity of consciousness and have not pursued it.
It occurred to me: ‘Why is it that my mind does not launch out upon the base of the infinity of space and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, though I see it as peaceful?’
Then it occurred to me: ‘I have not seen the danger in forms and have not cultivated that; I have not achieved the benefit in the base of the infinity of space and have not pursued it.
It occurred to me: ‘Why is it that my mind does not launch out upon the cessation of perception and feeling and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, though I see it as peaceful?’
Then it occurred to me: ‘I have not seen the danger in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception and have not cultivated that; I have not achieved the benefit in the cessation of perception and feeling and have not pursued it.
It occurred to the deity who lived in the tree: ‘It’s astounding and amazing how evil this man is!
It occurs to him: ‘Formerly, when I was a layman, I enjoyed myself, furnished and endowed with the five objects of sensual pleasure.
It occurs to him: ‘How good, indeed, that this householder or householder’s son, with his own hand, serves and satisfies me with various kinds of delicious food!’ It also occurs to him: ‘Oh, in the future too may this householder or householder’s son, with his own hand, serve and satisfy me with a similar variety of delicious food!’ He uses that food while being tied to it, infatuated with it, blindly absorbed in it, not seeing the danger in it and understanding the escape from it.
It occurs to him: ‘I give; he receives.’
Having given to him, he despises him.
It occurs to him: ‘I have some work to do.
It occurs to him: ‘I have to do some work.
It occurs to him: ‘I have to make a trip.
It occurs to him: ‘I have to make a trip.
It occurs to him: ‘If the bhikkhus find out that I am desirous of gain, honor, and admiration, and they are united, they will not honor, respect, esteem, and venerate me; but if they are divided into factions they will honor, respect, esteem, and venerate me.’
Seeing this fourth advantage, an evil bhikkhu delights in a schism in the Saṅgha.
It occurs to him: ‘If the bhikkhus find out that I am immoral … depraved, and they are united, they will expel me, but if they are divided into factions they won’t expel me.’
Seeing this first advantage, an evil bhikkhu delights in a schism in the Saṅgha.
It occurs to him: ‘If the bhikkhus find out that I am of wrong livelihood and earn my living by wrong livelihood, and they are united, they will expel me, but if they are divided into factions they won’t expel me.’
Seeing this third advantage, an evil bhikkhu delights in a schism in the Saṅgha.
It occurs to him: ‘If the bhikkhus find out that I hold wrong view, that I resort to an extremist view, and they are united, they will expel me, but if they are divided into factions they won’t expel me.’
Seeing this second advantage, an evil bhikkhu delights in a schism in the Saṅgha.
It occurs to him: ‘I’m a little ill.
It occurs to him: ‘I’m a little ill.
It occurs to him: ‘I’ve done some work.
It occurs to him: ‘I’ve done some work.
It occurs to him: ‘I’ve made a trip.
It occurs to him: ‘I’ve made a trip.
It occurs to him: ‘I’ve walked for alms in a village or town but didn’t get as much food as I need, whether coarse or excellent.
It occurs to him: ‘I’ve walked for alms in the village or town and gotten as much food as I need, whether coarse or excellent.
It occurs to him: ‘I’ve walked for alms in the village or town and gotten as much food as I need, whether coarse or excellent.
It occurs to him: ‘I’ve walked for alms in the village or town but didn’t get as much food as I need, whether coarse or excellent.
It occurs to him: ‘Oh, with the breakup of the body, after death, may I be reborn in companionship with affluent khattiyas, affluent brahmins, or affluent householders!’ He sets his mind on this, fixes his mind on this, and develops this state of mind.
It occurs to him: ‘This is the Dhamma and discipline in which I formerly lived the spiritual life.’
The arising of his memory is sluggish, but then that being quickly reaches distinction.
It occurs to him: ‘This is the Dhamma and discipline in which I formerly lived the spiritual life.’
The arising of his memory is sluggish, but then that being quickly reaches distinction.
It occurs to the latter: ‘Others treat that person who is desirable, lovable, and agreeable to me in a way that is desirable, lovable, and agreeable.’
He thus feels affection for them.
It occurs to the latter: ‘Others treat that person who is desirable, lovable, and agreeable to me in a way that is undesirable, unlovable, and disagreeable.’
He thus feels hatred for them.
It occurs to the latter: ‘Others treat that person who is undesirable, unlovable, and disagreeable to me in a way that is desirable, lovable, and agreeable.’
He thus feels hatred for them.
It occurs to the latter: ‘Others treat that person who is undesirable, unlovable, and disagreeable to me in a way that is undesirable, unlovable, and disagreeable.’
He thus feels affection for them.
It occurs to the one: ‘The person who is pleasing and agreeable to me has been suspended by the Saṅgha.’
He then loses much of his confidence in bhikkhus.
It occurs to the one: ‘The person who was pleasing and agreeable to me has passed away.’
He does not associate with other bhikkhus.
It occurs to the one: ‘The Saṅgha has made the person who is pleasing and agreeable to me sit at the end.’
He then loses much of his confidence in bhikkhus….
It patiently endures forms, patiently endures sounds, patiently endures odors, patiently endures tastes, and patiently endures tactile objects.
It remains steady, attained to imperturbability, and he observes its vanishing.
It remains steady, attained to imperturbability, and he observes its vanishing.
It remains steady, attained to imperturbability, and he observes its vanishing.
It remains steady, attained to imperturbability, and he observes its vanishing.
It remains steady, attained to imperturbability, and he observes its vanishing.”
It remains steady, attained to imperturbability, and he observes its vanishing.”
It rolled as far as the impetus carried it, and then it wobbled and fell to the ground.
It seemed to be flowing like rivers.
It seems that we are impermanent, transient, non-eternal, included in personal existence.’
So powerful is the Tathāgata, so majestic and mighty is he in this world together with its devas.” 
It seems these people have now become indifferent toward me.’
In this way, through lack of gain one feels humiliated; when feeling humiliated, one becomes restless; when one is restless, one loses one’s restraint.
It should be said: associating with good persons.
It should be said: associating with good persons.
It should be said: careful attention.
It should be said: careless attention.
It should be said: faith.
It should be said: hearing the good Dhamma.
It should be said: ignorance.
It should be said: lack of faith.
It should be said: lack of mindfulness and clear comprehension.
It should be said: mindfulness and clear comprehension.
It should be said: non-restraint of the sense faculties.
It should be said: not associating with good persons.
It should be said: not associating with good persons.
It should be said: not hearing the good Dhamma.
It should be said: restraint of the sense faculties.
It should be said: the five hindrances …  … And what is the nutriment for not hearing the good Dhamma?
It should be said: the five hindrances.
It should be said: the four establishments of mindfulness.
It should be said: the seven factors of enlightenment.
It should be said: the seven factors of enlightenment….
It should be said: the three kinds of good conduct.
It should be said: the three kinds of misconduct.
It stills hunger, dispels thirst, settles wind, cleans out the bladder, and promotes the digestion of the remnants of undigested food.
It then occurred to him: “ A bhikkhu should honor, respect, and dwell in dependence on the Teacher so that he might abandon the unwholesome and develop the wholesome.
It then occurred to him: “Doubtlessly, he must be a Blessed One, an Arahant, a Perfectly Enlightened One.
It then occurred to him: “It is not the proper time to see the Blessed One, who is in seclusion, nor to see the esteemed bhikkhus, who are also in seclusion.
It then occurred to him: “It is not the proper time to see the Blessed One, who is in seclusion, nor to see the esteemed bhikkhus, who are also in seclusion.
It then occurred to him: “It is still too early to walk for alms in Kosambī.
It then occurred to him: “It is still too early to walk for alms in Sāvatthī.
It then occurred to him: “It is still too early to walk for alms in Sāvatthī.
It then occurred to him: “Let me go to the Blessed One.”
Then the Venerable Dhammika took his bowl and robe and left for Rājagaha.
It then occurred to him: “This is truly astounding and amazing!
It then occurred to Mahānāma: “This is not a proper time for staying with the Blessed One, for he is tired.
It then occurred to me: ‘This is truly astounding and amazing!
It then occurred to Sīha: “Doubtlessly, he must be a Blessed One, an Arahant, a Perfectly Enlightened One.
It then occurred to those venerable ones: “A number of very well-known Licchavis have entered the Great Wood in order to see the Blessed One, and as they follow one another in their finest carriages they are making an uproar and a racket.
It then occurs to me: ‘Now a monastery attendant or a novice or a co-religionist will cause that venerable one to fall away from that concentration.’
For this reason I am not pleased with this bhikkhu’s dwelling on the outskirts of a village.
It then occurs to me: ‘Now a monastery attendant or a novice will return to this venerable one and cause him to fall away from that concentration.’
For this reason I am not pleased with this bhikkhu’s dwelling on the outskirts of a village.
It then occurs to me: ‘Now this venerable one will concentrate his unconcentrated mind or guard his concentrated mind.’
For this reason I am pleased with this bhikkhu’s dwelling in the forest.
It then occurs to me: ‘Now this venerable one will concentrate his unconcentrated mind or guard his concentrated mind.’
For this reason I am pleased with this bhikkhu’s dwelling in the forest.
It then occurs to me: ‘Now this venerable one will dispel this sleepiness and fatigue and attend only to the perception of forest, oneness.’
For this reason I am pleased with this bhikkhu’s dwelling in the forest.
It then occurs to me: ‘Now this venerable one will dispel this sleepiness and fatigue and attend only to the perception of forest, oneness.’
For this reason I am pleased with this bhikkhu’s dwelling in the forest.
It then occurs to me: ‘Now this venerable one will liberate his unliberated mind or guard his liberated mind.’
For this reason I am pleased with this bhikkhu’s dwelling in the forest.
It then occurs to me: ‘Now this venerable one will liberate his unliberated mind or guard his liberated mind.’
For this reason I am pleased with this bhikkhu’s dwelling in the forest.
It then occurs to me: ‘Surely, these venerable ones do not gain at will, without trouble or difficulty, this bliss of renunciation … which I gain at will, without trouble or difficulty.
It then occurs to me: ‘Surely, these venerable ones do not gain at will, without trouble or difficulty, this bliss of renunciation … which I gain at will, without trouble or difficulty; for these venerable ones laugh and play by poking one another with the fingers.’
It was badly stated, not well stated.
It was badly stated, not well stated.
It was with reference to this that I said human kingship is poor compared to celestial happiness.
It was with reference to this that I said human kingship is poor compared to celestial happiness.
It was with reference to this that I said human kingship is poor compared to celestial happiness.
It was with reference to this that I said human kingship is poor compared to celestial happiness.
It was with reference to this that I said human kingship is poor compared to celestial happiness.
It was with reference to this that I said human kingship is poor compared to celestial happiness.
It was with reference to this that I said human kingship is poor compared to celestial happiness.
It was with reference to this that I said human kingship is poor compared to celestial happiness.
It was with reference to this that I said human kingship is poor compared to celestial happiness.
It was with reference to this that I said human kingship is poor compared to celestial happiness.
It was with reference to this that I said human kingship is poor compared to celestial happiness.”
It was with reference to this that I said human kingship is poor compared to celestial happiness.”
It went to the east, the west, the north, the south, upward, and to the intermediate directions.
It will not be; it will not be mine.
It will not be; it will not be mine.
It will not be; it will not be mine.
It will not be; it will not be mine.
It will not be; it will not be mine….’ … With the utter destruction of the five lower fetters he becomes an attainer of nibbāna in the interval.
It will not be; it will not be mine….’ … With the utter destruction of the five lower fetters he becomes an attainer of nibbāna through exertion.
It will not be; it will not be mine….’ … With the utter destruction of the five lower fetters he becomes an attainer of nibbāna upon landing.
It will not be; it will not be mine….’ … With the utter destruction of the five lower fetters he becomes an attainer of nibbāna without exertion.
It will not follow along.’
When the liberation of mind by equanimity has been developed in this way, it leads to non-returning for a wise bhikkhu here who does not penetrate to a further liberation.”
It will not follow along.’
When the liberation of mind by loving-kindness has been developed in this way, it leads to non-returning for a wise bhikkhu here who does not penetrate to a further liberation.
It won’t be long before the Tathāgata’s final nibbāna takes place.
It would be good if he would clear up the meaning of this statement.
It would be good if Master Gotama would teach me the Dhamma by explaining how the paccorohaṇī festival is observed in the Noble One’s discipline.”
It would be good if Master Gotama would teach me the Dhamma by explaining how the paccorohaṇī festival is observed in the Noble One’s discipline.”
It would be good if Master Gotama would teach me the Dhamma in such a way as to make clear how one is a master of the threefold knowledge in the Noble One’s discipline.”
It would be good if Master Gotama would teach me the Dhamma in such a way as to make clear how one is a master of the threefold knowledge in the Noble One’s discipline.”
It would be good if Master Gotama would teach me the Dhamma so that I would understand in detail the meaning of this statement.”
It would be good if the Blessed One would clear up the meaning of this statement.
It would be good if the Blessed One would clear up the meaning of this statement.
It would be good if the Blessed One would clear up the meaning of this statement.
It would be good if the Blessed One would clear up the meaning of this statement.
It would be good if the Blessed One would clear up the meaning of this statement.
It would be good if the Blessed One would clear up the meaning of this statement.
It would be good if the Blessed One would teach me the Dhamma in a way that explains how purification comes about in the Noble One’s discipline.”
It would be good if the Blessed One would visit him out of compassion.”
It would be good if the Venerable Sāriputta would clear up the meaning of this statement.
It would be good, Bhante, if the Blessed One would approach the Venerable Sāriputta out of compassion.’
It would be good, Bhante, if the Blessed One would approach the Venerable Sāriputta out of compassion.”
The Blessed One consented by silence.
It would be good, Bhante, if the Venerable Nārada would teach the Dhamma to King Muṇḍa in such a way that he can abandon the dart of sorrow.”
It would be good, Bhante, if we could get to hear a Dhamma talk from him.”
It would be hauled up on dry land during the cold season and its lashings would be further attacked by wind and sun.
It would be painful if a strong man were to force open one’s mouth with a hot iron spike—burning, blazing, and glowing—and insert a hot copper ball … which burns one’s lips … and comes out from below taking along one’s entrails.”
It would be painful if a strong man were to grab one by the head or shoulders and force one to sit or lie down on a hot iron bed or chair, burning, blazing, and glowing.”
It would be painful if a strong man were to grab one, turn one upside down, and throw one into a hot copper cauldron—burning, blazing, and glowing—so that while one is boiling there in a swirl of froth, one sometimes rises, sometimes sinks, and sometimes is swept across.”
It would be painful if a strong man were to strike one in the breast with a sharp spear smeared with oil.”
It would be painful if a strong man were to wrap a hot iron sheet—burning, blazing, and glowing—around one’s body.”
It would be painful if a strong man were to wrap a tough horsehair rope around both one’s shins and tighten it so that it cuts through one’s outer skin, inner skin, flesh, sinews, and bone, until it reaches the marrow.”
It would be painful to embrace that great mass of fire, burning, blazing, and glowing, and sit down or lie down next to it.”
It would have nine wound orifices, nine natural orifices.
It would meet with calamity, with disaster, with calamity and disaster.
It would not be surprising if this evening, when he emerges from seclusion, the Blessed One makes a pronouncement about this matter, and he might call upon the Venerable Upavāṇa himself.
It would really be good if you would abandon bodily misconduct and develop bodily good conduct.’
When his wise fellow monks investigate him and speak to him, he abandons bodily misconduct and develops bodily good conduct.
It would really be good if you would abandon verbal misconduct and develop verbal good conduct.’
When his wise fellow monks investigate him and speak to him, he abandons verbal misconduct and develops verbal good conduct.
Its canopy extended for twelve yojanas; its network of roots for five yojanas.
Its fruits were as large as cooking pots and as sweet as pure honey.
Its health is excellent;its growth is excellent;its maturation is excellent;its fruit truly is excellent.
It’s astounding and amazing, friend, that the meaning and the phrasing of both teacher and disciple coincide and agree with each other and do not diverge in regard to the foremost state.”
It’s possible that my illness will grow worse.
I’ll enter this lake and playfully wash my ears and back.
Just as a bamboo yields fruit to its own ruin and destruction, so Devadatta’s gain, honor, and praise led to his own ruin and destruction.
Just as a bird, wherever it goes, flies with its wings as its only burden, so too, a bhikkhu is content with robes to protect his body and almsfood to maintain his stomach, and wherever he goes he sets out taking only these with him.
Just as a bird, wherever it goes, flies with its wings as its only burden, so too, a bhikkhu is content with robes to protect his body and almsfood to maintain his stomach, and wherever he goes he sets out taking only these with him.
Just as a blue, red, or white lotus flower, though born in the water and grown up in the water, rises above the water and stands unsoiled by the water, even so, though born in the world and grown up in the world, I have overcome the world and dwell unsoiled by the world.
Just as a bull with his horns cut, mild, well tamed and well trained, wanders from street to street and from square to square without hurting anyone with its feet or horns; so too, Bhante, I dwell with a mind like that of a bull with horns cut, vast, exalted, and measureless, without enmity and ill will.
Just as a cock’s feather or a strip of sinew, thrown into a fire, shrinks away from it, turns back from it, rolls away from it, and is not drawn toward it, so it is in regard to attachment to life when a bhikkhu often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of death.
Just as a cock’s feather or a strip of sinew, thrown into a fire, shrinks away from it, turns back from it, rolls away from it, and is not drawn toward it, so it is in regard to craving for tastes when a bhikkhu often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of the repulsiveness of food.
Just as a cock’s feather or a strip of sinew, thrown into a fire, shrinks away from it, turns back from it, rolls away from it, and is not drawn toward it, so it is in regard to gain, honor, and praise when a bhikkhu often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of impermanence.
Just as a cock’s feather or a strip of sinew, thrown into a fire, shrinks away from it, turns back from it, rolls away from it, and is not drawn toward it, so it is in regard to sexual intercourse when a bhikkhu often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of unattractiveness.
Just as a cock’s feather or a strip of sinew, thrown into a fire, shrinks away from it, turns back from it, rolls away from it, and is not drawn toward it, so it is in regard to the world’s beautiful things when a bhikkhu often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of non-delight in the entire world.
Just as a duster wipes off pure and impure things—feces, urine, spittle, pus, and blood—yet the duster is not repelled, humiliated, or disgusted because of this; so too, Bhante, I dwell with a mind like a duster, vast, exalted, and measureless, without enmity and ill will.
Just as a festering sore, if struck by a stick or a shard, will discharge even more matter, so too some person here is prone to anger … and displays irritation, hatred, and bitterness.
Just as a festering sore, if struck by a stick or a shard, will discharge even more matter, so too … Just as a firebrand of the tinduka tree, if struck by a stick or shard, will sizzle and crackle even more, so too … Just as a pit of feces, if struck by a stick or a shard, becomes even more foul-smelling, so too some person here is prone to anger and … displays irritation, hatred, and bitterness.
Just as a fire that starts in a house made of reeds or grass burns down even a house with a peaked roof, plastered inside and out, draft-free, with bolts fastened and shutters closed; so too, whatever perils arise … all arise on account of the fool, not on account of the wise person.
Just as a four-legged animal with one lame or defective leg would be incomplete with respect to that limb; so too, when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith and is virtuous, and gains internal serenity of mind, but he does not gain the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena, then he is incomplete with respect to that factor.
Just as a great rain cloud, nurturing all the crops, appears for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, so too, when a good person is born in a family, it is for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people.
Just as a great rain cloud, nurturing all the crops, appears for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, so too, when a good person is born in a family, it is for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people.
Just as a line etched in stone is not quickly erased by the wind and water but persists for a long time, so too, some person often gets angry, and his anger persists for a long time.
Just as a line etched in the ground is quickly erased by the wind and water and does not persist for a long time, so too, some person often gets angry, but his anger does not persist for a long time.
Just as a line etched in water quickly disappears and does not persist for a long time, so too, some person, even when spoken to roughly and harshly, in disagreeable ways, remains on friendly terms, mingles, and greets.
Just as a man might be sitting covered from the head down with a white cloth, so that there would be no part of his whole body that is not pervaded by the white cloth; so too, the bhikkhu sits pervading this body with a pure bright mind, so that there is no part of his whole body that is not pervaded by the pure bright mind.
Just as a mule becomes pregnant to its own ruin and destruction, so Devadatta’s gain, honor, and praise led to his own ruin and destruction.”
Just as a palm fruit that has just been removed from its stalk is pure and bright, so Master Gotama’s faculties are tranquil and the color of his skin is pure and bright.
Just as a permanently liberated bhikkhu does not see in himself anything still to be done or to increase what has been done, so it is with those deities that have been reborn in a mind-made body in companionship with the devas who transcend those subsisting on edible food.’
Thus you should establish mindfulness internally based on the deities.
Just as a person might carry around a cracked and perforated bowl of liquid fat that oozes and drips; so too, Bhante, I carry around this cracked and perforated body that oozes and drips.
Just as a plantain tree yields fruit to its own ruin and destruction, so Devadatta’s gain, honor, and praise led to his own ruin and destruction.
Just as a pot turned upside down does not receive back the water that has been poured out, and just as a fire that has gotten out of control advances burning up a dry woodland and does not return to what it has burnt, so too, a noble disciple who possesses these eleven qualities abandons bad unwholesome qualities and does not take them up.”
Just as a potter’s fire, when kindled, first smokes, fumes, and smolders, so with the appearance of the sixth sun, this great earth and Sineru, the king of mountains, smoke, fume, and smolder.
Just as a reed yields fruit to its own ruin and destruction, so Devadatta’s gain, honor, and praise led to his own ruin and destruction.
Just as a skillful bath man or a bath man’s apprentice might heap bath powder in a metal basin and, sprinkling it gradually with water, would knead it until the moisture wets his ball of bath powder, soaks it, and pervades it inside and out, yet the ball itself does not ooze; so too, the bhikkhu makes the rapture and happiness born of seclusion drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body that is not pervaded by the rapture and happiness born of seclusion.
Just as a trap set at the mouth of a river would bring about harm, suffering, calamity, and disaster for many fish, so too, the hollow man Makkhali is, as it were, a ‘trap for people’ who has arisen in the world for the harm, suffering, calamity, and disaster of many beings.” 
Just as a woman or a man—young, youthful, and fond of ornaments, with head bathed—would be repelled, humiliated, and disgusted if the carcass of a snake, a dog, or a human being were slung around her or his neck; so too, Bhante, I am repelled, humiliated, and disgusted by this foul body.
Just as a yellow jujube fruit in the autumn is pure and bright, so Master Gotama’s faculties are tranquil and the color of his skin is pure and bright.
Just as air blows upon pure and impure things—feces, urine, spittle, pus, and blood—yet the air is not repelled, humiliated, or disgusted because of this; so too, Bhante, I dwell with a mind like air, vast, exalted, and measureless, without enmity and ill will.
Just as an ornament of finest gold, well prepared by a skilled goldsmith and very skillfully wrought in the furnace, placed on red brocade, shines and beams and radiates, so Master Gotama’s faculties are tranquil and the color of his skin is pure and bright.
Just as an outcast boy or girl, clad in rags and holding a vessel, enters a village or town with a humble mind; so too, Bhante, I dwell with a mind like an outcast boy, vast, exalted, and measureless, without enmity and ill will.
Just as cloth from Kāsi is beautiful, so, I say, this person is similar.
Just as cloth from Kāsi is comfortable, so, I say, this person is similar.
Just as cloth from Kāsi is of great value, so, I say, this person is similar.
Just as cloth made of bark fabric is of little value, so, I say, this person is similar.
Just as cloth made of bark fabric is ugly, so, I say, this person is similar.
Just as cloth made of bark fabric is uncomfortable, so, I say, this person is similar.
Just as dice, when thrown upward, will rest firmly wherever they fall, so too, it is because of the threefold corruption and failure of bodily kamma … or it is because of the fourfold corruption and failure of verbal kamma … or it is because of the threefold corruption and failure of mental kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
Just as dice, when thrown upward, will rest firmly wherever they fall, so too, it is because of the threefold success of bodily kamma … … or it is because of the fourfold success of verbal kamma … or it is because of the threefold success of mental kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
Just as during the bright fortnight, whether night or day comes, the moon only increases in beauty, roundness, and brightness, in diameter and circumference, so too, if any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī has abandoned these five kinds of mental barrenness and well eradicated these five bondages of the mind, then, whether night or day comes, only growth in wholesome qualities and not deterioration is to be expected for that person.”
Just as during the dark fortnight, whether night or day comes, the moon only deteriorates in beauty, roundness, and brightness, in diameter and circumference, so too, if any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī has not abandoned these five kinds of mental barrenness … only deterioration … is to be expected for that person.
Just as fire burns pure and impure things—feces, urine, spittle, pus, and blood—yet the fire is not repelled, humiliated, or disgusted because of this; so too, Bhante, I dwell with a mind like fire, vast, exalted, and measureless, without enmity and ill will.
Just as from a cow comes milk, from milk curd, from curd butter, from butter ghee, and from ghee comes cream-of-ghee, which is reckoned the foremost of all these, so too, of these ten kinds of persons who enjoy sensual pleasures, the foremost, the best, the preeminent, the supreme, and the finest is the one who seeks wealth righteously, without violence, and having obtained it, makes himself happy and pleased; and shares the wealth and does meritorious deeds; and uses that wealth without being tied to it, infatuated with it, and blindly absorbed in it, seeing the danger in it and understanding the escape.”
Just as from a cow comes milk, from milk curd, from curd butter, from butter ghee, and from ghee cream-of-ghee, which is reckoned the foremost of all these, so the person practicing both for his own welfare and for the welfare of others is the foremost, the best, the preeminent, the supreme, and the finest of these four persons.
Just as ghee or oil, when poured on sand, sinks down, descends, and does not remain in place, so the young deva Hatthaka, “I will stand in front of the Blessed One,” sank down, descended, and could not remain in place.
Just as if a man had a house with eleven doors and when that house caught on fire, he could flee to safety through any of these eleven doors, so I can flee to safety through any of these eleven doors to the deathless.
Just as if a skillful butcher or his apprentice were to carve up belly with a sharp butcher’s knife, so too, violent winds are carving up my belly.
Just as if a strong man were to grind my head with the tip of a sharp sword, so too, violent winds cut through my head.
Just as if a strong man were to tighten a tough leather strap around my head as a headband, so too, there are violent headpains in my head.
Just as if there were a large reservoir with four inlets and four outlets, and a man would close the inlets and open the outlets, and sufficient rain does not fall, one could expect the water in the reservoir to decrease rather than increase; so the wealth thus amassed has four sources of dissipation: womanizing … bad comradeship.
Just as if there were a large reservoir with four inlets and four outlets, and a man would open the inlets and close the outlets, and sufficient rain falls; one could expect the water in the reservoir to increase rather than decrease, so the wealth amassed has four sources of accretion: one avoids womanizing … and cultivates good friendship.
Just as if two strong men were to seize a weaker man by both arms and roast and grill him over a pit of hot coals, so too, there is a violent burning in my body.
Just as one person might look upon another—as one standing might look upon one sitting down, or one sitting down might look upon one lying down—so too, a bhikkhu has grasped well the object of reviewing, attended to it well, sustained it well, and penetrated it well with wisdom.
Just as one whose clothes or head had caught fire would put forth extraordinary desire … to extinguish his clothes or head, so that bhikkhu should base himself on the wholesome qualities that he sees in himself and put forth extraordinary desire … to obtain those wholesome qualities that he does not see in himself.
Just as one whose clothes or head had caught fire would put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to extinguish his clothes or head, so that bhikkhu should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to abandon those bad unwholesome qualities.
Just as one whose clothes or head had caught fire would put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to extinguish his clothes or head, so that bhikkhu should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to abandon those bad unwholesome qualities.
Just as one whose clothes or head had caught fire would put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to extinguish his clothes or head, so that bhikkhu should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to abandon those bad unwholesome qualities.
Just as one whose clothes or head had caught fire would put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to extinguish his clothes or head, so that bhikkhu should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to abandon those bad unwholesome qualities.
Just as one whose clothes or head had caught fire would put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to extinguish his clothes or head, so that bhikkhu should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to obtain both those wholesome qualities.
Just as one whose clothes or head had caught fire would put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to extinguish his clothes or head, so that bhikkhu should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to obtain those wholesome qualities.
Just as one whose clothes or head had caught fire would put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to extinguish his clothes or head, so that person should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to obtain both those wholesome qualities.
Just as one whose clothes or head had caught fire would put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to extinguish his clothes or head, so too that bhikkhu should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to abandon those same bad unwholesome qualities.
Just as pain might arise for one feeling pleasure only to afflict him, so too if that perception and attention accompanied by sensuality occur in him, he feels it as an affliction.
Just as pain might arise for one feeling pleasure only to afflict him, so too if that perception and attention accompanied by the base of nothingness occur in him, he feels it as an affliction.
Just as pain might arise for one feeling pleasure only to afflict him, so too if that perception and attention accompanied by thought occur in him, he feels it as an affliction.
Just as pain might arise for one feeling pleasure only to afflict him, so too when that perception and attention accompanied by thought occurred in me, I felt it as an affliction.
Just as pain might arise for one feeling pleasure only to afflict him, so too, when perception and attention accompanied by sensuality occurred in me, I felt it as an affliction.
Just as pain might arise for one feeling pleasure only to afflict him, so too, when that perception and attention accompanied by forms occurred in me, I felt it as an affliction.
Just as pain might arise for one feeling pleasure only to afflict him, so too, when that perception and attention accompanied by pleasure equanimity occurred in me, I felt it as an affliction.
Just as pain might arise for one feeling pleasure only to afflict him, so too, when that perception and attention accompanied by rapture occurred in me, I felt it as an affliction.
Just as pain might arise for one feeling pleasure only to afflict him, so too, when that perception and attention accompanied by the base of nothingness occurred in me, I felt it as an affliction.
Just as pain might arise for one feeling pleasure only to afflict him, so too, when that perception and attention accompanied by the base of the infinity of consciousness occurred in me, I felt it as an affliction.
Just as pain might arise for one feeling pleasure only to afflict him, so too, when that perception and attention accompanied by the base of the infinity of space occurred in me, I felt it as an affliction.
Just as that charnel ground is an abode of wild spirits, I say this person is similarly so.
Just as that charnel ground is dangerous, I say this person is similarly so.
Just as that charnel ground is foul-smelling, I say this person is similarly so.
Just as that charnel ground is impure, I say this person is similarly so.
Just as that charnel ground is many people weep, I say this person is similarly so.
Just as the bandhujīvaka flower is red, red in color, with a red hue, with a red tint, or just as Bārāṇasī cloth, smoothened on both sides, might be red, red in color with a red hue, with a red tint, so too, one not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, red ones….
Just as the Blessed One is now hemmed in by bhikkhus, bhikkhunīs, male and female lay followers, kings and royal ministers, sectarian teachers and their disciples, so I am hemmed in by other young devas.
Just as the eldest son of a head-anointed khattiya king—one due to be anointed but not yet anointed—would have attained the unshaken, so too a bhikkhu is a trainee practicing the way who dwells aspiring for the unsurpassed security from bondage.
Just as the flax flower is blue, blue in color, with a blue hue, with a blue tint, or just as Bārāṇasī cloth, smoothened on both sides, might be blue, blue in color, with a blue hue, with a blue tint, so too, one not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, blue ones….
Just as the kaṇikāra flower is yellow, yellow in color, with a yellow hue, with a yellow tint, or just as Bārāṇasī cloth, smoothened on both sides, might be yellow, yellow in color, with a yellow hue, with a yellow tint, so too, one not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, yellow ones….
Just as the many rivers used by the hosts of people,flowing downstream, reach the ocean,the great mass of water, the boundless sea,the fearsome receptacle of heaps of gems; so the streams of merit reach the wise manwho is a giver of food, drink, and cloth; the donor of beds, seats, and coverslike rivers carrying their waters to the sea.
Just as the many rivers used by the hosts of people,flowing downstream, reach the ocean,the great mass of water, the boundless sea,the fearsome receptacle of heaps of gems; so the streams of merit reach the wise manwho is a giver of food, drink, and cloth; the donor of beds, seats, and coverslike rivers carrying their waters to the sea.
Just as the morning star is white, white in color, with a white hue, with a white tint, or just as Bārāṇasī cloth, smoothened on both sides, might be white, white in color, with a white hue, with a white tint, so too, one not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, white ones….
Just as the peak is the chief part of a peaked-roof house, the part that holds all the others in place, that unifies them, so among these five trainee powers, the power of wisdom is foremost, the one that holds all the others in place, the one that unifies them.
Just as the peak is the chief part of a peaked-roof house, the part that that holds all in place, that unifies them, so among these five powers, the power of wisdom is foremost, the one that holds all in place, the one that unifies them.”
Just as the trees that growin dependence on a rocky mountainin a vast forest wildernessmight become great ‘woodland lords,’ so, when the head of a family herepossesses faith and virtue,his wife, children, and relativesall grow in dependence on him;so too his companions, his family circle,and those dependent on him.
Just as the trees that growin dependence on a rocky mountainin a vast forest wildernessmight become great “woodland lords,”so, when the head of a family herepossesses faith and virtue,his wife, children, and relativesall grow in dependence upon him;so too his friends, his family circle,and those dependent on him.
Just as there is nothing that a diamond cannot cut, whether gem or stone, so too, with the destruction of the taints, some person realizes for himself with direct knowledge … the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and … dwells in it.
Just as there might be a lake whose waters welled up from below with no inflow from east, west, north, or south, and the lake would not be replenished from time to time by showers of rain, then the cool fount of water welling up in the lake would make the cool water drench, steep, fill, and pervade the lake, so that there would be no part of the whole lake that is not pervaded by cool water; so too, the bhikkhu makes the rapture and happiness born of concentration drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body that is not pervaded by the rapture and happiness born of concentration.
Just as they throw pure and impure things on the earth—feces, urine, spittle, pus, and blood—yet the earth is not repelled, humiliated, or disgusted because of this; so too, Bhante, I dwell with a mind like the earth, vast, exalted, and measureless, without enmity and ill will.
Just as they wash pure and impure things in water—feces, urine, spittle, pus, and blood—yet the water is not repelled, humiliated, or disgusted because of this; so too, Bhante, I dwell with a mind like water, vast, exalted, and measureless, without enmity and ill will.
Just as, during the bright fortnight, whether night or day comes, the moon only increases in beauty, roundness, and brightness, in diameter and circumference, so too, for one who has faith in wholesome qualities … heedfulness in wholesome qualities, whether night or day comes, only growth and not deterioration in wholesome qualities is to be expected.”
Just as, during the bright fortnight, whether night or day comes, the moon only increases in beauty, roundness, and brightness, in diameter and circumference, so too, for one who has faith … wisdom in wholesome qualities, whether night or day comes, only growth and not deterioration in wholesome qualities is to be expected.
Just as, during the dark fortnight, whether night or day comes, the moon only deteriorates in beauty, roundness, and brightness, in diameter and circumference, so too, for one who does not have faith in wholesome qualities … for one who is not heedful in wholesome qualities, whether night or day comes, only deterioration and not growth in wholesome qualities is to be expected.
Just as, during the dark fortnight, whether night or day comes, the moon only deteriorates in beauty, roundness, and brightness, in diameter and circumference, so too, for one who does not have faith … wisdom in wholesome qualities, whether night or day comes, only deterioration and not growth in wholesome qualities is to be expected.
Just as, friend Sarabha, a bull might think to bellow deeply in an empty cow shed, so, friend Sarabha, in the absence of the ascetic Gotama you thought you could bellow deeply.” those wanderers gave the wanderer Sarabha a thorough verbal lashing.
Just as, friend Sarabha, a chick might think: ‘I will sing like a cock,’ and yet would only sing like a chick, so, friend Sarabha, claiming in the absence of the ascetic Gotama: ‘I will sing like a cock,’ you only sang like a chick.
Just as, in a pond of blue or red or white lotuses, some lotuses that are born and grow in the water might thrive immersed in the water without rising out of it, and cool water would drench, steep, fill, and pervade them to their tips and their roots, so that there would be no part of those lotuses that would not be pervaded by cool water; so too, the bhikkhu makes the happiness divested of rapture drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body that is not pervaded by the happiness divested of rapture.
Just as, in the autumn, when thick drops of rain are pouring down, the waters stand in the hoof prints of cattle here and there, so the waters left in the great ocean will stand here and there the size of the hoof prints of cattle.
Just as, when a musical quintet is well trained and its rhythm well coordinated, and it is composed of skilled musicians, its music is exquisite, tantalizing, lovely, captivating, and intoxicating, just so those deities’ performance was exquisite, tantalizing, lovely, captivating, and intoxicating.
Just as, when a person has various food stuffs strewn over his lap—sesamum seeds, rice grains, cakes, and jujubes—if he loses his mindfulness when rising from that seat, he would scatter them all over, so too, some person often goes to the monastery to listen to the Dhamma from the bhikkhus….
Just as, when a pot is kept upright, the water that had been poured into it stays there and does not run off, so too, some person often goes to the monastery to listen to the Dhamma from the bhikkhus….
Just as, when a pot is turned upside down, the water that had been poured into it runs off and does not remain there, so too, some person often goes to the monastery to listen to the Dhamma from the bhikkhus….
Just as, when ghee or oil are blazing and burning, neither ashes nor soot are seen, so it is when this great earth and Sineru, the king of mountains, are blazing and burning.
Just as, when thick drops of rain are pouring down, the water flows down along the slope, so too, wherever the Blessed One will go now, the brahmin householders of town and country will incline in the same direction.
Just as, when thick drops of rain are pouring down, the water flows down along the slope, so too, wherever the Blessed One will go now, the brahmin householders of town and country will incline in the same direction.
Just as, when thick drops of rain are pouring down, the water flows down along the slope, so too, wherever the Blessed One will go now, the brahmin householders of town and country will incline in the same direction.
Just how do you discipline a horse to be tamed?”
Just how does the Blessed One discipline a person to be tamed?”
Just like this, I say, is the person who is practicing neither for his own welfare nor for the welfare of others.
Just now I feel timid.”
Just now, friend, I approached the Blessed One and asked him about this matter.
Just so in the Noble One’s discipline,one in whom faith is lacking, who is shameless and brash,heaps up a mass of evil kamma.
Just so, in quest of profit, I attended upon the foolish Nigaṇṭhas, but I did not gain a profit and instead only reaped weariness and distress.
Just so, in the Noble One’s discipline,one whose faith is firm,who is endowed with shame, dreading wrong,wise and restrained by virtuous behavior,is said to live happilyin the Noble One’s discipline.
Just so, when a person is virtuous,endowed with faith,of humble manner, compliant,gentle, welcoming, soft,those in the world who are fields of merit—devoid of lust and hatred,devoid of delusion, taintless—resort to such a person.
Just this is the result of actions that are done disrespectfully.
Just this is the result of actions that are done respectfully.
Keeping company with women is a thorn to the celibate life.
King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha, Master Gotama, cannot take the Vajjis by war, except through treachery or internal dissension.
King Pacetana then addressed the chariotmaker: ‘Six days from now there will be a battle.
Knowing and seeing things as they are, one becomes an end-maker.”
Lack of desire to see the noble ones, lack of desire to hear the noble Dhamma, and a mind bent on criticism.
Lack of desire to see the noble ones, lack of desire to hear the noble Dhamma, and a mind bent on criticism.
Lack of faith … lack of wisdom.
Lack of faith, becoming full, fills up careless attention.
Lack of faith, lack of moral shame, moral recklessness, laziness, muddle-mindedness, and lack of wisdom.
Lack of faith, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
Lack of faith, uncharitableness, and laziness.
Lack of faith, uncharitableness, and laziness.
Lack of mindfulness and clear comprehension, becoming full, fills up non-restraint of the sense faculties.
Lack of mindfulness and clear comprehension, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
Lacking the power of persuasion and the power of deliberation, unwilling to relinquish their opinion, they wrongly grasp that disciplinary issue even more tightly, and adhering to their position, they declare: ‘This alone is true; anything else is wrong.’
This is called the assembly that speaks non-Dhamma.
Lacks development of what?
Lacks development of what?
Lay down the rod toward living beings dwelling more than a hundred yojanas’ distance in the northern quarter.
Lay down the rod toward living beings dwelling more than a hundred yojanas’ distance in the southern quarter.’
Thus they enjoin them to be sympathetic and compassionate toward some living beings, but not to others.
Lay down the rod toward living beings dwelling more than a hundred yojanas’ distance in the western quarter.
Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.” 
Let Master Gotama consider us lay followers who from today have gone for refuge for life.”
Let Master Gotama exhort me and instruct me in a way that will lead to my welfare and happiness for a long time.”
Let Master Gotama exhort us and instruct us in a way that will lead to our welfare and happiness for a long time!”
Let Master Gotama exhort us and instruct us in a way that will lead to our welfare and happiness for a long time!”
Let Master Gotama teach me the Dhamma about things that would lead to my welfare and happiness in this present life and in future lives.”
Let Master Kaccāna consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
Let Master Piṅgiyānī consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
Let me approach the Blessed One.”
Then the Venerable Sāriputta approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and addressed the bhikkhus: “Here, friends, a bhikkhu accomplished in virtuous behavior, concentration, and wisdom might enter and emerge from the cessation of perception and feeling.
Let me arouse energy….’
This is the fifth ground for arousing energy.
Let me arouse energy….’
This is the fourth ground for arousing energy.
Let me arouse energy….’
This is the second ground for arousing energy.
Let me arouse energy….’
This is the sixth ground for arousing energy.
Let me ask the Blessed One for the going forth of women in some other way.”
Let me develop loving-kindness further.
Let me do whatever will make you pleased with me.’
A man standing on the sidelines might think: ‘Truly, this man must have committed an evil deed, reprehensible, censurable, insofar as he has wrapped himself in a black cloth, loosened his hair, and tells a large crowd of people: “Worthy sirs, I have committed an evil deed, reprehensible, censurable.
Let me do whatever will make you pleased with me.’
A man standing on the sidelines might think: ‘Truly, this man must have committed an evil deed, reprehensible, punishable by a sack of ashes, insofar as he has wrapped himself in a black cloth, loosened his hair, put a sack of ashes on his shoulder, and tells a large crowd of people: “Worthy sirs, I have committed an evil deed, reprehensible, punishable by a sack of ashes.
Let me do whatever will make you pleased with me.’
A man standing on the sidelines might think: ‘Truly, this man must have committed an evil deed, reprehensible, punishable by clubbing, insofar as he has wrapped himself in a black cloth, loosened his hair, put a club on his shoulder, and tells a large crowd of people: “Worthy sirs, I have committed an evil deed, reprehensible, deserving a clubbing.
Let me do whatever will make you pleased with me.”
Indeed, I should never do such an evil deed, reprehensible, a sack of ashes.’
Let me do whatever will make you pleased with me.”
Indeed, I should never do such an evil deed, reprehensible, censurable.’
Let me do whatever will make you pleased with me.”
Indeed, I should never do such an evil deed, reprehensible, punishable by clubbing.’
Let me dwell alone, withdrawn from company.’
Let me dwell alone, withdrawn from the herd.’
Let me get down on all fours, suck it up like a cow, and depart.’
He then gets down on all fours, sucks the water up like a cow, and departs.
Let me go and show it to the goldsmiths.
Let me go see that Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.”
Let me go to the Blessed One and report them to him.
Let me go to the Blessed One and report them to him.
Let me go to the park of the wanderers of other sects.”
Let me go to the park of the wanderers of other sects.”
Let me go to the park of the wanderers of other sects.”
Let me go to the park of the wanderers of other sects.”
Let me go to the park of the wanderers of other sects.”
Let me in advance arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.’
He arouses energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yetunachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
Let me in advance arouse energy for the attainment of the asyet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.’
He arouses energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet unrealized.
Let me in advance arouse energy….’
This is the seventh ground for arousing energy.
Let me in advance arouse energy….’
This is the third ground for arousing energy.
Let me just keep silent.”
Then the Venerable Sāriputta fell silent.
Let me lead Mahānāma the Sakyan off to one side and teach him the Dhamma.”
Let me lie down.’
He lies down.
Let me lie down.’
He lies down.
Let me lie down.’
He lies down.
Let me lie down.’
He lies down.
Let me lie down.’
He lies down.
Let me lie down.’
He lies down.
Let me lie down.’
He lies down.
Let me lie down.’
He lies down.
Let me now arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.’
This is the fifth future peril considering which it is enough for a forest bhikkhu to dwell heedful, ardent, and resolute … for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
Let me now arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.’
This is the first future peril considering which it is enough for a forest bhikkhu to dwell heedful, ardent, and resolute … for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
Let me now arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.’
This is the fourth future peril considering which it is enough for a forest bhikkhu to dwell heedful, ardent, and resolute … for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
Let me now arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.’
This is the second future peril considering which it is enough for a forest bhikkhu to dwell heedful, ardent, and resolute … for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
Let me now arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.’
This is the third future peril considering which it is enough for a forest bhikkhu to dwell heedful, ardent, and resolute … for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
Let me now do good by body, speech, and mind”?’ – ‘No, lord, I could not.
Let me now do good by body, speech, and mind”?’ – ‘No, lord, I could not.
Let me now do good by body, speech, and mind”?’ – ‘No, lord, I could not.
Let me now give up the training and revert to the lower life so that I can both enjoy that wealth and do meritorious deeds.’
So he gives up the training and reverts to the lower life.
Let me release him.”
Then the Blessed One said to the brahmin Saṅgārava: “What conversation, brahmin, arose today among the king’s retinue when they assembled and were sitting in the royal palace?”
Let me see how mighty he is!’ Indeed, it would be impossible for him to reject good will as a Dhamma factor and to point out a ascetic or brahmin who has a mind of ill will and intentions of hate.
Let me see how mighty he is!’ Indeed, it would be impossible for him to reject non-longing as a Dhamma factor and to point out a ascetic or brahmin who is full of longing, deeply passionate about sensual pleasures.
Let me see how mighty he is!’ Indeed, it would be impossible for him to reject right concentration as a Dhamma factor and to point out a ascetic or brahmin who is unconcentrated, with a wandering mind.
Let me see how mighty he is!’ Indeed, it would be impossible for him to reject right mindfulness as a Dhamma factor and to point out a ascetic or brahmin who is muddled in mind and lacks clear comprehension.
Let me see to it that in the future the royal banyan tree does not yield fruit.’
Then in the future the royal banyan tree did not yield fruit.
Let me surpass them.’
Let me surpass them.’
Let me surpass them.’
Let me surpass them.’
Let me then give up the training and return to the lower life, so that I can enjoy my wealth and do meritorious deeds.”
Let me then give up the training and return to the lower life, so that I can enjoy my wealth and do meritorious deeds’?”
Let my dwelling be as before.’
Let no hatred at all arise in me anywhere in any way regarding things provocative of hatred!
Let our departed relatives and family members partake of our gift.’
Can our gift, Master Gotama, actually be of benefit to our departed relatives and family members?
Let so many bullocks … so many heifers … so many goats … so many rams be slain in sacrifice!’ Though he, ‘Let me do merit,’ he does demerit.
Let so many bullocks … so many heifers … so many goats … so many rams be slain in sacrifice!’ Though he, ‘Let me do merit,’ he does demerit.
Let the Blessed One accept it from me, out of compassion.”
The Blessed One accepted, out of compassion.
Let the Blessed One accept it from me, out of compassion.”
The Blessed One accepted, out of compassion.
Let the Blessed One accept it from me, out of compassion.”
The Blessed One accepted, out of compassion.
Let the Blessed One accept it from me, out of compassion.”
The Blessed One accepted, out of compassion.
Let the Blessed One accept me as a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
Let the Blessed One accept me as a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
Let the Blessed One accept them from me, out of compassion.”
The Blessed One accepted, out of compassion.
Let the Blessed One accept them from me, out of compassion.”
The Blessed One accepted, out of compassion.
Let the Blessed One consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
Let the Blessed One consider us lay followers who from today have gone for refuge for life.”
Let the Blessed One exhort me and instruct me in a way that will lead to my welfare and happiness for a long time.’”
Let the Blessed One exhort them and instruct them in a way that will lead to their welfare and happiness for a long time.”
Let the Blessed One recite the Pātimokkha to the bhikkhus.”
Let the Blessed One recite the Pātimokkha to the bhikkhus.”
Let the Blessed One recite the Pātimokkha to the bhikkhus.”
When this was said, the Blessed One was silent.
Let the Blessed One spend the night at his hermitage.”
Let the Blessed One teach us the Dhamma in a way that will lead to our welfare and happiness in this present life and in future lives.”
Let the Blessed One, too, who is at present the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One, honor, respect, and dwell in dependence only on the Dhamma.’
Let the creatures retreat.
Let the Fortunate One live on for an eon, for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, out of compassion for the world, for the good, welfare, and happiness of devas and humans.”
For his mind was obsessed by Māra.
Let the Fortunate One now attain final nibbāna!
Let the Fortunate One now attain final nibbāna!
Let the Fortunate One now attain final nibbāna!
Let the Fortunate One now attain final nibbāna!
Let the Fortunate One teach me the Dhamma in brief!
Let the Fortunate One teach me the Dhamma in brief.
Let the Noble Ānanda consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
Let the Venerable Mahākaccāna expound it without finding it troublesome.”
Let the Venerable Ānanda expound it without finding it troublesome.”
Let the Venerable Ānanda please pardon me.”
Let them bear grain the day after tomorrow!’ But, with the change of seasons, there comes a time when the crops grow, mature, and bear grain.
Let them eat green grass, drink cool water, and enjoy a cool breeze.”
Let them mature tomorrow!
Let us approach the Venerable Mahākaccāna and ask him the meaning of this.
Let us approach the Venerable Ānanda and ask him the meaning of this.
Let us go to the Cāpāla Shrine for the day’s dwelling.”
Let us go to the Gosiṅga Sal Woods, where we can dwell at ease, without noise and crowds.’
So they went to the Gosiṅga Sal Woods, where they dwell at ease, without noise and crowds.”
Let us go to the Gosiṅga Sal Woods.
Let us go to the park of the wanderers of other sects.”
Let your majesty impose a penalty on him.’
The king would say to them: ‘Go, sirs, and tie this man’s arms tightly behind his back with a strong rope, shave his head, and lead him around from street to street, from square to square, to the ominous beating of a drum.
Let’s banish the Venerable Dhammika from all the seven monasteries in the native district.”
Let’s banish the Venerable Dhammika.”
Let’s engage them in battle a second time.’
A second time the asuras fought a battle with the devas, and a second time the devas were victorious and the asuras were defeated.
Let’s engage them in battle a second time.’
A second time the devas fought a battle with the asuras, and a second time the asuras were victorious and the devas were defeated.
Let’s engage them in battle a third time.’
A third time the asuras fought a battle with the devas, and a third time the devas were victorious and the asuras were defeated.
Let’s engage them in battle a third time.’
A third time the devas fought a battle with the asuras, and a third time the asuras were victorious and the devas were defeated.
Liberation is their core.
Liberation is their core.’
Liberation of mind and liberation by wisdom.
Licchavis, the manifestation of five gems is rare in the world.
Licchavis, the manifestation of these five gems is rare in the world.”
Licchavis, the manifestation of these five gems is rare in the world.”
Life is swept along, short is the life span,no shelters exist for one who has grown old.Seeing clearly this peril in death,one should do deeds of merit that bring happiness.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely.
Listen and attend closely; I will speak.”
Listen and attend closely; I will speak.”
Listen and attend closely; I will speak.”
Listen and attend closely….
Listen and attend closely….And what, bhikkhus, is the ignoble path?
Listen Listen … 
Listen ….
Listen….
Listen….
Listen….
Listen….
Listen….
Lodgings too, I say, are twofold: those to be used and those not to be used.
Long life, householder, is wished for, desired, agreeable, and rarely gained in the world.
Longing is non-Dhamma; non-longing is the Dhamma….
Longing is the near shore, non-longing the far shore.
Longing, I say, is also threefold: caused by greed, caused by hatred, and caused by delusion.
Loving-kindness is to be developed for abandoning hatred.
Loving-kindness should be developed to abandon ill will.
Loving-kindness should be developed to abandon ill will.
Lust and So Forth Repetition Series –
Lust for form, lust for the formless, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance.
Lust for form, lust for the formless, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance.
Lust is a thorn, hatred is a thorn, and delusion is a thorn.
Lust is abandoned.
Lust leads to blindness, loss of vision, and lack of knowledge; it is obstructive to wisdom, aligned with distress, and does not lead to nibbāna.
Lust … conceit.
Lust, hatred, and delusion.
Lust, hatred, and delusion.
Lust, hatred, and delusion.
Lust, hatred, delusion, anger, hostility, denigration, insolence, envy, and miserliness.
Lust, hatred, delusion, anger, hostility, denigration, insolence, envy, and miserliness.
Lust, hatred, delusion, anger, hostility, denigration, insolence, envy, miserliness, and conceit.
Lust, once arisen, is hard to dispel.
Maddened by angerhe acquires a bad reputation.His relatives, friends, and loved onesavoid the angry person.Anger is a cause of harm;anger stirs up mental turmoil.People do not recognize the perilthat has arisen from within.
Mahākaccāna has great wisdom.
Mahākaccāna is wise.
Mahānāma the Sakyan heard about this, approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said to him:
Mahānāma the Sakyan heard: “The Blessed One has arrived at Kapilavatthu.”
Then Mahānāma the Sakyan approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, and stood to one side.
Mahānāma, you should develop this recollection of the Buddha while walking, standing, sitting, and lying down.
Mahānāma, you should develop this recollection of the deities while walking, standing, sitting, and lying down.
Make amends for it first.’
I say this person is similar to the wild colt that, when told: ‘Go forward!’ and when spurred and incited by its trainer, loosens its thigh from the chariot pole and crushes the chariot pole.
Make merit.
Make merit.
Many hundreds of times he was a wheel-turning monarch, a righteous king who ruled by the Dhamma, a conqueror whose rule extended to the four boundaries, one who had attained stability in his country, who possessed the seven gems.
Many hundreds of times I was a wheel-turning monarch, a righteous king who ruled by the Dhamma, a conqueror whose rule extended to the four boundaries, one who had attained stability in his country, who possessed the seven gems.
Master Gotama encompasses with his own mind the mind of one who has attained concentration that is without thought and examination such that he understands: ‘This person’s mental activities are so disposed that immediately afterward he will think this thought.’
And Master Gotama instructs thus: ‘Think in this way and not in that way!
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness so those with good eyesight can see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness so those with good eyesight can see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness so those with good eyesight can see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness so those with good eyesight can see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness so those with good eyesight can see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness so those with good eyesight can see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness so those with good eyesight can see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness so those with good eyesight can see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness so those with good eyesight can see forms.
Master Gotama is the best!
Master Gotama knows the aim, quest, support, intent, and final goal of khattiyas, brahmins, householders, women, thieves, and ascetics.
Master Gotama, I set free the five hundred bulls and allow them to live.
Master Gotama, King Ajātasattu wishes to wage war against the Vajjis.
Master Kaccāna has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness so those with good eyesight can see forms.
Master Kaccāna, I now go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
Master Piṅgiyānī has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness so those with good sight can see forms.
Master Piṅgiyānī, I now go for refuge to Master Gotama, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
Material wealth and the wealth of the Dhamma.
May all beings, all living things,all creatures, every one,meet with good fortune;may nothing bad come to anyone.
May footless beings not harm me;may no harm come to me from those with two feet;may four-footed beings not harm me;may no harm come to me from those with many feet.
May he get the leader of the village district!
May I be able to bear up with arisen bodily feelings that are painful, racking, sharp, piercing, harrowing, disagreeable, sapping one’s vitality,’ let him fulfill virtuous behavior … and resort to empty huts.
May I overcome discontent and delight whenever they arise,’ let him fulfill virtuous behavior … and resort to empty huts.
May I overcome fear and terror whenever they arise,’ let him fulfill virtuous behavior … and resort to empty huts.
May I understand a mind with lust as a mind with lust and a mind without lust as a mind without lust; a mind with hatred as a mind with hatred and a mind without hatred as a mind without hatred; a mind with delusion as a mind with delusion and a mind without delusion as a mind without delusion; a contracted mind as contracted and a distracted mind as distracted; an exalted mind as exalted and an unexalted mind as unexalted; a surpassable mind as surpassable and an unsurpassable mind as unsurpassable; a concentrated mind as concentrated and an unconcentrated mind as unconcentrated; a liberated mind as liberated and an unliberated mind as unliberated,’ he is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
May I understand a mind with lust as a mind with lust, and a mind without lust as a mind without lust; a mind with hatred as a mind with hatred, and a mind without hatred as a mind without hatred; a mind with delusion as a mind with delusion, and a mind without delusion as a mind without delusion; a contracted mind as contracted and a distracted mind as distracted; an exalted mind as exalted and an unexalted mind as unexalted; a surpassable mind as surpassable and an unsurpassable mind as unsurpassable; a concentrated mind as concentrated and an unconcentrated mind as unconcentrated; a liberated mind as liberated and an unliberated mind as unliberated,’ one is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
May I understand … an unliberated mind as unliberated,’ he is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
May I understand … an unliberated mind as unliberated,’ he is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
May no delusion at all arise in me anywhere in any way regarding things that breed delusion!’: for the sake of this benefit a bhikkhu should dwell equanimous, mindful and clearly comprehending, having turned away from both the repulsive and the unrepulsive.”
May your majesty inflict due punishment on him!’
Meditate, bhikkhu, do not be heedless.
Meditate, bhikkhu, do not be heedless.
Meditate, bhikkhus, do not be heedless.
Meditate, bhikkhus, do not be heedless.
Mental good conduct is to be developed for abandoning mental misconduct.
Might someone give such a gift?”
Might someone give such a gift?”
Might there arise in that householder or householder’s son bodily and mental fevers born of hatred … … bodily and mental fevers born of delusion, which would torment him so that he would sleep badly?”
Might there arise in that householder or householder’s son bodily and mental fevers born of lust, which would torment him so that he would sleep badly?”
Mind arises first followed by the unwholesome qualities.”
Mind arises first followed by the wholesome qualities.”
Mindfulness and clear comprehension, becoming full, fill up restraint of the sense faculties.
Mindfulness and clear comprehension, too, I say, have a nutriment; they are not without nutriment.
Mindfulness directed to the body.
Mindfulness directed to the body.
Mindfulness directed to the body.
Mindfulness directed to the body.
Mindfulness directed to the body.
Mindfulness directed to the body.
Mindfulness directed to the body.
Mindfulness directed to the body….
Mindfulness exercises authority over them.
Mindfulness exercises authority over them.
Mindfulness of breathing is to be developed for abandoning mental distraction.
Mindfulness of breathing should be developed to cut off thoughts.
Mindfulness of breathing should be developed to cut off thoughts.
Mindfulness of breathing….
Mindfulness of death….
Mine-makings will cease for me.
Miserliness is a donor’s stain.
Miserliness with regard to dwellings … ingratitude or unthankfulness.
Miserliness with regard to dwellings … ingratitude or unthankfulness.
Miserliness with regard to dwellings … miserliness with regard to the Dhamma.
Miserliness with regard to dwellings … miserliness with regard to the Dhamma.
Miserliness with regard to dwellings … miserliness with regard to the Dhamma.
Miserliness with regard to dwellings, miserliness with regard to families, miserliness with regard to gains, miserliness with regard to praise, and ingratitude or unthankfulness.
Miserliness with regard to dwellings, miserliness with regard to families, miserliness with regard to gains, miserliness with regard to praise, and ingratitude or unthankfulness.
Miserliness with regard to dwellings, miserliness with regard to families, miserliness with regard to gains, miserliness with regard to praise, and miserliness with regard to the Dhamma.
Miserliness with regard to dwellings, miserliness with regard to families, miserliness with regard to gains, miserliness with regard to praise, and miserliness with regard to the Dhamma.
Miserliness with regard to dwellings, miserliness with regard to families, miserliness with regard to gains, miserliness with regard to praise, and miserliness with regard to the Dhamma.
Miserliness with regard to dwellings, miserliness with regard to families, miserliness with regard to gains, miserliness with regard to praise, and miserliness with regard to the Dhamma.
Moral shame and moral dread.
Moral shame and moral dread.
Moral shamelessness and moral recklessness.
Moral shamelessness, moral recklessness, and heedlessness.
Moral shamelessness, moral recklessness, and heedlessness.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away as devas, are reborn in hell … in the animal realm … in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”
More numerous are those who, when they pass away as devas, are reborn in hell … in the animal realm … in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”
More numerous are those who, when they pass away as human beings, are reborn in hell … in the animal realm … in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”
More numerous are those who, when they pass away as human beings, are reborn in hell … in the animal realm … in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from hell, are reborn in hell … in the animal realm … in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from hell, are reborn in hell … in the animal realm … in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from the animal realm, are reborn in hell … in the animal realm … in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from the animal realm, are reborn in hell … in the animal realm … in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from the sphere of afflicted spirits, are reborn in hell … in the animal realm … in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from the sphere of afflicted spirits, are reborn in hell … in the animal realm … in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”
Moreover, he is a good speaker with a good delivery … and he instructs, encourages, inspires, and gladdens his fellow monks.
Moreover, he is not a good speaker with a good delivery … and he does not instruct, encourage, inspire, and gladden his fellow monks.
Mortals have mind as their core.
Mortals have mind as their core.
Mother and father are called “Brahmā,”and also “first teachers.”They are worthy of gifts from their children,for they have compassion for their offspring.Therefore a wise person should revere themand treat them with honor.
Mother and father are called “Brahmā”and also “first teachers.”They are worthy of gifts from their children,for they have compassion for their offspring.
Mother and father are helpful to their children: they raise them, nurture them, and show them the world.”
Mother and father are very helpful to their children: they raise them, nurture them, and show them the world.”
Mp says only, “The sixth is clear.”
Both Ce and Be, referring to this comment, have a note: “The commentary says, ‘The sixth is clear,’ but it is not found in the canonical text.”]
Much of a poorly timed meal is not nutritious.
Much of a properly timed meal is nutritious.
Muddle-mindedness … flattery.
Muddle-mindedness, lack of clear comprehension, and mental distraction.
Muddle-mindedness, lack of clear comprehension, and mental distraction.
Muddle-mindedness, lack of clear comprehension, not guarding the doors of the sense faculties, lack of moderation in eating, duplicity, and flattery.
Munificence with material goods and munificence with the Dhamma.
My back is aching, so I will stretch it.”
My back was aching while I stood outside the door waiting for the talk to end.”
My behavior is purified, cleansed, undefiled.’
His disciples know him thus: ‘This honorable teacher, though of unpurified behavior, claims: “I am one whose behavior is purified.
My behavior is purified, cleansed, undefiled.’
My disciples do not cover me up with respect to my behavior, and I do not expect to be covered up by my disciples with respect to my behavior.
My behavior is purified, cleansed, undefiled.”
Now he would not like it if we were to report this to the laypeople.
My body has become as heavy and unwieldy as a heap of wet beans.
My body has become tired and unwieldy.
My body is light and wieldy.
My body is still weak and unwieldy.
My body is strong and wieldy.
My Dhamma teaching is purified, cleansed, undefiled.’
His disciples know him thus: ‘This honorable teacher, though of unpurified Dhamma teaching, claims: “I am one whose Dhamma teaching is purified.
My Dhamma teaching is purified, cleansed, undefiled.’
My disciples do not cover me up with respect to my Dhamma teaching, and I do not expect to be covered up by my disciples with respect to my Dhamma teaching.
My Dhamma teaching is purified, cleansed, undefiled.”
Now he would not like it if we were to report this to the laypeople.
My disciple who dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute for nine months … eight months … seven months … six months … five months … four months … three months … two months … one month … half a month, practicing as I instruct him, might experience exclusively happiness for a hundred years, ten thousand years, a hundred thousand years, and ten million years.
My disciple who dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute for nine nights and days … eight nights and days … seven nights and days … six nights and days … five nights and days … four nights and days … three nights and days … two nights and days … one night and day, practicing as I instruct him, might experience exclusively happiness for a hundred years, ten thousand years, a hundred thousand years, and ten million years.
My disciple who dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute for nine years … eight years … seven years … six years … five years … four years … three years … two years … one year, practicing as I instruct him, might experience exclusively happiness for a hundred years, ten thousand years, a hundred thousand years, and ten million years.
My disciple who dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute for ten months, practicing as I instruct him, might experience exclusively happiness for a hundred years, ten thousand years, a hundred thousand years, and ten million years.
My disciple who dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute for ten nights and days, practicing as I instruct him, might experience exclusively happiness for a hundred years, ten thousand years, a hundred thousand years, and ten million years.
My explanations are purified, cleansed, undefiled.’
His disciples know him thus: ‘This honorable teacher, though giving unpurified explanations, claims: “I am one whose explanations are purified.
My explanations are purified, cleansed, undefiled.’
My disciples do not cover me up with respect to my explanations, and I do not expect to be covered up by my disciples with respect to my explanations.
My explanations are purified, cleansed, undefiled.”
Now he would not like it if we were to report this to the laypeople.
My family has wealth.
My father Purāṇa was celibate, living apart, abstaining from sexual intercourse, the common person’s practice.
My father Purāṇa was celibate, living apart, abstaining from sexual intercourse, the common person’s practice.
My fetters will be abandoned.
My knowledge and vision are purified, cleansed, undefiled.’
His disciples know him thus: ‘This honorable teacher, though of unpurified knowledge and vision, claims: “I am one whose knowledge and vision are purified.
My knowledge and vision are purified, cleansed, undefiled.’
My disciples do not cover me up with respect to my knowledge and vision, and I do not expect to be covered up by my disciples with respect to my knowledge and vision.” 
My knowledge and vision are purified, cleansed, undefiled.”
Now he would not like it if we were to report this to the laypeople.
My livelihood is purified, cleansed, undefiled.’
His disciples know him thus: ‘This honorable teacher, though of unpurified livelihood, claims: “I am one whose livelihood is purified.
My livelihood is purified, cleansed, undefiled.’
My disciples do not cover me up with respect to my livelihood, and I do not expect to be covered up by my disciples with respect to my livelihood.
My livelihood is purified, cleansed, undefiled.”
Now he would not like it if we were to report this to the laypeople.
My mind then launched out upon renunciation and became placid, settled, and liberated in it, since I saw it as peaceful.
My mind then launched out upon the absence of pleasure and pain and became placid, settled, and liberated in it, since I saw it as peaceful.
My mind then launched out upon the absence of rapture and became placid, settled, and liberated in it, since I saw it as peaceful.
My mind then launched out upon the absence of thought and became placid, settled, and liberated in it, since I saw it as peaceful.
My mind then launched out upon the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception and became placid, settled, and liberated in it, since I saw it as peaceful.
My mind then launched out upon the base of nothingness and became placid, settled, and liberated in it, since I saw it as peaceful.
My mind then launched out upon the base of the infinity of consciousness and became placid, settled, and liberated in it, since I saw it as peaceful.
My mind then launched out upon the base of the infinity of space and became placid, settled, and liberated in it, since I saw it as peaceful.
My mind then launched out upon the cessation of perception and feeling and became placid, settled, and liberated in it, since I saw it as peaceful.
My mind will not delight in anything in the world.
My mind will rise up from the entire world.
My mind will rise up from the entire world.
My mind will slope toward nibbāna.
My speed was like that of a light arrow easily shot by a firm-bowed archer—one trained, skillful, and experienced—across the shadow of a palmyra tree.
My stride was such that it could reach from the eastern ocean to the western ocean.
My underlying tendencies will be uprooted.
Nakulamātā is one of my white-robed female lay disciples who fulfill virtuous behavior.
Nakulapitā recovered from that illness, and that is how his illness was abandoned.
Name and form.
Name and form….
Nandiya the Sakyan also entered upon the rains residence in Sāvatthī, where he engaged in business and from time to time got to see the Blessed One.
Nandiya the Sakyan heard about this and it then occurred to him: “I will also enter upon the rains residence in Sāvatthī.
Nandiya the Sakyan heard about this, approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side, and said to him:
Nevertheless, he acquires gain.
Nevertheless, he acquires gain.
Nevertheless, he fails to acquire gain.
Nevertheless, he fails to acquire gain.
Nevertheless, I will answer you.
Nevertheless, I will answer you.
Next the wardens of hell harness him to a chariot and drive him back and forth across ground that is burning, blazing, and glowing….
Next the wardens of hell make him climb up and down a great mound of coals that are burning, blazing, and glowing….
Next the wardens of hell turn him upside down and pare him with adzes….
Next the wardens of hell turn him upside down and plunge him into a red-hot copper cauldron that is burning, blazing, and glowing.
Next, he sows seeds at the proper time.
Next, he swiftly sows seeds.
No arising is seen, no vanishing is seen, and no alteration while it persists is seen.
No measurable kamma remains or persists there.’
No measurable kamma remains or persists there.’ 
No one guarded the tree’s fruits, yet no one took another’s fruits.
No rebirth is happiness.
No white-robed layman was present.”
Noble concentration has been understood and penetrated.
Noble concentration has been understood and penetrated.
Noble happiness and ignoble happiness.
Noble liberation has been understood and penetrated.
Noble liberation has been understood and penetrated.
Noble virtuous behavior, noble concentration, noble wisdom, and noble liberation.
Noble wisdom has been understood and penetrated.
Noble wisdom has been understood and penetrated.
Non-afflictive bodily action, non-afflictive verbal action, non-afflictive mental action, and non-afflictive view.
Non-anger and non-hostility … Non-denigration and non-insolence … Non-envy and non-miserliness … Non-deceitfulness and non-craftiness … Moral shame and moral dread.
Non-anger and non-hostility … Non-denigration and non-insolence … Non-envy and non-miserliness … Non-deceitfulness and non-craftiness … Moral shame and moral dread.
Non-anger and non-hostility … Non-denigration and non-insolence … Non-envy and non-miserliness … Non-deceitfulness and non-craftiness … Moral shame and moral dread.
Non-anger and non-hostility … Non-denigration and non-insolence … Non-envy and non-miserliness … Non-deceitfulness and non-craftiness … Moral shame and moral dread.
Non-anger and non-hostility … Non-denigration and non-insolence … Non-envy and non-miserliness … Non-deceitfulness and non-craftiness … Moral shame and moral dread.
Non-anger and non-hostility … Non-denigration and non-insolence … Non-envy and non-miserliness … Non-deceitfulness and non-craftiness … Moral shame and moral dread.
Non-anger and non-hostility … Non-denigration and non-insolence … Non-envy and non-miserliness … Non-deceitfulness and non-craftiness … Moral shame and moral dread.
Non-anger and non-hostility … Non-denigration and non-insolence … Non-envy and non-miserliness … Non-deceitfulness and non-craftiness … Moral shame and moral dread.
Non-anger and non-hostility … Non-denigration and non-insolence … Non-envy and non-miserliness … Non-deceitfulness and non-craftiness … Moral shame and moral dread.
Non-anger and non-hostility … Non-denigration and non-insolence … Non-envy and non-miserliness … Non-deceitfulness and non-craftiness … Moral shame and moral dread.
Non-contentment, lack of clear comprehension, and strong desires.
Non-greed is a cause for the origination of kamma; non-hatred is a cause for the origination of kamma; and non-delusion is a cause for the origination of kamma.
Non-greed is a cause for the origination of kamma; non-hatred is a cause for the origination of kamma; non-delusion is a cause for the origination of kamma.
Non-greed is a cause for the origination of kamma; non-hatred is a cause for the origination of kamma; non-delusion is a cause for the origination of kamma.
Non-hatred is a cause and condition … Non-delusion is a cause and condition … Careful attention is a cause and condition … A rightly directed mind is a cause and condition for the doing of good kamma, for the occurrence of good kamma.
Non-recitation is an obstruction to learning.
Non-recitation is the stain of the hymns.
Non-recitation is the stain of the hymns;the stain of houses is lack of upkeep;the stain of beauty is laziness,heedlessness is the stain of a guard.
Non-restraint of the sense faculties is an obstruction to celibacy.
Non-restraint of the sense faculties, becoming full, fills up the three kinds of misconduct.
Non-restraint of the sense faculties, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
Nor does a good woman scold her husbandwith speech caused by jealousy;the wise woman shows venerationto all those whom her husband reveres.
Nor does a good woman scold her husbandwith speech caused by jealousy;the wise woman shows venerationto all those whom her husband reveres.
Not adorning and beautifying oneself are obstructions to beauty.
Not applying oneself and lack of reflection are obstructions to good qualities.
Not being insolent or aggressive,with a mind not elated,he speaks free from envyon the basis of right knowledge.He should approve of what is well expressedbut should not attack what is badly stated.
Not by agriculture, not by trade, not by raising cattle, not by archery, not by service to the king, not by a particular craft, but solely by wandering for alms without scorning the alms bowl.
Not by agriculture, not by trade, not by raising cattle, not by archery, not by service to the king, not by a particular craft, but solely by wandering for alms without scorning the alms bowl.
Not by agriculture, not by trade, not by raising cattle, not by archery, not by service to the king, not by a particular craft, but solely by wandering for alms without scorning the alms bowl.
Not by buying and selling, only a brahmin woman given to him by the pouring of water.
Not clinging, he is not agitated.
Not delighting in work, not delighting in talk, not delighting in sleep, not delighting in company; and he reviews the extent to which his mind is liberated.
Not excited by them, not taking delight in them, he does not attend externally to feminine faculty … her feminine ornamentation.
Not excited by them, not taking delight in them, he does not desire union externally, nor does he desire the pleasure and joy that arise on account of such union.
Not excited by them, not taking delight in them, she does not attend externally to masculine faculty … his masculine ornamentation.
Not excited by them, not taking delight in them, she does not desire union externally, nor does she desire the pleasure and joy that arise on account of such union.
Not having abandoned lust, hatred, and delusion, one is not freed from birth, from old age and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish; one is not freed from suffering, I say.
Not having fulfilled our duty, full of regret and remorse, we were reborn in an inferior class.’
Not having fulfilled our duty, full of regret and remorse, we were reborn in an inferior class.’
Not having fulfilled our duty, full of regret and remorse, we were reborn in an inferior class.’ 
Not hearing the good Dhamma, becoming full, fills up lack of faith.
Not hearing the good Dhamma, too, I say, has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
Not long after he left, I was filled with remorse and regret, thinking: ‘It is my misfortune and loss that when the Blessed One was instructing … and gladdening the bhikkhus with a Dhamma talk connected with the training rules, I became impatient and bitter, thinking: “This ascetic is too stringent.”
Let me now go to the Blessed One and confess my transgression to him.’
Not long after the bhikkhu Kokālika had left, his entire body became covered with boils the size of mustard seeds.
Not long after the Blessed One left, the Venerable Phagguṇa died.
Not long afterward, Citta Hatthisāriputta shaved off his hair and beard, put on ochre robes, and went forth from the household life into homelessness.
Not taking delight in work, not taking delight in talk, not taking delight in sleep, not taking delight in company, being easy to correct, and good friendship.
Not taking delight in work, not taking delight in talk, not taking delight in sleep, not taking delight in company, guarding the doors of the sense faculties, and moderation in eating.
Not taking delight in work, not taking delight in talk, not taking delight in sleep, not taking delight in company, guarding the doors of the sense faculties, moderation in eating, not taking delight in bonding, and not taking delight in proliferation.
Not taking delight in work, not taking delight in talk, not taking delight in sleep, not taking delight in company, guarding the doors of the sense faculties, moderation in eating; and when there are matters pertaining to the Saṅgha that are in the Saṅgha, the bhikkhu who is a trainee reflects thus: ‘There are in the Saṅgha elders of long standing, long gone forth, responsible, who will take responsibility for that.’
He does not himself undertake them.
Now a good report about that Master Gotama has circulated thus: ‘That Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened … … he reveals a spiritual life that is perfectly complete and pure.’
Now it is good to see such arahants.”
Now a good report about that Master Gotama has circulated thus: ‘That Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened … … reveals a spiritual life that is perfectly complete and pure.’
Now it is good to see such arahants.”
Now a good report about that Master Gotama has circulated thus: ‘That Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.
Now a good report about that Master Gotama has circulated thus: ‘That Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.
Now a good report about that Master Gotama has circulated thus: ‘That Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.
Now a good report about this Venerable Nārada has circulated thus: ‘He is wise … and an arahant.’
Your majesty should visit the Venerable Nārada.
Now a good report about this Venerable Nārada has circulated thus: ‘He is wise, competent, intelligent, learned, an artful speaker, eloquent, mature, and an arahant.’
Suppose King Muṇḍa would visit the Venerable Nārada: perhaps if he hears the Venerable Nārada’s Dhamma, he would abandon the dart of sorrow.”
Now at that time a bhikkhu named Tissa had recently died and been reborn in a certain brahmā world.
Now at that time, a bhikkhu named Tissa had recently died and been reborn in a certain brahmā world.
Now both one who himself sacrifices and one who enjoins others to offer sacrifices engage in a meritorious practice that extends to many people, that is, one based on sacrifice.
Now I am fulfilling virtuous behavior, and so too are these five hundred lay followers.
Now I am fulfilling virtuous behavior, and so too are these five hundred lay followers.
Now I am fulfilling virtuous behavior, and so too are these five hundred lay followers.
Now I too am subject to death and am not exempt from death.
Now I too am subject to illness and am not exempt from illness.
Now I too am subject to old age and am not exempt from old age.
Now I will find out whether or not this bhikkhu exhibits the manifestations of faith.”
Now if I were to commit such a bad deed, and if kings were to arrest me, they would subject me to the same punishments.
Now if I were to commit such an evil deed, and if kings were to arrest me, they would subject me to the same punishments.
Now if I were to engage in misconduct by body, speech, and mind, then, with the breakup of the body, after death, I would be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell!’ Afraid of the fault pertaining to the future life, he abandons bodily misconduct and develops bodily good conduct; he abandons verbal misconduct and develops verbal good conduct; he abandons mental misconduct and develops mental good conduct; he maintains himself in purity.
Now if I were to engage in misconduct with body, speech, and mind, then with the breakup of the body, after death, I would be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.’
Afraid of the peril of a bad destination, he abandons bodily misconduct and develops bodily good conduct; he abandons verbal misconduct and develops verbal good conduct; he abandons mental misconduct and develops mental good conduct; he maintains himself in purity.
Now is the time for the Blessed One’s final nibbāna!
Now is the time for the Blessed One’s final nibbāna!
Now is the time, Bhante, for the Blessed One’s final nibbāna!
Now is the time, Bhante, for the Blessed One’s final nibbāna!”
Now it is for one who feels that I proclaim: ‘This is suffering,’ and ‘This is the origin of suffering,’ and ‘This is the cessation of suffering,’ and ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
Now it won’t be long before it fully blossoms.’
Now it won’t be long before its bud burst occurs.’
Now it won’t be long before its bud formation occurs.’
Now it won’t be long before its floral differentiation occurs.’
Now it won’t be long before its floral initiation occurs.’
Now it won’t be long before its foliage will fall.’
Now I’ll reject the training and return to the lower life.’
He then rejects the training, returns to the lower life, and declares: ‘Now you can be satisfied!’ I say this person is similar to the wild colt that, when told: ‘Go forward!’ and when spurred and incited by its trainer, tucks in its front legs and its back legs and sits down right there on all four legs.
Now Master Gavesī eats once a day, refraining from a night meal, abstaining from eating outside the proper time.
Now Master Gavesī will be celibate, living apart, abstaining from sexual intercourse, the common person’s practice.
Now Master Gavesī will fulfill virtuous behavior.
Now Master Gavesī, having shaved off his hair and beard and put on ochre robes, has gone forth from the household life into homelessness.
Now on a certain occasion the Venerable Phagguṇa was sick, afflicted, gravely ill.
Now on that occasion a mother and a son, being respectively a bhikkhunī and a bhikkhu, had entered the rains residence at Sāvatthī.
Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus were making a robe for the Blessed One, thinking that with his robe completed, at the end of the three months, the Blessed One would set out wandering.
Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus were making a robe for the Blessed One, thinking that with his robe completed, at the end of the three months, the Blessed One would set out wandering.
Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus were walking back and forth in the open air.
Now on that occasion a number of Licchavi youths had taken their strung bows and were walking and wandering in the Great Wood, accompanied by a pack of dogs, when they saw the Blessed One seated at the foot of a tree to dwell for the day.
Now on that occasion a number of Nigaṇṭhas from street to street and from square to square in Vesālī, thrashing their arms about and crying out: “Today Sīha the general has slain a plump animal to prepare a meal for the ascetic Gotama!
Now on that occasion a number of very well-known Licchavis had entered the Great Wood in order to see the Blessed One, and as they followed one another in their finest carriages they made an uproar and a racket.
Now on that occasion a number of very well-known wanderers were residing at the wanderers’ park on the bank of the river Sappinī, namely, Annabhāra, Varadhara, Sakuludāyī the wanderer, and other very well-known wanderers.
Now on that occasion a number of very well-known wanderers were residing at the wanderers’ park on the bank of the river Sappinī, that is, Annabhāra, Varadhara, Sakuludāyī, and other very well-known wanderers.
Now on that occasion a wanderer named Sarabha had recently left this Dhamma and discipline.
Now on that occasion bhikkhus were reproving a bhikkhu for an offense.
Now on that occasion five hundred Licchavis had assembled at the Sārandada Shrine and were sitting together when this conversation arose: “The manifestation of five gems is rare in the world.
Now on that occasion five hundred Licchavis were visiting the Blessed One.
Now on that occasion Kakudha the Koliyan son, the Venerable Mahāmoggallāna’s attendant, had recently died and been reborn among a certain group of mind-made.
Now on that occasion King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha wished to wage war against the Vajjis.
Now on that occasion King Muṇḍa’s Queen Bhaddā, who had been dear and beloved to him, had died.
Now on that occasion King Pasenadi of Kosala had returned from the war front, victorious in battle, his purpose having been achieved.
Now on that occasion the bhikkhu Kassapagotta was resident at Paṅkadhā.
Now on that occasion the Blessed One had just recently recovered from illness.
Now on that occasion the Blessed One wanted to enter upon the rains residence in Sāvatthī.
Now on that occasion the brahmin Kāraṇapālī was getting some work done for the Licchavis.
Now on that occasion the brahmin Uggatasarīra had made arrangements for a great sacrifice.
Now on that occasion the female lay follower Veḷukaṇṭakī Nandamātā had prepared an offering possessed of six factors for the Saṅgha of bhikkhus headed by Sāriputta and Moggallāna.
Now on that occasion the female lay follower Veḷukaṇṭakī Nandamātā, having risen as the night was receding, chanted the Pārāyana.
Now on that occasion the great king Vessavaṇa was traveling from north to south on some business.
Now on that occasion the great king Vessavaṇa was traveling from north to south on some business.
Now on that occasion the householder Dasama of Aṭṭhakanagara had arrived at Pāṭaliputta on a business matter.
Now on that occasion the householder Nakulapitā was sick, afflicted, gravely ill.
Now on that occasion the Licchavi youth Mahānāma was walking and wandering for exercise in the Great Wood when he saw the Licchavi youths silently standing in attendance upon the Blessed One with their hands joined in reverential salutation.
Now on that occasion the Venerable Anuruddha dwelled among the Cetis in the eastern bamboo park.
Now on that occasion the Venerable Anuruddha had gone off to pass the day and was in seclusion when a number of agreeable-bodied deities approached him, paid homage to him, stood to one side, and said to him:
Now on that occasion the Venerable Girimānanda was sick, afflicted, and gravely ill.
Now on that occasion the Venerable Khema and the Venerable Sumana were dwelling at Sāvatthī in the Blind Men’s Grove.
Now on that occasion the Venerable Mahāmoggallāna and the Venerable Ānanda took a key and wandered from dwelling to dwelling,: “Come forth, venerables!
Now on that occasion the Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was sitting and dozing at Kallavālamuttagāma among the Magadhans.
Now on that occasion the Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was sitting not far from the Blessed One.
Now on that occasion the Venerable Meghiya was the Blessed One’s attendant.
Now on that occasion the Venerable Nandaka was instructing, encouraging, inspiring, and gladdening the bhikkhus in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk.
Now on that occasion the Venerable Nāgita was the Blessed One’s attendant.
Now on that occasion the Venerable Nāgita was the Blessed One’s attendant.
Now on that occasion the Venerable Nāgita was the Blessed One’s attendant.
Now on that occasion the Venerable Soṇa was dwelling at Rājagaha in the Cool Grove.
Now on that occasion the Venerable Sāriputta was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Migāramātā’s Mansion in the Eastern Park.
Now on that occasion the Venerable Udāyī, surrounded by a large assembly of laypeople, was sitting teaching the Dhamma.
Now on that occasion the Venerable Visākha Pañcāliputta was instructing, exhorting, inspiring, and gladdening the bhikkhus in the assembly hall with a Dhamma talk, with speech that was polished, clear, articulate, expressive of the meaning, comprehensive, and unhindered.
Now on that occasion the Venerable Ānanda was standing behind the Blessed One fanning him.
Now on that occasion the wanderers of other sects had assembled and were making an uproar as they loudly and boisterously sat discussing various pointless topics.
Now on that occasion the wanderers of other sects had assembled and were sitting together when this conversation arose: “Such are the brahmin truths, such are the brahmin truths.”
Now on that occasion those wanderers had assembled and were sitting together when this conversation arose among them: “Friends, anyone at all who lives the complete and purified spiritual life for twelve years is fit to be called a bhikkhu who is ‘ten-less.’”
Now on that occasion those wanderers had assembled and were sitting together when this conversation arose among them: “Friends, anyone who passes away with a residue remaining is not freed from hell, the animal realm, or the sphere of afflicted spirits; he is not freed from the plane of misery, the bad destination, the lower world.”
Now on that occasion, a number of well-known Licchavis had assembled in the meeting hall and were sitting together speaking in many ways in praise of the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha.
Now on that occasion, after their meal, on returning from their alms round, a number of bhikkhus assembled in the assembly hall and were sitting together when they took to arguing and quarreling and fell into a dispute, stabbing each other with piercing words.
Now on that occasion, after their meal, on returning from their alms round, a number of bhikkhus had assembled in the assembly hall and were sitting together engaging in various kinds of pointless talk, that is: talk about kings, thieves, and ministers of state … talk about becoming this or that.
Now on that occasion, after their meal, on returning from their alms round, a number of bhikkhus had assembled in the assembly hall and were sitting together engaging in various kinds of pointless talk, that is: talk about kings, thieves, and ministers of state; talk about armies, perils, and wars; talk about food, drink, garments, and beds; talk about garlands and scents; talk about relatives, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and talk about heroes; street talk and talk by the well; talk about the departed; miscellaneous talk; speculation about the world and the sea; talk about becoming this or that.
Now on that occasion, after their meal, on returning from their alms round, a number of elder bhikkhus assembled and were sitting together in the pavilion hall engaged in a discussion pertaining to the Dhamma.
Now on that occasion, after their meal, on returning from their alms round, a number of elder bhikkhus assembled and were sitting together in the pavilion hall when this conversation arose: “It was said, friends, by the Blessed One in the Pārāyana, in ‘The Questions of Metteyya’:
Now on that occasion, in Sāvatthī, a certain bhikkhu had been bitten by a snake and had died.
Now on that occasion, on the day of the uposatha, the Blessed One was sitting surrounded by the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
Now on that occasion, on the day of the uposatha, the Blessed One was sitting surrounded by the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
Now on that occasion, on the day of the uposatha, the Blessed One was sitting surrounded by the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
Now on that occasion, on the uposatha day, the brahmin Jāṇussoṇī stood to one side not far from the Blessed One, with his head washed, wearing a new pair of linen clothes, holding a handful of wet kusa grass.
Now on that occasion, on the uposatha day, the brahmin Jāṇussoṇī stood to one side not far from the Blessed One, with his head washed, wearing a new pair of linen clothes, holding a handful of wet kusa grass.
Now on that occasion, people in Anāthapiṇḍika’s residence were making an uproar and a racket.
Now tell us your view.”
Now that foolish man will, of his own accord, expose himself.
Now that you’ve come to me, why be concerned that you have been banished from those places?
Now the Blessed One has called noise a thorn to the jhānas.
Now the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One Kassapa lived in dependence on that city.
Now the soil remover or his apprentice first pours the gold into a trough and washes, rinses, and cleans it.
Now the Venerable Sāriputta will roar his lion’s roar in the presence of the Blessed One!”
Now there are chores to be done in the families, and for this reason, when a bhikkhu turns up, people may not pay attention to him.
Now there is none; thus this is wholesome.
Now there is none; thus this is wholesome.
Now there is none; thus this is wholesome.’
Now there is wealth in my family, and it is possible for me to enjoy my wealth and do meritorious deeds.
Now there is wealth in my family, and it is possible for me to enjoy my wealth and do meritorious deeds.
Now these venerable ones are fond of quiet, disciplined in quiet, and speak in praise of quiet.
Now they are standing silently in attendance upon the Blessed One with their hands joined in reverential salutation.”
Now this view has come into being and is conditioned, a product of volition, dependently originated.
Now this view has come into being and is conditioned, a product of volition, dependently originated.
Now this view has come into being and is conditioned, a product of volition, dependently originated.
Now what ascetic or brahmin can I honor, respect, and dwell in dependence on?’
Now when living conditions are congested and crowded, it is not easy to attend to the Buddhas’ teaching; it is not easy to resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
Now when living conditions are congested and crowded, it is not easy to attend to the Buddhas’ teaching; it is not easy to resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
Now when one is ill, overcome by illness, it is not easy to attend to the Buddhas’ teaching; it is not easy to resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
Now when one is old, overcome by old age, it is not easy to attend to the Buddhas’ teaching; it is not easy to resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
Now when there is a schism in the Saṅgha, it is not easy to attend to the Buddhas’ teaching; it is not easy to resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
Now which one are you?” 
Now while this exposition was being spoken, sixty bhikkhus vomited hot blood.
Now who will expound its meaning in detail?’
Then it occurred to them: “The Venerable Mahākaccāna is praised by the Teacher and esteemed by his wise fellow monks; he is capable of expounding the detailed meaning of this brief synopsis.
Now who will expound its meaning in detail?”
Then it occurred to them: “The Venerable Ānanda is praised by the Teacher and esteemed by his wise fellow monks; he is capable of expounding the detailed meaning of this brief synopsis.
Now, because he harbored resentment against Sāriputta and Moggallāna, the bhikkhu Kokālika has been reborn in the red-lotus hell.”
Now, bhikkhus, as to that great hell:
Now, if you wish, you may go to the Blessed One himself and ask him about the meaning of this.
Now, if you wish, you may go to the Blessed One himself and ask him about the meaning of this.
Now, Potaliya, which among these four kinds of persons seems to you the most excellent and sublime?”
O bhikkhus, and for seven eonsof dissolution and evolution,I did not come back again to this world.
Observe the difference.’
Of the five lower fetters taught by the Blessed One, I don’t see any that I haven’t abandoned.”
Of the four establishments of mindfulness … the noble eightfold path.
Of the four establishments of mindfulness … the noble eightfold path.
Of the four establishments of mindfulness, the four right strivings, the four bases for psychic potency, the five spiritual faculties, the five powers, the seven factors of enlightenment, and the noble eightfold path.
Of the four establishments of mindfulness, the four right strivings, the four bases for psychic potency, the five spiritual faculties, the five powers, the seven factors of enlightenment, and the noble eightfold path.
Of these eight bases of overcoming, this is the foremost, namely, that one not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, white ones, white in color with a white hue, with a white tint, and having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see.’
There are beings who are percipient in such a way.
Of these five kinds of miserliness, the vilest is miserliness with regard to the Dhamma.”
Of these four lights, the light of wisdom is foremost.”
Of these four luminaries, wisdom is foremost.”
Of these four lusters, the luster of wisdom is foremost.”
Of these four modes of perception, this is the foremost, namely, when, ‘There is nothing,’ one perceives the base of nothingness.
Of these four modes of practice, this is the foremost, namely, practice that is pleasant with quick direct knowledge.
Of these four radiances, the radiance of wisdom is foremost.”
Of these four splendors, the splendor of wisdom is foremost.”
Of these ten kasiṇa bases, this is the foremost, namely, when one perceives the consciousness kasiṇa above, below, across, undivided, measureless.
Of these ten, the foremost, the best, the preeminent, the supreme, and the finest is the one enjoying sensual pleasures who seeks wealth righteously, without violence, and having obtained it, makes himself happy and pleased; and shares the wealth and does meritorious deeds; and uses that wealth without being tied to it, infatuated with it, and blindly absorbed in it, seeing the danger in it and understanding the escape.
Of these three wonders, which appeals to you as the most excellent and sublime?”
Of these two kinds of accumulation, the accumulation of the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of assemblies, the assembly of the foremost is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of assemblies, the assembly of the noble is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of assemblies, the assembly that acts in accordance with the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of assemblies, the assembly that speaks Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of assemblies, the assembly that values the good Dhamma, not worldly things, is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of assemblies, the assembly trained in interrogation, not in vain talk, is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of assemblies, the cream of an assembly is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of assemblies, the deep assembly is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of assemblies, the harmonious assembly is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of assemblies, the righteous assembly is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of assistance, assistance with the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of compassion, compassion shown with the Dhamma is foremost.” 
Of these two kinds of enjoyment, the enjoyment of the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of expansion, expansion in the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of gems, the gem of the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of generosity, generosity with the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of gifts to present to a guest, the gift of the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of gifts, the gift of the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of growth, growth in the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of happiness, mental happiness is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of happiness, noble happiness is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of happiness, spiritual happiness is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of happiness, the happiness based on equanimity is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of happiness, the happiness based on the absence of rapture is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of happiness, the happiness based on the formless is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of happiness, the happiness of concentration is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of happiness, the happiness of equanimity is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of happiness, the happiness of one who has gone forth is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of happiness, the happiness of renunciation is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of happiness, the happiness without acquisitions is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of happiness, the happiness without rapture is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of happiness, the happiness without taints is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of hospitality, hospitality with the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of munificence, munificence with the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of offerings, the offering of the Dhamma is foremost.” 
Of these two kinds of quest, the quest for the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of relinquishment, relinquishment the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of search, the search for the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of seeking, seeking for the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of sharing, sharing the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of success, success relating to the Dhamma is foremost.” 
Of these two kinds of veneration, veneration with the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two kinds of wealth, the wealth of the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of these two ways, sustaining a favorable relationship with the Dhamma is foremost.”
Of those accomplished in view, five gain the goal here in this world; five gain the goal having left this world.
Of those accomplished in view, the former five gain the goal here in this world; the latter five gain the goal having left this world.”
Of those four, the one that is the most excellent and sublime is the one who speaks dispraise of someone who deserves dispraise, and the dispraise is accurate, truthful, and timely; and who also speaks praise of someone who deserves praise, and the praise is accurate, truthful, and timely.
Of those four, the one that seems to me the most excellent and sublime is the one who does not speak dispraise of someone who deserves dispraise, though the dispraise would be accurate, truthful, and timely; and who does not speak praise of someone who deserves praise, though the praise would be accurate, truthful, and timely.
Of those four, the one that seems to me the most excellent and sublime is the one who speaks dispraise of someone who deserves dispraise, and the dispraise is accurate, truthful, and timely; and who also speaks praise of someone who deserves praise, and the praise is accurate, truthful, and timely.
Of those stream-enterers, five gain the goal here in this world; five gain the goal having left this world.
Of those stream-enterers, the former five gain the goal here in this world; the latter five gain the goal having left this world.”
Of those who proclaim supreme nibbāna in this very life, this is the foremost, namely, emancipation through non-clinging after one has seen as they really are the origin and passing away, the gratification, danger, and escape in regard to the six bases for contact.
Of those who proclaim supreme purification, this is the foremost, namely, by completely surmounting the base of nothingness, one enters and dwells in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
Oh, that I might attain the human state!
Oh, that these five hundred bhikkhus could obtain at will, without trouble or difficulty, the unsurpassed bliss of liberation!’ Then, Ānanda, dwelling each alone, withdrawn, heedful, ardent, and resolute, in no long time those five hundred bhikkhus realized for themselves with direct knowledge, in this very life, that unsurpassed consummation of the spiritual life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the household life into homelessness, and having entered upon it, they dwelled in it.
Oh, what happiness!’ Getting to hear that sound is the foremost kind of hearing.
On a later occasion the Venerable Citta Hatthisāriputta gave up the training and returned to the lower life.
On a second occasion, a number of well-known Licchavis had assembled in the meeting hall and were sitting together speaking in many ways in praise of the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha….
On a third occasion, a number of well-known Licchavis had assembled in the meeting hall and were sitting together speaking in many ways in praise of the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha.
On account of his broken teeth, grey hair, and wrinkled skin?
On account of his wealth, because of his wealth, by reason of his wealth, could that man experience exclusively happiness for one night or one day, or for half a night or half a day?”
On one occasion a number of elder bhikkhus were dwelling at Bārāṇasī in the deer park at Isipatana.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Bhaggas at Suṃsumāragira, in the deer park at Bhesakalā Grove.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Bhaggas at Suṃsumāragira, in the deer park at Bhesakalā Grove.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Bhaggas in Suṃsumāragira in the deer park at Bhesakalā Grove.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Bhaggas in Suṃsumāragira in the deer park at Bhesakalā Grove.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Bhaggas in Suṃsumāragira in the deer park at Bhesakalā Grove.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Koliyans near the Koliyan town named Kakkarapatta.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Koliyans near the Koliyan town named Sajjanela.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Kurus near the Kuru town named Kammāsadamma.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Magadhans at Andhakavinda.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Mallas near the Mallan town named Uruvelakappa.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Sakyans at Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Sakyans at Sāmagāmaka near the lotus pond.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Vajjis at Bhaṇḍagāma.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling among the Vajjis at Hatthigāma.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Bhaddiya in the Jātiyā Grove.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Bhoganagara near the Ānanda Shrine.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Bārāṇasī in the deer park at Isipatana.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Bārāṇasī in the deer park at Isipatana.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Bārāṇasī in the deer park at Isipatana.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Campā on a bank of the Gaggarā Lotus Pond.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Campā on a bank of the Gaggārā Lotus Pond.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Campā on a bank of the Gaggārā Lotus Pond.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Campā on a bank of the Gaggārā Lotus Pond.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Cālikā on Mount Cālikā.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Gayā on Gayāsīsa.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Kajaṅgalā in the Bamboo Grove.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Kimbilā in a nicula grove.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Kimbilā in a nicula grove.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Kimbilā in a nicula grove.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Kusinārā between the twin sal trees in the sal-tree grove of the Mallas at Upavattana, on the occasion of his final nibbāna.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Kusinārā, in the Baliharaṇa forest thicket.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Kusinārā, in the forest thicket of oblations.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Nādika in the brick hall.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Nādika in the brick hall.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Nādika in the brick hall.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Nādika in the brick hall.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Nādika in the brick hall.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Nādika in the brick hall.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Pāvā in the mango grove of Cunda, the smith’s son.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha at the wanderers’ park, the peacock sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha at the wanderers’ park, the peacock sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha in Jīvaka’s mango grove.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrel sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrel sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrel sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrel sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha on Mount Vulture Peak not long after Devadatta had left.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha on Mount Vulture Peak soon after Devadatta had left.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha on Mount Vulture Peak.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha on Mount Vulture Peak.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha on Mount Vulture Peak.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha on Mount Vulture Peak.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha on Mount Vulture Peak.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha on Mount Vulture Peak.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha on Mount Vulture Peak.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha on Mount Vulture Peak.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha on Mount Vulture Peak.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha on Mount Vulture Peak.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha on Mount Vulture Peak.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāketa in the Tikaṇḍakī Grove.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāketa, at Kāḷaka’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī at Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī at Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Migāramātā’s Mansion in the Eastern Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Migāramātā’s Mansion in the Eastern Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Migāramātā’s Mansion in the Eastern Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Migāramātā’s Mansion in the Eastern Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Migāramātā’s Mansion in the Eastern Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Migāramātā’s Mansion in the Eastern Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī, in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Verañjā at the foot of Naḷeru’s neem tree.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Verañjā at the foot of Naḷeru’s neem tree.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī at the Gotamaka Shrine.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī at the Sārandada Shrine.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in Ambapālī’s Grove.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the Great Wood in the hall with the peaked roof.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood together with a number of very well-known elder disciples: the Venerable Cāla, the Venerable Upacāla, the Venerable Kakkaṭa, the Venerable Kaṭimbha, the Venerable Kaṭa, the Venerable Kaṭissaṅga, and other very well-known elder disciples.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Vesālī in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Āḷavī at the Aggāḷava Shrine.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Āḷavī at the Aggāḷava Shrine.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Āḷavī on a heap of leaves spread out on a cow track in a siṃsapā grove.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling in Bārāṇasī at the deer park in Isipatana.
On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling in Rājagaha on Mount Vulture Peak.
On one occasion the Blessed One was traveling along the highway between Madhurā and Verañjā.
On one occasion the Blessed One was traveling along the highway between Ukkaṭṭhā and Setavya.
On one occasion the Blessed One was walking on tour among the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering on tour among the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of bhikkhus when he arrived at a Kosalan town named Daṇḍakappaka.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering on tour among the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of bhikkhus when he reached the Kosalan brahmin village named Icchānaṅgala.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering on tour among the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of bhikkhus when he reached the Kosalan brahmin village named Icchānaṅgala.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering on tour among the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of bhikkhus when he reached the Kosalan brahmin village named Icchānaṅgala.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering on tour among the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of bhikkhus when he reached the Kosalan brahmin village named Venāgapura.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering on tour among the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of bhikkhus when he reached the Kosalan town named Naḷakapāna.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering on tour among the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of bhikkhus when he reached the Kosalan town of Paṅkadhā.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering on tour among the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering on tour among the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering on tour among the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of monks when he reached the town of the Kālāmas named Kesaputta.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering on tour among the Kosalans when he reached Kapilavatthu.
On one occasion the Venerable Mahācunda was dwelling among the Cetis at Sahajāti.
On one occasion the Venerable Mahācunda was dwelling among the Cetis at Sahajāti.
On one occasion the Venerable Mahācunda was dwelling among the Cetis at Sahajāti.
On one occasion the Venerable Mahākaccāna was dwelling among the people of Avantī on Mount Pavatta at Kuraraghara.
On one occasion the Venerable Mahākaccāna was dwelling at Madhurā in Gundā’s Grove.
On one occasion the Venerable Mahākaccāna was dwelling at Varaṇā on a bank of the Kaddama Lake.
On one occasion the Venerable Mahākassapa was dwelling at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrel sanctuary.
On one occasion the Venerable Nandaka was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Migāramātā’s Mansion in the Eastern Park.
On one occasion the Venerable Nārada was dwelling at Pāṭaliputta at the Cock’s Park.
On one occasion the Venerable Sāriputta and the Venerable Candikāputta were dwelling at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrel sanctuary.
On one occasion the Venerable Sāriputta and the Venerable Mahāmoggallāna were wandering on tour in Dakkhiṇāgiri together with a large Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
On one occasion the Venerable Sāriputta was dwelling among the Magadhans at Nālakagāmaka.
On one occasion the Venerable Sāriputta was dwelling among the Magadhans at Nālakagāmaka.
On one occasion the Venerable Sāriputta was dwelling at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrel sanctuary.
On one occasion the Venerable Sāriputta was dwelling at Rājagaha on Mount Vulture Peak.
On one occasion the Venerable Uttara was dwelling at Mahisavatthu, in Dhavajālikā on Mount Saṅkheyya.
On one occasion the Venerable Ānanda was dwelling among the Koliyans near the Koliyan town named Sāpūga.
On one occasion the Venerable Ānanda was dwelling at Kosambi in Ghosita’s Park.
On one occasion the Venerable Ānanda was dwelling at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park.
On one occasion the Venerable Ānanda was dwelling at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park.
On one occasion the Venerable Ānanda was dwelling at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park.
On one occasion the Venerable Ānanda was dwelling at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park.
On one occasion the Venerable Ānanda was dwelling at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park.
On one occasion the Venerable Ānanda was dwelling at Rājagaha in the Hot Springs Park.
On one occasion the Venerable Ānanda was dwelling at Vesālī in the hall with the peaked roof in the Great Wood.
On one occasion the Venerable Ānanda was living at Beluvagāmaka near Vesālī.
On that account taints productive of painful feeling might flow in upon a person in some future life.”
