"The two kinds of latent forces" are also similar  . Every single defilement has two principles . Discriminated  are the primitive latent forces that produce the panorama of phenomena generated from defilement. They have names but no essence . 
The discriminator is the essence of defilement. It also exists but is not absolute . It is the nature of dependence . 
However, what we have explained here as the discriminated  and  dependence are named differently in  the Three States of Insubstantiality  . 
The nature of discrimination is called "the categories for aspects," and the nature of dependence is called "the primitive  ." 51 If one considers the nature of discrimination as having an essence, having categories for aspects, and producing the panorama of phenomena of all defilements, we say that this is called defilement. 
The nature of dependence is the essence of defilement. Because it can bring about the retribution of life and death  it is called primitive . 
Now because we explain here the nature of discrimination as the categories of aspects and the primitive manifestation , we call it primitive . 
The nature of dependence can be attached to the previous category of aspects and is thus called "aspects ." Each  has its own meaning. 
If one wishes to turn to these meanings,  the Three States of Insubstantiality has acceptable terminology. Theory of Three Natures ] The text says: 
"Whatever is discrimination: if one discriminates this or that kind of thing, these kinds of things are · called the nature of discrimination."  These only have names, but the essence  that the name indicates does not really exist. 
52  The essence  that is indicated  does not really exist; this discrimination is generated contingent upon others . 53 Therefore it is called the nature of dependence . 
Both natures are inseparable; this is identical to the nature of the absolute . 
If they were separable from each other, then the principle of Consciousness-Only would not be upheld, because sense objects would be different from consciousness. 
Because they are inseparable, there is Consciousness-Only without an objective world . Because there is no objective world, consciousness also does not exist. Because the sense object does not exist, and neither does consciousness, the principle of ConsciousnessOnly is established . This being then established, therefore the former nature  are neither identical to nor different from each other. 
If one posits their identity or difference, then there is an error. 
If the nature of discrimination is posited as identical to the nature of dependence, then the nature of discrimination would never exist nor could it include the five sets  . 
54 The nature of dependence could never exist either. If this were the case, then there could be no life or death, liberation, good or evil, morality or discipline . 
This cannot be . Therefore, since this is not the case, the nature of discrimination and the nature of dependence are not to be posited as identical. 
If one posits that they are different, then given the nature of discrimination, one could not dispense with the nature of dependence . 
This follows because, if we view the nature of discrimination as devoid of existence, then and only then will we see that the nature of dependence is also devoid of existence . Therefore, we are not to posit that they are different. 
Moreover, if the nature of discrimination is posited as being164 different from the nature of dependence, then the essence of the nature of discrimination should be posited as existing, and one should not say that it never exists . 
Existence can be differentiated from nonexistence, but how can we discuss the difference? 
Therefore, we only say that they are neither identical nor different and cannot posit either identity or difference  . 55 [Verse XXlIb: 
] It is like impermanence  and conditioned phenomena. We also cannot posit that they are either identical or different. 
Impermanence means not existing either in the previous or in the succeeding moment. 
The five aggregates are conditioned phenomena. If impermanence and conditioned phenomena were posited as being identical, then if impermanence did not exist, all phenomena would not exist. 
Since they both  are not nonexistent, they are not to be posited as identical. 
If they are posited as different, then when one views the impermanent, one should not understand conditioned phenomena. Because they are understood, they are not to be posited as different. 
Thus, they are neither identical nor different. 
Thus, all phenomena are like this: the form  and the pot are neither identical nor different. 
If the form and the pot were posited as identical, then the form could not be a pot, but if the pot were truly real and if the form is maintained as different from the pot, then when one sees form one should not apprehend the pot. 
Therefore, they are not maintained as identical or different. 
These two sets of explanations  are similar in that [Verse XXIIc: ] if one does not view the nature of discrimination, then one does not view the nature of dependence. 56  Therefore, they are neither identical nor different. 
However, all phenomena have only three natures and are entirely included in these  . 
Theory of Three States of Insubstantiality or Naturelessnesses ]  The Tathagata, for the benefit of living beings, explained that all phenomena are devoid of a substantial nature . There are three kinds. 
The three natures were previously explained . 57  The first two are conventional truth. The third one is absolute truth. 
All phenomena are included in the two truths, conventional and absolute . 
The three states devoid of substantial natures are inseparable from the previously mentioned three natures . The nature o f discrimination i s called the state devoid of a substantial nature with respect to characteristics  58 because its characteristics have no essence . The nature of dependence is called the "state devoid of a substantial nature with respect to production"  59 because its essence with relation to causation does not exist  . The essence  appears as the aspect of matter. 
Since discrimination does not exist, the essence  does not exist. 
60 Since the causes do not exist either, the sense object, being derived from the nature of discrimination, can bring about effects on consciousness. 
If an objective world does not exist, what produces any effects? 
For example, seeds can produce a sprout. If the seed does not exist, how can a sprout emerge? 
Therefore, there is no production  The nature of the absolute is called "the state devoid of any substantial nature" with respect to the nature 62 [Exegesis: ] because it neither exists nor does not exist  . 
With reference to persons and phenomena, they are devoid of any substantial nature as existent things . With reference to these two Emptinesses  , they are devoid of any substantial nature as nonexistent things . Therefore, we deny both "the substantial nature of existence" and that of nonexistence and reiterate that this is referred to as "the state devoid of any substantial nature with respect to any nature"  . 
These three states devoid of substantial natures are the absolute reality 63 in all phenomena . [Exegesis: ] Because these are separate from existence, they are166 called permanent . 
In order to indicate these three states devoid of substantial natures, we explain the principle of Consciousness-Only. Supreme Knowledge ] [Verse XXVI: 
] Someone who cultivates the path to wisdom 64 but does not abide in the principle of Consciousness-Only has defilements produced by the propensities  of the twofold attachment  65 that have not been eliminated, [Exegesis: ] nor have their roots been eliminated . 
For this reason, one establishes the One Vehicle in which all are able to learn the Bodhisattva path . [Verse XXVII: 
] If one says: "there is only the existence of consciousness" based upon attachment to what is presented before him  , then since he has not yet eliminated this attachment  , he does not enter Consciousness-Only. 66 [Verse XXVIII: 
] If the cognizer , the two  are not manifeste d . 67 At that time the practitioner says: "I am entering Consciousness-Only. " [Exegesis: 
] This is called "nonapprehension 68  that is neither thought 69 nor sense object." This wisdom is called lithe transcendenFo wisdom devoid of  discrimination" [Exegesis: ] which means there is no differentiating between cognizer and sense objects . It is called the "wisdom of Suchness" and [Verse XXIXb : 
] also called lithe transformation  of the basis"  . [Exegesis : ] Therefore, one abandons the basis of life and death, based only upon the principle  . 
Gross  are the nature of discrimination, and the attachments  are the nature of dependence . 
These two kinds  are both ended. This is called the "realm devoid of outflows "  . This is called "the inconceivable ." 7! This is called "the absolutely real and good ." 72 This is called "the fruit that permanently abides ." 73 This is called "transcendent bliss," 74 "the body of liberation," 75 and the Dharmabody within the three bodies  . 
Commentary   "The defilements produced by the propensities of the twofold attachment  that have not been eliminated." -This signifies the defilements  the propensities of the two attachments  of Insight and by  Development, which can create seeds and produce unlimited defilements onto the mind; 76 
all take the fundamental consciousness  for their foundation. If the foundation is not yet eliminated, the branches will not end either. As the Srzmaladevz-sutra explains: "If the stage of ignorance is not absolutely eliminated, then the limitless four stages of abiding will not be absolutely eliminated." 77  "If the cognizer does not apprehend the object, the two  are not manifested ." The "sense objects" are the objects of Consciousness-Only; this is confusion concerning Consciousness-Only. Because there are no objects, there is  no consciousness. 
Since consciousness does not exist, the mind that apprehends Consciousness-Only as an object also does not exist. Therefore, it is said that "the two are not manifested." These two  only refer to two  consciousnesses presented with a sense object before them, but the sense ocject  before consciousness is already nonexistent. 
This is the culmination of the "Evolution of Consciousness." 

are completely steady,
“When that night was over, on the seventh morning, he went back into the capital city of Ratnāvatī.
that emptiness which is the emptiness of all phenomena is also empty of the emptiness of all phenomena because it does not endure and does not disintegrate.
But I did not attain forbearance In which there is no self, no sentient being, and no life force. “When I attained this forbearance That nobody dies or is born here, That the nature of all these phenomena is to be without self,
She thought, “This renunciant is still groggy from sleep. I shall return during the final watch.”
“ ‘Remaining in the Buddha’s scope of conduct, Rejecting all that is not that conduct,
and may a great rain of flowers be cast down by the devas who dwell in the sky.
If one offers 100,000 homas of lotuses,
“Holding many powders and ointments, And excellent parasols, banners, canopies, and flags,
the fetters binding them to the rebirth process completely severed,
He will see a full three hundred billion buddhas, Those with great power,
Moreover, Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings are endowed with two [other] attributes,
I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
Are they easy to guide? Are they easy to nurture? Do they wish for purity?
“What has become of his tīrthika community?”
Has had a hand destroyed, I also feel great suffering. {2}
You may ask the Thus-Gone One whatever you wish.
“Maitreya, such is the wheel of Dharma that the Thus-Gone One turns.
Friends, in the Deer Park at Ṛṣivadana by Vārāṇasī, the Blessed One has turned the wheel of Dharma in three phases with twelve aspects. He has turned the wheel of Dharma in a way that no mendicant or brahmin, and no god, māra, or Brahmā in the world could ever do in accord with the Dharma. He has done so for the benefit of many beings, for the happiness of many beings, out of love for the world, and for the welfare, benefit, and happiness of gods and humans. Hence,
Eighty thousand bhikṣuṇīs attained liberation of mind through the nonarising of defilements.
and been attentive to it in the correct manner, and so forth.
“Moreover, the transcendent perfection of wisdom does not enlarge physical forms, nor does it contract them.
We have obtained in the Buddha’s teaching This principal, immaculate, chief result.
Lord, I remember one day when,
“The thus-gone ones feel great compassion for sentient beings since all phenomena are free of bewilderment and yet sentient beings are bewildered.
those worn out by the road, those with debilitating digestive disorders,
“The four immaterial aggregates emerging together with consciousness, along with physical form, is what is meant by ‘consciousness causes name and form.’
He was without any stinginess when it came to teaching the Dharma.
From now on we will not act like rākṣasīs, and we will keep the upāsikā vows.’ In this way the rākṣasīs took vows.
even though that wind element itself,
After seeing many, endless buddhas.
They are characterized by being irreversible, and have acceptance of the profound.
Son of noble family, through these five instructions will one attain the absorption that encapsulates all merit.
Still other palaces were made of those gems worn by Śakra.
They will think, ‘By relying on a guru, virtuous qualities will increase and negative qualities will fade.’
The Tathāgata sees the stages of meaning in all the dharmas.
“You have realized the nature of things with certainty, You have taught the meaning in words that end suffering.
All entities are impermanent. So, one should cultivate the clear understanding of non-attachment to anything whatsoever.
Know all conditioned phenomena to be impermanent and like illusions.
and so on, up to and including [notions of] experiencers and experiencing subjects, might abandon these views,
“Young brahmins, clearly something troubles you.”
One will excel in being able to remember whatever one hears.
“What is employing designations? It is the knowledge of speaking.
“Your Majesty, get my son back quickly.”
On this day the seed has been planted, And on this day the fruit has been produced.’
A full awakening will happen within a moment
in any event, you should not squander this transcendent perfection of wisdom.
appeared in the kingdom of King Mahābala.
Voidness does not result from the destruction of matter,
will come from our various buddhafields to spread far and wide this enlightenment of the perfect Buddha, the Tathāgata.
Some time afterwards, the householder’s wife conceived a child.
not on nature or symbolic conventions—that the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas are brought to understand that all things are uncreated.
No conceptions arise in him, He naturally has no conceptions about women. {215}
“The assembled beings each returned to their own dwelling places,
"རིགས་ཀྱི་བུ་འདི་ལ་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་དེ་འདི་<tNoble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
and I myself was speechless.
Tejovibhu and Tejaviniścita, Tejasvarendra and Suvighuṣṭatejas, {19}
“Śāriputra, those beings who are wise will believe in the Tathāgata, the father of the world.
Su­bhūti, all uncontaminated phenomena are signless,
In this way, they can recollect many of their own past lives and those of other sentient beings, and other individuals, along with their circumstances and locations. Yet, they do not make assumptions on account of this extrasensory power, and so on.
before crying out, “That thief has been here! He has killed my mother and fled!”
are heirs of the Buddha,
As they get up, they develop the motivation, ‘I shall cause all beings to rise above the occurrence of affliction.’
Furthermore, Bhadrapāla, beings who are born in the realm of hell, although they may indeed eat food, do not derive any pleasure from it at all.
“Billions of gods Scattered a beautiful rain Of a million flowers, powders, Incense, and clothing.
Similarly, Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings have achieved and maintain a state of mind that is imbued with loving kindness, compassion, empathetic joy and equanimity,
“Su­bhūti! It will not!” “Then is enlightenment attained by means of a path that is not cultivated?”
“In the same way, the ear is empty of a self and what belongs to a self;
And the royal family line will be interrupted.
Until I am rid of the suffering and bondage in the realms of gods and demigods,
He will make beautiful stūpas of precious materials Together with victory banners for those supreme jinas.
Or a bee may also,
Venerable Lord! This transcendent perfection of wisdom is profound.
will for my sake have created a high, vast temple made of red sandalwood, with thirty-two mansions that have eight floors, as a residence for a thousand bhikṣus, with gardens beautified by flowers, with groves that have walkways, with beds and seats, filled with food and drink—hard food and soft food—and medicine for when there is illness, and adorned with things that bring happiness.
We have come to pay homage to the Jina
and they will not be separated from the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, and the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
There dwells the guide Amitāyus, The one who is the leader of beings.
and the element of consciousness animates different bodies.
With big heads, necks like bows, Wizened, hunchbacked, and with gourd-shaped bellies
no rousing them, no making to rouse them,
Noble son, those who lack logical reasoning will fail to establish proofs, but not those who possess infinite proofs.
The wise, in this world of the living, Avoid misdeeds.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain the four great brahmavihāras.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ skill in dispelling lingering regrets.
and you should be satisfied with the answers to your questions.”
The target will become enthralled.
This is the heart essence of Tārā: Oṃ kurukulle hrīḥ hūṃ svāhā This is the mantra.
nor are [the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path, discerned;
with such mental joy they separate from desire as well as from negative and unvirtuous qualities.
Some of them arrived together with a quintillion apsaras, uncountable and beyond conception, singing and playing musical instruments while they sat in jeweled palaces.
“Now that Puṣya is present, this is the perfect time to leave.
“ ‘He possessed the Dharma treasure of the guides, And he was a lamp for a world in darkness.
Noble ones, the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas have inconceivable power.
for those who have entered the path to enlightenment, like a chariot;
They will see in their bodies all the beings
They went before the King of Aṅga and said,
whether they observe the discipline or not,
They conceive of the unreal as being real And the real as being unreal. {16}
Present also were hundreds of thousands of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas.
his was my family, this was my caste, this was my color, this was the food that I ate,
However, right then they saw Chanda trailing behind the god, leading the horse Kaṇṭhaka and carrying the Bodhisattva’s ornaments.
the love that is high resolve because it is without passions;
That, Mañjuśrī, is what is called the practice of bodhisattva mahāsattvas.
In that respect, what is non-division,
you show them how all beings are like a dream, an illusion, a mirage, And impermanent, unstable, and momentary.
Children of noble family, no beings are beings.
Buddharakṣita, a wealthy householder with much riches and goods who lived in Śrāvastī,
Then Senior Su­bhūti, knowing in his own mind the thoughts of Senior Śāradvatī­putra, addressed Senior Śāradvatī­putra as follows:
Inappropriateness is a stain and a flaw in relation to diligence.
They will cause harm, be hypocritical and dishonest— Yet they will say, ‘I am going to be a buddha.’ {41}
were they to move all the dust in that way So that this world realm would become vacant And all that dust would have been taken away,
who has four arms and is white like the autumn moon.
In this regard, the ‘pointing upwards of his body hairs’ means that the hair that grows from his head and the hairs of his body point upwards and finely grow, bluish black in color, all curling softly into rings, lustrous and curling to the right.
The transcendent perfection of ethical discipline is pure, owing to the purity of the transcendent perfection of tolerance.
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, Whenever I saw people who were very poor, Who were in distress and suffering because of their need, I freed them from their poverty. {62}
to show the path to those whose roots of virtue have ripened and who are suitable recipients,
“The body of beings has many cavities and transforms into old age and death.
In that realm there appeared the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Prabhūtaratna.
One should, in turn, kill Yellow Acala.
It is in the same way that the element of consciousness, through possessing merit, assumes a body that then gives it sovereign power,
They know the motivations and conduct of other beings And they know what should be said to them.
how should they train to be reborn in the god realms of [the other sense fields of the world system of formlessness], up to and including the sense field of neither perception nor non-perception, and
never being shaken by demons,
You could not hear those words of mine, But other than that I did not pass into nirvāṇa.
Their gardens will be the hells. Their homes will be the lower realms.
If this is an opportune moment for the Blessed One to grant me answers to some questions of mine, may I put them to the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha?
He was accompanied by the music of five hundred other gandharvas holding musical instruments.
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is generosity.”
“Young man, there is nothing in the endless, infinite worlds that the Tathāgata does not know,
When he said the letter sa, out came the statement: ‘Attaining the perfect awakening to omniscient wisdom (sarva­jña­jñānābhisaṃ­bodhana).’
noble son, those beings will have happiness.”
“Su­bhūti, physical forms are neither fettered by nor liberated from their present circumstances.
Such a person is referred to as irreversible.
remaining keenly mindful of virtuous qualities, they proceed to collect alms.
Surrounded and escorted by an infinite number of bodhisattvas,
Then Māra, the evil one, approached the Thus-Gone One and said,
“Oṃ vajrapāṇi tiṣṭha hūṃ. “That is the mantra for stabilizing enlightened mind.
Su­bhūti, it is because the natural expression of their present circumstances, though without entity, is still consciousness [and the other aggregates].
Here, the eye functions as the basis for the eye consciousness.
who then teaches those ārya warriors this kind of Dharma teaching, which is contrary to the world, which is not believed in by the world, which has previously not been expounded, which has previously not been taught.
without a sentient being,
This completes the eighth chapter from “The Transcendent Perfection of Wisdom in Ten Thousand Lines,” entitled “Maturity.”
or experience tactile objects with their bodies.
Likewise I was not separated from the emptiness of internal phenomena and the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities.
And I, full of astonishment, having saluted this good man by touching his feet with my head,
Have you not heard before That the one whose body blazes with all the marks And who walks away from his home Will conquer disturbing emotions and attain awakening?
Having eaten that food, there arose in the bodies of those bodhisattvas, disciples, Śakras, Brahmās, Lokapālas, and other living beings, a bliss just like the bliss of the bodhisattvas of the universe Sarva­sukha­pratimaṇḍita.
As I saw the omens foretelling the previous sages, I see the very same signs in you.
“It is awakening, because in this way one realizes emptiness, no-sign, no-wish; no-effort, no-dwelling, no coming about; no object of apprehension and no-abode.
Similarly, the applications of mindfulness are empty,
What are these five?
Why is that? Bhagavān, in this assembly there are many hundreds of beings, many thousands of beings,
They are free from thinking or examining, and possess inner serenity.
Similarly, Su­bhūti, this supreme vehicle has also neither decrease nor increase, and diminutions are non-apprehensible.
the inconceivably numerous families of wisdom concerning the kleśas,
“Blessed One, the thus-gone ones, the foe-destroyers, the completely perfect buddhas, are said to possess the marks of one hundred merits.
They think, ‘Through these roots of virtue and this offering of the Dharma,
“Friends,” he said, “you should be aware of this.
Son of a noble family, the basis-of-all in its pure state is mirror-like wisdom, the dharmakāya
Have seen me and have seen you,
They should cultivate a state of equanimity with respect to all sentient beings
There is no cessation in the knowledge of a word— That is the nature of cessation. {107}
and in the same vein, this mind [of the bodhisattvas] is unattached to [the other sense organs], up to and including the mental faculty.
followed the Bhagavān into homelessness, and they all became dedicated to the highest, complete enlightenment and became dharmabhāṇakas.
a massive cloud formation appeared,
Thus I will share with you their import.”
It is hard to make your bed in distant forests, at the foot of mountains, and in remote places.
“Venerable Lord,” he asked, “how should great bodhisattva beings then train in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, and
to each of those stūpas.
it is like a heavenly palace, with terraces, balconies, architraves, skylights, cool pavilions, multistoried buildings, and palaces.
“King Jñānabala then recited these verses to his daughter:
who are indolent,
When the king sees his warriors battling, he is delighted, pleased, and overjoyed because of those warriors.
the Bodhisattva had always and continuously been without any need to rely on others. He was his own master with regard to worldly concerns, as well as those that go beyond the world.
“Śāriputra, a tathāgata appears in this world for that one deed and one action, for that one great deed and one great action, and with that one intention.
Where the saṅgha of the lamp of the world, The Lord of jinas, would sit. {xix}
Jāmika is in the form of a horse.
and so no one else experiences Śāriputra’s actions and accumulations for themselves.
there he runs into misfortune. He undergoes great difficulties and hardship in his search for food and clothing.
Jeweled utensils clanged without being touched.
Repeatedly making gifts To the buddhas and śrāvakas,
Because the bhikṣu meditators are holy,
unexcelled,
they do not investigate the notions that physical forms are a self or not a self, empty or not empty, with signs or signless, having aspirations or lacking aspirations, calm or not calm, void or not void, and so on.
and similarly, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness cannot be appropriated.
They eliminate all the convictions of the māras, and they manifest relativity.
“I shall establish you well in this. None of you should have any doubt.
‘No one at all should do anything That is displeasing to my teacher.’ {65}
Nor should a monk of two years, nor a monk of three years, nor a monk of four years,
should he too travel the realm without a reliable instructor?” “Upāli, he should not travel the realm without a reliable instructor.
The bodhisattva who enters this Dharma-door
For the sake of many beings, for the benefit of many beings, for the happiness of many beings, and with compassion for the world,
to have discernment of sensations;
“Reverend, when the Blessed One was born, the Blessed One was destined to become king of the world.
Those who were fixated on objects and were attached to a self Did not approve of the bhikṣu’s teaching. {54}
nor is the noble eightfold path other than emptiness. The nature of the noble eightfold path is indeed emptiness
Once the sages had praised the Bodhisattva with these verses, they circumambulated him three times and returned to the sky.
for it enables one to retain everything said by the Buddha.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is a field of virtuous application.
It is the joy of serving those of equal fortune, of not hating or resenting those of superior fortune, of serving the spiritual benefactors, and of avoiding sinful friends.
‘Guide, these airborne palaces of ours Today were beautified through your power.
Free from desire, they are liberated.
From your lack of concern
Sitting cross-legged on that Dharma seat,
Why is that? Ajita, that noble man or noble woman will have made an offering to my body,
extending from the Catur­mahā­rāja­kāyika realm as far as the Pure Abodes, have congregated here,
“Moreover Su­bhūti, the future and the present are pure, owing to the purity of the past.
They are holders of the precious orange Dharma robes And they are constantly happy in homelessness.
O gods, this doctrine is profound owing to the profundity of the sensory element of the ears, the sensory element of sounds, and the sensory element of auditory consciousness.
there will be no loss of meaning or words and all their words will come forth as those of the Buddha.”
while from her mouth wafts the fragrance of utpala flowers.
Śāriputra, it is because they cannot be designated as men or women.
Those various places are completely pure
“He is called the one who abides in great love,
There are many hundreds of mountains within that pore.
Noble son, people are ordained in various orders and are ordained in the various garments of those seeking liberation,
It is just as you have said.
Mañjuśrī, what are bodhisattvas, who are free from evil and beyond reproach, like?
Human beings are continually thinking about transitory things, about acquisitions, about great pleasures, about male and female slaves, servants, and hired workers, about costly clothes, beds, and seats, about valuable treasures, riches, stores of grain, and storerooms, about sons and daughters, and about wives and parents.
Yet when sentient beings, whom previous victorious ones took under their care,
When karmic formations cease, consciousness ceases.
Countless hundreds of thousands of beings All gained certainty in the Buddha’s wisdom. {88}
My son is not enthralled By family or caste;
Similarly, they do not consider any feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, or consciousness in which they should have confidence.
Others had hair like oxen, donkeys, boars, mongooses, goats, sheep, cats, monkeys, wolves, or jackals.
She is worthy of being the mother of the Great Sage.
On the other hand, Kāśyapa, it is as being like the entire earth filled with crops that you should see,
I then asked him,
“At that moment the entire world shook. There was then this wonder and marvel:
and in the same vein, anything that enhances or diminishes [all those other attributes], up to and including buddhahood, cannot be an outcome of the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
at that time do they eradicate anything at all that is conditioned or unconditioned?”
place the crown on his head, and sprinkle him as before.
I constantly offer and venerate, unceasingly until the end of time, all of the Three Jewels that have not been, are not now, nor ever will be relinquished. I make Dharma offerings, as well as a variety of offerings comparable to the incomparable, that arise from the infinite merit of the bodhisattvas, and are exalted, foremost, holy, special, noble, supreme and unsurpassable, comparable to the incomparable, and that completely fill the entire world of the ten directions.
another bodhisattva might establish a single sentient being in the result of an arhat.
“They will not ruin their correct conduct Even for the sake of their life.
Those who write a single letter from the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, will have happiness and
Thus all the twelve thousand pure gods, beautifully ornamented with jeweled crowns, Excellently comported, and with their lovely hair flowing, Quickly traveled to the supreme city of Kapilavastu And stood before the king’s gate.
and two to play with him.
“Gods, this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom has the defining characteristic of emptiness.
What can be said of the nature of woman
The Blessed Buddha was resident at the Jetavana, Anāthapiṇḍada’s grove near Śrāvastī,
This is the heart mantra of the venerable Vāgīśvara.
“Venerable Lord! We shall always guard and shelter those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who accept, affirm, maintain, recite, and explain this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, demonstrating it extensively to others and attending to it in the correct manner, and who are never separated from the mind endowed with omniscience.
“They know the numerous properties of having the kleśas, And in the same way they know the aspect of purification.
Take śirīṣa flowers, the apāmārga plant, Kaṭaka fruit, aloeswood,
At each palace five hundred guardsmen walked up and down the staircase.
“Avalokiteśvara, it is like this.
Śakra, king of the devas, and the Trāyastriṃśa devas Came with hundreds of millions of apsarases
Also all of the followers of a jina, Those beings who listen to his Dharma, And having heard it are overjoyed.
Monks, what is this old path, this old route, this old trail which seers of old have traveled and traversed?
one will be able to remember Everything that one has learned.
You went to the supreme Bodhimaṇḍa that is not very far from the city of Gayā.
because the natural expression of their past limits, though without entity, is still omniscience [and the rest].
the bodhisattva Pradānaśūra, the bodhisattva Ratnacandra,
“What is this loud noise coming from the ladies’ apartments?”
Divine being, such is the knowledge of bodhisattvas.
[How can] they become free of desire to possess anything?
Reflecting that the Śākya clan would flourish and become supreme,
They will be able to apply to the Dharma all of the world’s languages, incantations, and mundane terminology.
Here, having acquired love, I vanquished The armies of persistent demon hordes With disfigured shapes, bearing the highest crests On chariots mighty with elephants and horses.
In short, when the Bodhisattva, who is more exalted than anyone in all the worlds, came into this world,
Prosperity, however, ends with its decline.
Later, as he was dying, he made this prayer:
In this manner the universal monarch comes to possess the precious steward.
the samādhi named Divine Bright Earrings,
Conducting themselves in the emptiness of all things,
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, the past limits of physical forms are neither fettered nor liberated.
(7) The Blessed One is endowed with inconspicuous ankle bones.
“Excellent, my son. You should do just that,
and cures the body’s poisons, the diseases derived from the four great elements.
Siṃhavāhinī (She Who Rides upon a Lion)
‘Reverend Aniruddha, you have been proclaimed by the Buddha to be the foremost among those who possess the divine eye.
It transcends all objects of the mind. Does the Jina teach this samādhi?
No-sign is the basis.
“Venerable Lord! By means of what is it said that great bodhisattva beings who have entered upon the Great Vehicle, ride upon the Great Vehicle?”
What is an instructor who inquires into confidential matters? He is one who delves into private matters.
By becoming golden, stone no longer appears.
“The light of the sun and moon Shines equally upon humans, Both those with qualities and the sinful,
“For the limitless wisdom of the Buddha Is as vast as the sky.
carried their goods to the ocean in carts, on poles, in baskets and hampers, and on camels, bullocks, and donkeys.
Right livelihood is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
The qualities of a bodhisattva who engages in this diligence
They do not give with the arrogance and haughtiness of the wealthy.
In this way he was unstained by any impurities of the womb, which otherwise are said to stain everyone else.
die among animals and are reborn among humans.
They will not fall away from the state of Śakra, while at the same time conscientiously striving for awakening, and wishing only to behold the buddhas.
I am cultivating wisdom!
pacified from within.
e praise you, Victorious One, tamer of disturbing emotions, and foremost being.
“Thus, these Dharma discourses are endowed with many positive properties. They are like the great maṇi jewel.
In what could emancipation possibly be attained?
Venerable Lord! For what reason is omniscience neither created nor conditioned?
Such understanding of the five compulsive aggregates and the knowledge of them as such by means of gnosis is the entrance into nonduality.”
and taught the Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma, first to the bodhisattva Varaprabha.
They were beautified by strings of jewels. They were decorated with flower garlands.
Disturbed and driven by their wants, They are draped in intestine garlands.
and having emanated [that form] then induce it to undertake the activities of an arhat,
nor will one who has not cultivated the path attain the fruit.
Similarly, they have a view concerning the eyes, and in the same vein, they have a view concerning [the other sense organs], up to and including the mental faculty.
These childish beings are impaled, like a criminal on the tip of a stake.
The kiṃnaras relax in those celestial palaces
She is attractive, with lips as red as the bimba fruit, a tapered neck bedecked with jewelry,
“When you departed from the Heaven of Joy, you exhausted all unfortunate states;
The Blessed One then replied to Senior Su­bhūti as follows:
“The formation of the five aggregates born from such actions is what is meant by ‘becoming causes birth.’
When he saw this, the Bodhisattva turned to the charioteer and asked him the following, even though he already knew the answer:
We would offer it all to you. May you use it according to your wishes!
space would neither be diminished even when it is not eulogized, nor would it be enhanced even when it is eulogized,
Nor do formations think, ‘We are produced by ignorance,’
On the fifth ground, bodhisattvas achieve excellent realization of all the Dharma, thereby attaining the body of Dharma.
He proceeded to observe freedom from desire, observe its cessation, and observe and abide by its utter abandonment.
Su­bhūti, there is!
I will definitely practice generosity by relinquishing sovereignty over the four continents and Jambudvīpa, as well as its kingdoms!’
Without developing any craving or attachments with respect to the temple,
‘Giving away one’s ears and nose represents the bodhisattvas’ perfection of unimpaired sense faculties. Therefore,
And as for the bodhisattvas, when they hear this inconceivable liberation they should be as joyful as a young crown prince when he takes the diadem and is anointed, and they should increase to the utmost their devotion to this inconceivable liberation.
From grasping arises becoming, which is entry into the womb.
Having offered various kinds of delicious divine foods and sprinkled the area with scented water,
“They purify a buddha realm. Their realm is inconceivable.
“My dear sir, I do. I do not care for this place.”
would have the good fortune to attain the fruit of entering the stream, the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth, the fruit of no longer being subject to rebirth, or arhatship?”
the one who teaches a Dharma that is without strife, and the one who grants consecration into omniscient wisdom.
And also his other relatives, Numbering seventy-five quintillion. {52}
Are today in uncertainty, Wondering what the Jina is saying. {25}
Since he has his mind set on deliverance, he will uproot birth, old age, and death. He is wellborn and will bring beings to awakening.
“If a preceptor or an instructor were to incur a transgression requiring saṅgha intervention,
Bodhisattvas, similarly, are never late when it comes to ripening sentient beings who are to be trained.
The Lord Buddha was in residence in the garden of Āmrapālī, in the city of Vaiśālī, attended by a great gathering. Of bhikṣus there were eight thousand,
Blessed One, what are the instructions for attaining this absorption that encapsulates all merit?”
“Blessed One, without training, we will practice the trainings of the bodhisattvas.”
Upatiṣya and Kolita and their students, 250 apiece, then went to the Kalandakanivāpa in the Bamboo Grove.
I accurately understood the precise identity of death, the source of death, the cessation of death, and the path leading to its cessation.
“Such bodhisattvas become the leaders in a special, jewellike family. They have great wealth and are lords over many people.
Monk, as all phenomena are free of the three times, they are timeless.
“Lord, you cut off your own flesh,
These bodhisattvas were named: Samadarśin, Sama­viṣama­darśin, Samādhi­vikurvaṇa­rāja, Dharmeśvara, Dharmaketu, Prabhāketu, Prabhāvyūha, Ratnavyūha, Mahāvyūha, Pratibhāna­kūṭa, Ratnakūṭa, Ratnapāṇi, Ratna­mudrā­hasta, Nityotkṣipta­hasta, Nityotpalakṛta­hasta, Nityotkaṇṭhita, Nitya­prahasita­pramuditendriya, Prāmodyarāja, Devarāja, Praṇidhi­prayāta­prāpta, Prati­saṃvit­praṇāda­prāpta, Gaganagañja, Ratnolkā­dhārin, Ratnavīra, Ratnananda, Ratnaśrī, Indrajāla, Jālinīprabha, Anārambaṇa­dhyāyin, Prajñākūta, Ratnajaha, Mārapramardin, Vidyuddeva, Vikurvaṇarāja, Lakṣaṇa­kūṭa­samatikrānta, Siṃha­ghoṣābhigarjita­śvara, Śaila­śikhara­saṃghaṭṭana­rāja, Gandhahastin, Gaja­gandha­hastin, Satatodyukta, Anikṣiptadhura, Sumati, Sujāta, Padmaśrī­garbha, Padmavyūha, Avalokiteśvara, Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, Brahmajāla, Ratnayaṣṭin, Mārajit, Kṣetralaṃkṛta, Maṇi­ratnacchattra, Suvarnacūḍa, Maṇicūḍa, Maitreya, Mañjuśrī­kumāra­bhūta, and so forth, with the remainder of the thirty-two thousand.
He goes there and, searching for them, he climbs up, climbs down, and traverses their slopes.
On returning they considered the matter.
What will they be? They will be the food of joy in the Dharma and the food of joy in meditation.
Let him follow the One Who Has Completed All Paths.
whose emotions had been cooled as if treated by a balm of sandalwood, and whose knowledge had rent open the shell.
If a monk were to engage in them, he would immediately disqualify himself as a monk,
You controlled well your body, speech, and mind. Sugata who has a self-restrained mind, I pay homage to you. {4}
then in one’s dream one will not be able to see one’s own head or those of others.
on the other hand, there are some other sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who retain, hold, recite, and master this transcendent perfection of wisdom, and are attentive to it in the correct manner, committing it to writing, and having it committed to writing, and who then honor, venerate, respect, and make offerings to this volume of the scripture with flowers, garlands, perfume, unguents, powders, religious robes, clothing, parasols, victory banners, ribbons, and diverse musical sounds
They would take up discipline and abide by that. They would then dedicate the roots of what is wholesome toward birth in that reflection of the abode of the Thirty-Three.
The guardians of the world and the other guests sat down on the arranged seats.
They had begun their collection again
and those ascetics and brahmins who do not embrace other views, are said to be the fewest of the few.
It is the joy of unbreakable faith in the Buddha, of wishing to hear the Dharma, of serving the Saṅgha and honoring the spiritual benefactors without pride.
nor does it possess the attributes of maturation.
They said, “How amazing! He has such expertise in the arts, without even having trained.”
Then he said, “All accumulation ends in depletion;
Why is that so? Because they have the power of previous training in insight and wisdom.
they never think, ‘Through this gift, these roots of virtue, and this offering of the Dharma may I become a king, a ruler, a minister, a god, a nāga, a divine son, or any other type of divine being!’
dwell in the activity of buddhas.
Similarly, they neither associate feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness with the limit of past time, nor do they disassociate them therefrom.
Venerable Lord! How, when maintaining this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, should those great bodhisattva beings practice this transcendent perfection of wisdom
Similarly, if they have not misconstrued the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of both external and internal phenomena, and the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities,
So the doctor then goes before them and says, ‘Hello everyone, I am a doctor. I know well about illnesses and their causes, and I know how to cure them.’
‘All phenomena are empty and equal, And
The Blessed One, in turn, continued,
to gain spiritual acceptance of how phenomena truly are;
“Śāradvatī­putra, the expression ‘all things’ denotes the following:
“The four guardians of the world are present, Waiting to offer you an alms bowl.
The sun, the moon, the celestial chariots, the planets, and the stars all stood still.
An omniscient mind’s compassion never wanes In its quest for the young calves it nurses,
Lord of the World, you make no error.
They are subtle, precise, and ultimately incomprehensible.
saying, ‘Come here, man!
“There is a reason we put even elders to work.”
They will be without attachment to their religious robes.
Arrange all of this, and then swiftly report to me.”
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, enters the aspect-less by entering an aspect.
They see my buddha realm, this Sahā world realm, to have a ground made of beryl that is level, divided like a checkerboard with golden cords, and to be adorned by trees made of precious materials.
Three weeks or twenty-one days after the birth, relatives came and gathered to celebrate his birth in grand style,
If he should ask, ‘Is there or is there not an afterlife?’
Similarly, [all other attributes], up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom and enlightenment, are indivisible and without duality.
To make snakes flee, one should incant some clay with this mantra and place it on the ground:
“Upasena, he should be called an immature elder.”
He then addressed the master Viśvāmitra:
The tathāgatas, bodhisattvas, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, antigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas present in the world systems of the eastern direction, numerous as the sands of the River Ganges, will sustain their bodies.
Tiṣya’s son, Koṣṭhila, returned to the village of Nālada from the South where he had taken up with the Lokāyata ascetics.
Accepted an offering of gifts,
The Blessed One is endowed with a visage that resembles the full moon.
then you should take charge of one while entrusting the other to a monk friend of yours.”
Moreover, they think to themselves, ‘The sacred teaching is the Dharma-Vinaya of the Thus-Gone One.’
“ ‘Therefore, you should teach the Dharma by keeping your mind on this.
and through the tathāgatas that the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas have appeared.
Women, men, boys, and girls who just see that person,
Ānanda replied, “Yes, Blessed One. I would love to, Bliss-Gone One!”
Coming is not really known in coming, and going is not really known in going.
If you ask what constitutes the mundane gift of the sacred doctrine,
he is the One with a Voice like a God, a Nāga, a Yakṣa, a Gandharva, a Demigod, a Garuḍa, a Kiṃnara, and a Mahoraga.
“So may his wishes be fulfilled and may he, Under the best of trees, attain supreme and noble awakening.
“How should we uphold the doctrine revealed by the Elder Su­bhūti?”
‘I should not attain the fruit of entering the stream, and should avoid abiding in it.
“Bhikṣus, at that time this buddha realm will be like billion-world world realms as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges River combined into one buddha realm.
They are perfectly happy in this world.
Those beings you saw who were shaped like pots were formerly bondmen in the service of the saṅgha.
Once the mind has become stable in this, One may meditate on the subtle practice.
Here I relinquished, without exception,
They should also maintain the aggregate of correct conduct.”
“Su­bhūti, if the emptiness of internal phenomena were an entity,
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of engagement concerning the composite,
Similarly, owing to the utter purity of all things, they do not apprehend [the truth of] suffering.
“What are you? A hermaphrodite?”
Su­bhūti, it is because the essential nature of the applications of mindfulness will not attain emancipation from the three world systems, and will not come to rest in omniscience.
When they hear this teaching on the transcendent perfection of wisdom, they will indeed be afraid and terrified.
If one feels a prickling sensation in one’s eyes when pricking the soles of the feet, it will come within three months.
being free of extremist convictions;
If ordination was not given, the Blessed One decreed,
The Tathāgata is the one who knows our aspirations and our past.”
The queen of vidyās, the great enchantress
“With my infinite compassion for the whole world, I do not hesitate when others supplicate me.
and they will quickly attain this samādhi,
Then Umādevī came and bowed her head to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s feet and
King Śūradatta inquired of Nandika, ‘If you wish to greatly please me, are you able to slay this bhikṣu?’ “Nandika answered, ‘Your Majesty,
those who are beautiful, those who are ugly, those in the blissful higher realms, those in the wretched lower realms,
“Su­bhūti, you have said that this vehicle is equal to space.
When King Śuddhodana heard this, he sent the councilor-priest before Daṇḍapāṇi Śākya with the request,
“Why is it retentive memory for those dedicated to listening to the Dharma?
He does not think, does not conceive, does not divide things in two,
It is the seal of the nature of all phenomena. This is the samādhi taught by the guides. {114}
He teaches the Dharma in the form of a nāga to beings who are to be taught by a nāga.
That supreme sage asks to enter the king’s palace.
If they engage with the notion that physical forms are void, or that these are not void, then they are merely engaging with mental images.
Similarly, they correctly perceive the six external sense fields to be empty of the six external sense fields.
in addition they are also attentive to this transcendent perfection of wisdom in the correct manner, and
Is the Jina teaching this samādhi Of the greatly famous, supremely wise buddhas?’ {129}
He will become worthy of veneration!
Knowing the great sage Supreme One’s pure intentions and perceiving, too, the maturity of the beings in this world,
When the ethical monks evicted us from the monastery,
In order to be in harmony with people, he associated with elders, with those of middle age, and with the young, yet always spoke in harmony with the Dharma.
That is taught to be the characteristic of the body’s restraint. {2}
“Noble son, the eloquence of bodhisattvas is free of quivering.
who completely frees all beings;
They prostrated to the Blessed One, placing their heads at his feet,
We are freed from the pain of suffering in the three realms.
Similarly, Su­bhūti, this Great Vehicle is also neither an object of knowledge,
and those who have venerated the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas, numerous as the sands of the River Ganges,
The bodhisattva Śrīkūṭa declared,
He is the one who the lord of the mahoragas longs to see.
“Why is it called dependent arising?
One should place the mantra in the center of a bowl of ghee, honey, and sugar-candy and,
At the same time a symphony of eight hundred thousand cymbals was sounded, and a heavy rain of flowers fell.
freedom from mistakes; freedom from impediments of speech; freedom from forgetfulness;
If you ask why, Su­bhūti, it is because those individual followers of the vehicle of the bodhisattvas who have been born in the abode of Tuṣita
I pay homage to Avalokiteśvara, great lord, who gives life,
This is the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline possessed by great bodhisattva beings.
and some attained the result of becoming a non-returner.
And extremely rare it is that someone develops faith.
Su­bhūti, non-entities do not at all abide in non-entity.
“With such insight, wisdom, Intellect, and mindfulness, This ocean of knowledge Even today learns and trains further in calculation.”
did not ignore his audience, pleased all retinues,
the avenues, the parks, and the palaces are made of various perfumes,
He is the inevitable result of roots of merit. He is adorned by patience.
that he resembles a thoroughbred elephant or a thoroughbred steed of noble breed.
The Bhagavān came to the street on which was the home of the youth Candraprabha,
As one enriches this with the root mantra,
Yet this son of noble family brings about these beings’ fulfillment with the bliss of the higher realms and liberation. What are these particular transgressions?
The Buddha then said to the venerable Subhūti,
That which we refer to as awakening is the bodhisattva’s attainment of buddhahood,
it is owing to the non-apprehension of sentient beings.
When you have earnestly applied the transcendent perfection of wisdom, as it has been taught,
To be healthy and without disease; And to have infinite life without death ever coming.”
so that they would, in the future, be drawn into the Blessed One’s sphere.
When he arrived in the land of Magadha, he saw beings that had lived for twenty years in the wilderness eating each other’s flesh.
“Senior Śāradvatī­putra, physical forms are empty of physical forms.
“Due to the virtuous deeds of Māyādevī,
Sugata, regard them and give your teaching So that they will experience the highest happiness.” {37}
“When a tree is small, Fingernails may fell it.
It is reviling previous foolish conduct and not wishing for the level of the śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas.
As the negativities of speech completely disappear, one will be able to remove poison; when those of the mind disappear, insight will increase; and when the flaws of the body are exhausted, one will bring about enthrallment.
It is taught that one will seize the sixth
who are the specialists in the discourses,
which is then transformed into an eight-spoked wheel, extremely ornate as it is the nature of the complete range of speech.
with regard to things that resemble an echo,
Instead they each now found themselves dressed in the three robes of a mendicant with an alms bowl and their head shaven.
Then, for the sake of such a person, the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha will be born, live, and teach in the land of the uncivilized or another place.
and similarly, so that they might completely perfect [the other transcendent perfections], down to and including the transcendent perfection of generosity, and then completely perfect [all attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience!
“Mañjuśrī, when bodhisattva great beings wish to achieve this absorption, what Dharma should they strive in?”
Then he summoned Prince Bimbisāra and said,
Śāradvatī­putra, to what purpose have you said that physical forms do not constitute a bodhisattva, and in the same vein, that [all those other phenomena], up to and including the link of aging and death, do not constitute a bodhisattva?
“Su­bhūti, in the same way, one who wishes to attain emancipation in things without defining characteristics merely wishes to attain emancipation in the transcendent perfection of generosity.
Those who were angry at the dharmabhāṇakas
Without moving from one given buddha realm, they appear to awaken to complete buddhahood in numerous buddha realms.
The bodhisattvas’ practice of generosity is not based on desire.
Then the student should say:
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha is endowed with the excellent quality of such skillful means.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designation of sights as with signs or signless constitutes a bodhisattva?”
It would leave his spiritual practice in tatters, leave him ruined, wrecked, fallen, and defeated.
and neither does it have aspirations, nor is it without aspirations.
It is the knowledge of all language. It is the knowledge of presenting definitions. It is the knowledge of attaining certainty in meaning.
This can be remedied by rinsing the nasal passages with sandalwood.
Monk, dwelling within the essence of enlightenment, I have not perceived even the slightest phenomenon that arises, that perishes, that is afflicted, cleansed, obscured, fettered, regretful, or miserable.
he light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Vyūharāja, who resided in the Sūryāvartā world of the Thus-Gone One Candra­sūrya­jihmī­kara­prabha’s buddha realm.
So too the practice of the bhūtas, starting with Aparājita.
but emerge through false imagination,
‘Those who are addicted to their desires, Who crave for children and wives,
The very moment I heard it from the Thus-Gone One Vidyuprabhāsa,
Moreover, Satata­samitābhiyukta, the noble man or noble woman who teaches and explains to others this Dharma teaching will have those twelve hundred qualities of the ears.
“What has become of the brahmin Tiṣya?” “His time came too.”
Such miracles are not made by humans.”
In the ponds, all the blue, red, and white lotus flowers also budded and blossomed.
I, for my part, will assume the reins of power here.”
and went to sit under a large magnolia tree.
If you ask why, it is because they do not consider the nature of the limit of future time.
endowed with a supremely good complexion, excellent figure,
Similarly if one feels a prickly sensation in all four of the smallest fingers and toes, one will die within a month.
“Su­bhūti, one should know that these are called the refinements of the six extrasensory powers of great bodhisattva beings who abide in the transcendent perfection of wisdom.”
At that time, the five thousand yakṣas who had assembled from everywhere in the universe, vanquished by the curse of the incantation,
Then, from among the assembly of bodhisattvas, four hundred million bodhisattvas heard the name of the Blessed One, the thus-gone Śākyamuni.
They do not apprehend the emptiness of essential nature as the emptiness of essential nature.
What are those ten? They are freedom from attachment and aversion with respect to pleasant and unpleasant forms, or in relation to pleasant and unpleasant sounds, smells, tastes, textures, and mental phenomena. Furthermore, they are freedom from attachment and aversion in relation to gain and loss, pleasure and pain, fame and obscurity, and praise and blame. Noble son, bodhisattvas possessing these ten qualities are similar to space.
Similarly, the purity of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness is identical to it.
descended to the levels of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, and failed to enter into the maturity of the bodhisattvas.
The very moment the Victorious One consumes solid and excellent food,
“Lord, where is there such a great being as this?
Similarly, the transcendence of the sensory element of the ears, the sensory element of sounds, and the sensory element of auditory consciousness is not the sensory element of auditory consciousness [and the other sensory elements of hearing].
They help living beings by means of material gifts and do not help them by means of the gift of the Dharma.
Just as in space, coming, going, and abiding are not discernible,
Reject the faults and practice the qualities. Then, young man, in this life you will become a buddha.” {104}
“In the same vein, as before,
Within the milk appeared the contours of an endless knot, a simple swastika, an elaborate swastika, a lotus, a vardhamāna, and other auspicious signs.
You know the aspirations that humans have. Therefore I ask this question to you, supreme among men. {57}
Phenomena, one hundred thousand strong, I also perfectly comprehended.
The monk informant then prostrates to the seniormost in the saṅgha before taking his place in a kneeling position.
Similarly, they perfect the four applications of mindfulness, the four correct exertions, the four supports for miraculous ability, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven branches of enlightenment, the noble eightfold path, and the three gateways to liberation.
A trillion gandharvas dwell in a pore named Suvarṇa.
if it counters, it would undermine, and if it undermines, it would debunk the self.
then purify them
acknowledging the benevolent activity of the Buddha,
they should encourage others also to adhere to the genuine path by abstaining from wrong views.
Eighty thousand bodhisattvas achieved the absorption that encapsulates all merit.
In terms of wisdom, they were like Sumeru,
Through words with an implied meaning, many bodhisattvas Have been inspired toward the enlightenment of buddhahood.” {22}
venerable Vakkula,
Then we will have attained nirvāṇa.
Ānanda, formerly in times gone by there lived a king named Candraprabha, good-looking,
If you ask how this dedication is made,
That noble man or noble woman should be known to have been sent to do the Tathāgata’s work.
“How is it then, Mañjuśrī, that the Dharma taught by the Thus-gone One is not false?”
Nor should they abide in the notion that the aggregates, from physical forms up to and including consciousness, are non-arising.
He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of mirrors and reflections!”
the time came for Māyādevī to pass away.
Bodhisattvas should be like kings, with a vast orientation.
These root transgressions cause confusion, and beginners who have correctly entered the Mahāyāna will forfeit the entirety of their previously generated roots of virtue, and they will be in a state of transgression.
“What is it you understand?” Rudraka replied, “The way of equilibrium, which is neither perception nor nonperception.”
Thus, Ānanda, the enlightenment of the buddhas is immeasurable,
and teaches without teaching.
“If they filled all worlds like stands of bamboo Uninterruptedly at all times,
As soon as all these precious parasols had been laid down, suddenly, by the miraculous power of the Lord, they were transformed into a single precious canopy
the bodhisattva mahāsattva has no attachment to life or body.
the sugata, the one who knows the world, the unsurpassed guide who tames beings,
Such is the bodhisattvas’ aspiration that knows no dejection.
All of these trees produce shoots and flowers according to seasons,
“Noble son,” replied the Blessed One, “this teaching will not spread among beings of inferior merit.
That Blessed, Thus-Gone One knew the king’s good intentions, so he taught him how to gain expertise in the mode of Dharma known as the boundless seal.
and thirty-two thousand great bodhisattva mahāsattvas,
attachment to the world system of desire and malice;
With his mind filled with faith,
To have the conviction that the body is like a reflection;
This wheel is without mental elaboration because it is devoid of the sources of conceptual thinking.
Bodhisattvas should be unspoiled and unimpaired by any wholesome or unwholesome qualities.
Although with their single mind they view the minds of all beings, ultimately they view nothing whatsoever.
is not without any cause or condition,
Exclaiming horrid sounds, Beings are tormented.
“Next the teacher should whisper into the disciple’s ear about the division of the four joys.
they continually delighted in the Dharma, and they took vows.
Moreover, Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings, by filling the world systems of the great trichiliocosm with divine perfume,
The four guardians of the four directions,
Padminī, Anurāginī,
In front of them there were five thousand beautifully decorated elephants.
That eon will be named Ratnāvabhāsa,
heroic strength, consummated in the upholding of the holy Dharma;
And dhāraṇī is also not difficult to attain For the one who practices this samādhi. {124}
“Just as Sumeru, unshakable and immovable, Cannot be shaken by the winds,
say, ‘There is no other Dharma for attaining complete buddhahood and I have attained nirvāṇa.’
Since the weather that week was intemperate,
“Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara bowed his head to Bhagavat Viśvabhū’s feet, circumambulated him three times, and sat on his left.
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is without defining characteristics.
“ ‘ “Noble son, what if, because he has gone to another land and lacks the facilities, he cannot even obtain those?” “ ‘
You have thoroughly eliminated all signs, And you wish for nothing whatsoever.
They do not forget anything that they have obtained, and teach the Dharma to beings,
dwelt with all the patience of the bodhisattvas.
when the mind does not engage with diverse perceptions, so that one achieves and abides in the sense field of infinite space, thinking, ‘Space is infinite.’
Desires fall like fruit from trees;
According to the division of colors—the black and so forth.
To reply to Māra who said these words, The Bodhisattva said,
You want to scrape through a mountain with your fingernails, Chew through iron with your teeth, Penetrate a mountain with your head, And measure an unfathomable depth.
You have prepared various parasols, various crowns, various earrings, and various necklaces.
“Knowing the nature and dispositions of fools, The wise do not associate with fools.
would not even resort to malice.
Similarly, as great caravan leaders bodhisattvas are worthy of the offerings of those who train and those who are beyond training, just as they are worthy of the offerings of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas.
“Their names and their worlds with their devas Will all be exactly the same as What I have previously described For the supreme human Samanta­prabhāsa.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who are evenly balanced through mindfulness and awareness will be born in his buddhafield.
No dharma has been seen by the buddhas, nor has it been heard, recollected, cognized, or known.
“Venerable Lord! Is it after hearing the sūtras spoken by the Tathā­gata alone that great bodhisattva beings become free from doubt and hesitation, and
They have sung their perfect, beautiful songs, But they do not equal a fraction of the Buddha’s speech. {53}
Jewels and pearls were spread out As an offering to Kṣemadatta. {36}
laid down his precious parasol in offering, and withdrew to one side.
as well as various gods such as the great Brahmā, who is the lord of the Sahā world, Nārāyaṇa, the great Īśvara, Śakra, who is the chief of the gods, and Pañcaśikha, who is the king of the gandharvas.
He may follow the ways of laziness, yet his efforts are uninterrupted as he strives in the cultivation of roots of virtue.
This is called emptiness as a gateway to liberation.
“I will be the master of the three realms, venerated by gods and humans;
will gain special attainments;
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata thoroughly understands that the root of clinging is the position of a self.
“They do not have the good karma For listening to this Dharma.
Great King, what are these eighty minor marks?
can irreversible bodhisattvas be called reversible?”
“Oṁ hrāṁ hrīṁ hrauṁ,
Poised in equanimity, your mind is like the sky.
He presents them through the wisdom of a tathāgata,
In the world system called Vajra abides the Tathāgata called Indestructible Vajra.
he established nine hundred and ninety million beings in irreversible progress toward the highest enlightenment,
Young man, those are the five higher cognitions that are obtained.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain the state of great compassion,
amongst them the following bodhisattva mahāsattvas of the excellent eon
will not perceive any flaws in them, for they will not think
the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
Just like awakening, so also the earth element does not swerve from the tathatā.
The first sense field of mastery refers to the [miraculous] perceptual transformation that ensues when one who perceives inner forms regards lesser external forms, along with excellent colors and inferior colors, understands these forms, having attained mastery over them, and sees them, having attained mastery over them.
Some proclaim emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness;
It will be flat, pleasant, beautiful, delightful, made of beryl, adorned by jewel trees, divided eightfold like a checkerboard by golden cords, and filled with flowers.
They are always weak and hungry, Devouring here and there.
Those who know that phenomena are empty
They are constantly focused on omniscience In order to bring benefit and happiness to beings. {53}
Many hundreds of thousands of apsarases had gathered there. The apsaras named Tilottamā, the apsaras named Suvyūhā, the apsaras named Suvarṇamekhalā, the apsaras named Vibhūṣutā, the apsaras named Karṇadhārā, the apsaras named Amṛtabindu, the apsaras named Pariśobhitakāyā, the apsaras named Maṇiprasthanā, the apsaras named Cuḍakā, the apsaras named Mṛdukā, the apsaras named Pañcabhūryābhimukhā, the apsaras named Ratikarā, the apsaras named Kañcanamālā, the apsaras named Nīlotpalā, the apsaras named Dharmābhimukhā, the apsaras named Sakrīḍā, the apsaras named Kṛtsnākarā, the apsaras named Suvyūhamati, the apsaras named Keyūradharā, the apsaras named Dānaṃdadā, the apsaras named Śaśī, and many hundreds of thousands of other apsarases were gathered there.
owing to the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, that physical forms are non-existent and non-apprehensible.
In the same vein, [all the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path, are not one thing, and illusions another.
The maṇḍala image is the outer meaning. Regarding the outer is the inner. The secrecy of just that is the secret meaning.
Ānanda, I do not rejoice when this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom is proclaimed to such individuals, and
the householder dropped like a felled tree at the monk’s feet and asked,
“Similarly, when they engage in union with the emptiness of sights, they are said to engage in union with the transcendent perfection of wisdom;
or a bodhisattva who is about to be initiated into all Dharmas, there is no other being
Sarva­sumeru­parvata­rāja­śrī (Glory of the Entire King of Mountains, Mt. Sumeru)
rather what she says is timely,
the love that is without deviation because it acts from decisive motivation;
they will accomplish all aims.
Have before them the compassionate Amitābha And his host of bhikṣus. {110}
Mañjuśrī, I know this clearly.
The Buddha then said to the bodhisattva Jagatindhara,
the sensory element of the body, the sensory element of tangibles, and the sensory element of tactile consciousness;
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who follow the path of the ten virtues with positive thoughts will be born in his buddhafield.
Consider, noble son, the analogy of how the wind moves without impediment, without dwelling, and without being supported.
“Here, with the sunlight of mindfulness and tranquility, I dried up the ocean of existence, An expanse of craving churned up By the intoxicated crocodiles of the four physical elements.
“The bodhisattvas do not believe in the existence of a self Any more than that a fire can burn in the middle of the ocean.
one thinks, ‘Who is that man having sex with my woman?’
“ ‘Ah! Puṣpacandra, you are self-controlled and compassionate! Ah! Come here, you mountain of love and compassion!
“The precious, divine wheel, set in motion by the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class, will magically travel through space to the east,
Those sounds are heard in all world realms, As many worlds as there are in the ten directions.
Beautifully adorned body of the one with the ten strengths. {44}
It is rational speech.
Similarly, the same refrain also should be applied extensively in the case of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness.
And, finding it, place it on the crown of their head.
Nor do they apprehend [the truths of] the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the path that leads to it.
One should eat cumin seeds with sugar.
Bodily mindfulness, tranquility and insight, the three absorptions, the four bases of supernatural power, the four thorough relinquishments, the four foundations of mindfulness, the four concentrations, the four truths of the noble ones, the five faculties, the five powers, the six kinds of mindfulness, the seven aspects of awakening, the eightfold path of the noble ones, the nine successive stages of meditative equipoise, the ten powers of a thus-gone one, the eleven liberated sense fields, the twelve links of dependent origination, the twelvefold wheel of Dharma, the sixteen recollections of inhaling and exhaling the breath, the eighteen unique attributes of a buddha, and the forty-two letters—all this, Brahmā, is in the queen of incantations called Destroyer of the Great Trichiliocosm.
“Divine son, the relative truth, which employs all forms of statements, speech, cognition, objects of cognition, activities, conventions, and acts, is a gateway to all dharmas.
Persons who are not yet twenty years of age cannot accept all they may be subjected to
And non-arising is awakening.
and all things are just the same as sin.
One who is on the path is not concerned with good or bad paths.
And the kṣatriyas together with their retinues become angry at the bhikṣus who diligently practice relinquishment, and disparage them.
the six sense organs,
Venerable Lord, if the notion of physical forms as arising or ceasing is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of physical forms as such become a bodhisattva?
mouths the size of a needle’s eye.
so that I may heal this bhikṣu of his illness!’
Mañjuśrī, to realize the body and mind in this manner is explained as awakening.
but others had two or more, some had even up to one hundred thousand.
or their view of living creatures, their view of living organisms, their view of lives,
They do not consider whether tangibles are connected with mental phenomena.
“Oṃ vaiśravaṇāya dhanapuṣṭiṃ kuru ye svāhā Oṃ vaiśravaṇa vaśaṃ kuru svāhā Oṃ vaiśravaṇāye śāntiṃ kuru svāhā
he entered his mother’s womb as the earth shook and this world
“ ‘The Jina thus teaches the relative Dharma: Regard the composite and noncomposite in that way.
They are always close to the Bodhimaṇḍa. Those are the benefits of giving the Dharma. {47}
and in the same vein, they apprehend [the other sense organs], up to and including the mental faculty, and develop a view of them in an apprehending manner.
Why so? It is thought that humans and non-humans could not be harmed wherever blessed buddhas were dwelling.
Reverend Śāriputra, the Śakras, the Brahmās, the Lokapālas, the devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas who live in this house
Their renown spreads Through the villages and towns. {3}
Thus, bodhisattvas are the ground that holds the seeds of virtuous qualities.
Alternatively one should meditate on the white Sarasvatī, Arisen from the syllable dhīḥ,
In meditation they master the perfections. These are distinctive qualities of the second patience. {11}
“This tantra must not be revealed
When the Bhagavān taught this Dharma teaching of the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
“They keep in mind the buddhas, the supreme humans, And they have faith in their supreme conduct.
“Noble ones, it is like this: I dwell in happiness; I have little harm, little illness.
Blessed One, any god or human being who becomes inspired by this teaching and pursues it will attain the happiness that results from the perfections you have just explained.
May beings be liberated from all negative forms of existence!
Then create an ink formed from your blood, and a pen from one of your bones.
“I taught for numerous years, Explaining the level of nirvāṇa.
while auditory consciousness is inner form.
children of noble family, I will also go there.”
One will attain the state of Vāgīśvara.
“Senior ones! This transcendent perfection of wisdom, which is so profound, which cannot be investigated, which is not within the perceptual range of sophistry;
The nirvāṇa that is the end of causes, like an extinguished lamp. They will dream those kinds of dreams.
Having strewn the earth with flower petals and offered burning butter-lamps, the patient should then perform worship at that shrine.
and beyond the intellect.
"If someone touched<tei:note xml:id=""UT22084-066-003-57""/> the corpse of that dog, if he shook it, if he enjoyed himself with it,"
“Monks, so it is,” replied the Blessed One, “so it is.”
“If you ask what is the ‘meditative stability free from both ideation and scrutiny,’
“Su­bhūti, if the expanse of reality were an entity and not a non-entity, then this supreme Great Vehicle would not overpower and attain emancipation from the world with its gods, humans, and antigods.
To banish the target,
“Blessed One, upon hearing from the Blessed One about the power of the bodhisattvas, my pride and arrogance were humbled;
If he has lost faith in me, that will be an impediment to his living the holy life.
“As another analogy, at the point when a flower matures, its fruit becomes visible.
The transcendent perfection of meditative concentration is pure, owing to the purity of the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
freedom from special pride because of pursuing excellent advice;
Senior Su­bhūti, do great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom, practice the essential doctrine?
“To what the Teacher knows there is no end, His mind the perfection of human capacity.
Whatever is not a distortion of the intrinsic nature is rational.
For example, Su­bhūti, a bird does not fall to the ground, even though it moves through the air.
My friends, only bodhisattva great beings who are free from reference points are born there without being born.
In order to behold, make offerings to, and venerate the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas,
and you would also teach the Dharma with the eloquence of a buddha.” At this point venerable Śāradvatīputra thought to himself,
The last of them became the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Dīpaṃkara.
Then Senior Ānanda asked the Blessed One,
Brother Ānanda asked the Bhagavat,
However, if the king does not appreciate numerous teachings, he should first give a teaching that induces weariness.
the stride that floats above the surface,
Tranquility is one-pointed mind. Special insight is to discern phenomena as they actually are.
They should praise the actualization of the fruit of entering the stream.
and the lord of the Dharma.
called to the children, ‘Those toys that you delight in and marvel at, and that you are unhappy not to have obtained,
Similarly, [the fruitional attributes] from the ten powers of the tathāgatas, up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, are empty of notions of “I” and “mine.”
Likewise, so long will those who have entered the stream, those who are tied to one more rebirth, those who are no longer subject to rebirth, as well as arhats, pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, and the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas, all emerge in the world.
I entrust you with a supreme entrustment.
When the western direction was high, the eastern direction was low.
Everyone we allow to go forth, they up and snatch away!
diligence is an obscuration,
Prostrations to the dharmadhātu, indescribable ultimate perfection;
They engage equally with all sentient beings, have no aversion for any sentient being, nor any wish to harm anyone.
And yet, deceived by their own errors, childish beings believe that there are pleasant feelings.
[all other attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, are neither fettered by nor liberated from their future limits.
And cover the realms of the victorious ones in all the trichiliocosm.
He would become a conqueror, a righteous Dharma king. Such a king would have the seven treasures:
This concludes the tenth chapter, on the demonstration at the writing school.
possesses just one verse, or one line from this Dharma teaching The White Lotus of the Good Dharma and
Beings will desire and crave irreligious things.
Mañjuśrī asked,
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designation of sights as void or not void constitutes a bodhisattva?”
At all times he has served beings through the activity of a buddha.
In the presence of the nāgas.
What then is dullness? Dullness is also threefold, as there is greater, middling, and lesser dullness.
“Noble son, you may wonder how bodhisattvas sustain sentient beings with vital breaths of air that emerge from their virtuous qualities.
and thus they are free of all the pains of affliction.
This concludes the ordination portion of the rite.
“My friends,” said the Blessed One, “I say this repeatedly:
They are the inconceivably numerous vajra words concerning the composite,
The buddhas make the sound of clearing their throats And they make the sound of a single finger snap.
The countless buddhas of the future, And the buddhas who are present in the ten directions,
into eighteen thousand buddha realms in the eastern direction.
“Dear boy, we will not let you leave. So long as we live, you will remain within sight. Do not think of disobeying!”
overcomes all demons, brings an end to all evil deeds,
and that the gods extending as far as the Akaniṣṭha realm
Without a teacher or a guide, he gave rise to the thirty-seven qualities conducive to awakening and actualized his own awakening.
On this topic, it was said: “The wise ones who remain in solitude Will quickly attain the treasure of the buddhas,
Those sūtras that you are following are not the most extensive discourses taught by the tathāgatas,
What is the causal condition of name and form?” It then occurred to him,
stood up in the circle of the assembly, bowed to the Bhagavān with hands together in homage, and said these words:
physical forms are empty of their own essential nature.
You with designs of wheels on your feet, You are like a shining golden sacrificial post. Illuminator of the world, Great Sage, you are like fire!
“Very well, my lady,” said Uttarā,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­tīrtha­maṅgala­dhārin,
One should add the mantra: ‘Nail such and such body part of such and such a person!’
The light of the rays of awareness from the round sun of the Tathāgata does not have any such concepts.
“Bhagavān, in the future time when the Tathāgata has passed into nirvāṇa,
“Why is it the equanimity of those with compassion? Because it is the activity that accomplishes a buddha’s deeds.
This concludes the section on what constitutes a reliable monk.
The domain of the four foci of mindfulness, where body, sensation, mind, and things are not ultimately of concern, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existents concerning the kleśas,
non-origination, non-apprehension, non-affliction, and non-purification are without foundation
I contemplated my predicament, thinking, ‘These rākṣasīs will kill us if they find out.’
If his spouse drinks this while fasting, They will receive a fortunate son
Is the essence of the joy of cessation.
“Bhagavān, how should one view the eightfold path of the noble ones?”
They do not preoccupy themselves with talk about animals.
Their joints are extended.
“to the west of this buddha realm, past 18,000 buddha realms, is the Sahā world.
he dragged it outside the city gate.
“Su­bhūti, if the correct exertions, the supports for miraculous ability, the faculties, the powers, the branches of enlightenment, and the noble eightfold path, and in the same vein, the ten powers of the tathāgatas, and [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, were entities and not non-entities,
Remaining in this samādhi, They will pay homage to the buddhas who have great might. {19}
Meanwhile, a young nāga born not long before that
In the world system called Endowed with Realization and Intelligence abides the Tathāgata called Purifier of All Rebirths.
He never lay down on his belly, side, or back.
“Noble son, great caravan leaders are worthy of the offerings of brahmins, nobility, townspeople, and country dwellers.
Though they arrest their feeling, thought, and mental processes.
Blessed One, quickly call out with the great speech of a buddha!
“What is praising correct conduct? It is the knowledge of the result of correct conduct.
and at last arrives at the town where lives his father, who has much property, grain, treasure, and storehouses.
How is the view appropriated?
There the queen may remain.”
“Always remember the Jina’s qualities. The color of perfect gold, shining brightly,
they bring all phenomena to perfection, and they are aware that they do not make assumptions about all these phenomena.
like a famous one,
“Oṃ vajrapāṇi nīlāmbara­dhara vajrasphoṭa hūṃ phaṭ svāhā. This incantation is a mantra that brings control over activities.
This Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma is like this:
the four applications of mindfulness are subsumed within it;
In this way he rested in a state of immense qualities.
and installed me as a teacher in residence, who would share his duties with him.
and that unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment is consequent on having abandoned involuntary reincarnation through propensities and all afflicted mental states?
Śāriputra, this buddha realm is beautifully adorned by such displays of the excellences of buddha realms. “Furthermore, Śāriputra, in the Sukhāvatī world there are swans, cranes, and peacocks that assemble three times during the day and three times at night and perform a concert,
External concepts are exertion.
Awakening is characterized by the absence of wishes, yet the absence of wishes cannot truly realize the absence of wishes.
Just so, though the infantile hate and lust, Their desire and hatred are never real.
the buddha Bhagavān Stainless Light, the Essence of the Sun, appeared in the world.
and the same goes for the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, and the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration.
Only this ritual belongs to the second garland mantra.
Thereupon the Bhagavān, in order to teach this meaning to Candraprabha,
then they are actually practicing the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Those that dwell in maṇḍalas and charnel grounds, And likewise, in temples, At borders, and in customs houses, Empty houses, and wild places;
Bereft of existence or non-existence.
If it is concealed wherever harm might occur, There will be peace by pronouncing the power of truth.
Thereupon, the bodhisattva Sarva­rūpa­saṃdarśana, who was present in that assembly, addressed the Licchavi Vimalakīrti:
he should then point out the maṇḍala to the disciple
It was surrounded by a variety of trees,
freedom from deception with regard to gods;
a garuḍa made of anthill clay;
the unimpeded and infinite wisdom,
say the rishis to that man,
as numerous as the grains of sand in the ocean, and where there is a great caitya. The moment he arrived there, for the enjoyment of the Bhagavān,
“When, for instance, a preceptor or instructor falls ill,
For those who do not persevere,
Moreover, while the Bodhisattva was attending school,
Leaving the butter element behind, they are transferred into the body.
“Noble son, in that same way, this precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, burns up all bad karma.
What instructions do you give to your students? What is the result of living the holy life?
Having instructed them in this way as a skillful method he goes to another land, and having gone there, sends news to his sick sons that he is dying.
When those beings see bodhisattvas residing within their mother’s womb they will be astonished and amazed by the bodhisattvas’ powers
All shall be lovingly reverential.
and with his hands together in homage bowed toward the Bhagavān and
“ ‘Kaṇṭhaka, carry the guide of this world! Be swift and don’t feel sad!
After that, they shine on the elevated regions of the earth.
“When he had listened to what they had to say, The elephant-like king became distrustful.
Conclusion of the twenty-seventh chapter, “The Benefits of Generosity.”
He was joined in the palace by a group of gods whose good fortune equaled that of the Bodhisattva, and who had entered the same vehicle.
Therein physical forms, omniscience and the real nature are non-apprehensible!”
“Young man, you should understand this through the following teaching.
“Therefore, once I attain the auspicious peace of awakening, The time has come for me to free beings drowning in the ocean of old age and death.”
“Mañjuśrī, this is the supreme Dharma taught by the tathāgatas.
the more the volition of those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage will be enhanced.
“ ‘Oh! Oh! King of the medicine of wisdom, unequaled, You have reached the perfection of superior wisdom.
"Just like lights illuminating the world, This great hero will remain <tei:milestone xml:id=""UT22084-061-006-55""/>“For the benefit of beings For many eons after his nirvāṇa."
In all the many lotus ponds were flocks of many types of birds, such as leafbirds,
Noble son, such is the bodhisattvas’ diligence free of conceit.
Thus, they think to themselves,
Similarly, they will not construe the notion that conditioned elements are signless, and that signlessness is the conditioned elements.
“Those bodhisattva heroes Are adorned by the primary signs.
Similarly, they do not apprehend [all the other phenomena], up to and including the applications of mindfulness.
The Blessed One now asked venerable Kauṇḍinya,
Thus, they bring them freedom from evil acts of body, speech, and mind;
“Similarly, [the eighteen aspects of emptiness], from the emptiness of internal phenomena, up to an including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, being empty of inherent existence,
May we also in that way become Unsurpassable buddhas in the world, And through words with implied meaning Teach buddhahood’s highest enlightenment.
“Living in solitary places, practicing meditation, And abandoning living among many people
“ ‘I established them in celibacy, I introduced them to the meaning of the Dharma,
“What is the cause due to which the Tāthagata’s companions are now so few?
actualize what you have not yet actualized—do not let your effort lag.”
“When a bodhisattva considers which things constitute non-specific phenomena, they include the following:
The accumulation of discipline also fulfills two functions.
When the group of six saw this they said,
whenever they do not engage with the notions that the [other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, are with attachment or that they are without attachment.
They see the supreme humans, the sugatas, And they give them the prophecy of their stainless enlightenment. {23}
All the splendor of the four guardians of the world and the lord of the demigods, All the splendor of Brahmā, lord of the world, and Kṛṣṇa, Is minuscule in comparison to that of the son of the Śākyas.”
They are hung with Kaśika cloth.
From a distance the Licchavi people of Vaiśālī saw the Blessed One coming. He was handsome and inspiring, and his senses were stilled.
The fruit of being tied to one more rebirth is empty of the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth.
The Bhagavān replied to Candraprabha,
In like manner, why do you say that the designation of the eyes does not constitute a bodhisattva,
“Kauṇḍinya, did you understand? Did you understand?” “Blissful One,” he replied, “I understood. I understood.”
In such a way, you will repay the kindness of the Tathāgata,
This sacred doctrine is compatible with the fruit of arhatship.
Tumburu and Sūryavarcasa, Śaila and Asiputra, Viśvāmitra and Yaśodharā, Āḍavaka and Sumanas, Śūcīkarṇa and Darīmukha, Pañcālagaṇḍa and Sumukha,
All the gods joyfully proclaimed, “He will be a Dharma king!”
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is the emptiness of ultimate reality.”
“And why? Blessed One, because although the Thus-Gone One may speak of preference,
Without their consciousness dwelling on it they understand, through the sameness of mind, that concentration is sameness.
they defame omniscience, which the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas of the past, the future, and the present all have.
He lived on just a single sesame seed, a single juniper berry, and a single grain of rice
are not afraid, are not terrified, and cannot be made to be terrified;
It was then that the tathāgatas emanated by Bhagavān Śākyamuni who had been in the eastern direction,
Whether for oblations, the circle, Or inauguration, Red substances are always to be applied.
Ultimately, not even a slight distinction can be made with respect to these.
Then Bhadrapāla beseeched the Blessed One,
Because both self and liberation are void.
Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
“Moreover, Kauśika, the transcendent perfection of wisdom possessed by great bodhisattva beings dominates the transcendent perfection of generosity.
Bodhisattvas give up unvirtuous company in all regards.
accumulation will occur and accumulation will not disappear;
better, exalted,
With the hairs on their bodies bristling with anger, they spoke the following verse:
I answer him by saying, ‘The afterlife is like that and not like that.’ ”
We will protect it.
“I am free of doubt, I am fixed upon enlightenment. This is the nature of my skill in methods.
The strength of ten blue elephants is the same as the strength of one yellow elephant.
He had attained excellence in control and calm abiding, and superiority in control and calm abiding.
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is without purification.”
for which a tathāgata, arhat, perfectly enlightened buddha comes into the world?
Knowing existents in this way, They are taught to be nonexistent. {112}
not high, not low;
“Another, young man, is that bodhisattva mahāsattvas have correct conduct.
“The dedication of generosity for the sake of attaining omniscience is dualistic.
For the sake of ripening sentient beings they display birth throughout all lives, accepting birth yet remaining free from appropriation.
“On the left or right of the guide Amitābha He holds a fan and he fans him.
then together with the saṅgha of bodhisattvas, the saṅgha of bhikṣus,
and these too they integrate with the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
without ever feeling any regret.”
The lifespan of the future buddha Ratnavyūha will be six hundred million years,
They bow solely to the Thus-Gone One, and prostrate themselves solely to the Thus-Gone One with their palms joined.
There were no dark mountains, nor any ordinary trees.
Enjoining him to heed what he reveres.
Here too, the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha will appear at the break of dawn in the dreams of those beginner bodhisattvas who have committed a transgression,
So, O Beloved, look at us who ardently desire pleasure.
Venerable Lord! How do great bodhisattva beings, after abiding in the transcendent perfection of perseverance, acquire the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration?
At that moment the Thus-Gone One realized that Rudraka had died just one week before.
With your aspiration now fulfilled, quick, turn the wheel of Dharma in detail!
The Tathāgata appeared sitting cross-legged upon that throne.
“What is the perfection of conduct? It is its perfect preservation.
Abandon the nature of void!
that has been kept through the power of the Tathāgata and has not previously been revealed, has not previously been told.
Then, in order to ripen students, He taught the ritual of conferring empowerment:
Through the sound of the great Dharma drum,
and the indulgence of all their desires resulted in no child, male or female,
the body will not be afflicted by illness,
the samādhi named Ornament,
“When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra was in the samādhi named Intimidating Lion, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara was in the samādhi named Play of the Lion.
and also various kinds of clothing: monastic robes, clothing commanded by the vidyādharas, and Kaśika cloth;
and so he was named Kolita.
a noble son or daughter were to sprinkle with their own blood the path that their Dharma teacher is to walk upon,
If you ask why, Su­bhūti, it is because great bodhisattva beings are [already] established in the attributes which are the aspects of enlightenment.
If a child vomits breast-milk The ashes of burnt peacock feathers Should be bound to its neck
That is called the knowledge of suffering.
“ ‘The restraint of the body is said to have this meaning. It is a meaning that cannot be taught through words.
Yet the great wealth and renown he enjoyed were like drops of water rolling off the petals of a lotus flower. The Blessed One remained detached and untainted by it all.
Bhagavān, please do not expound this Dharma discourse.
it is free from all torments,
Throughout many eons they will not lose a limb, And will always avoid the eight disadvantageous states. {22}
In Ujjayinī the son of King Anantanemi was born.
“Where might these five companions be staying?”
But one cannot count the different aspects of their speech.
without characteristics,
One should also eat the root of moonseed.
and that Nakula and Sahadeva are the sons of the two Aśvins.
They said to each other,
On the level of the arhat you have accomplished your goal, Which is the cessation of all suffering.
Who is soothing and clear minded like the moon,
The palms of her hands and the soles of her feet are like liquid lac.
If this precious gemstone were immersed in a pool of water,
Elder, you are ‘foremost of the wise!’ Why do you not speak?
having created a stūpa made of the seven precious materials that is as high as the realm of Brahmā, encircled by a circumambulatory walkway, with parasols upon it, with flags and ringing bells.
In this manner, with his pristine divine eye beyond that of humans, the Bodhisattva saw sentient beings dying and being born, in all their beauty and ugliness, in favorable and unfavorable circumstances, degenerating and advancing, respectively, precisely in accordance with their actions.
that great bodhisattva beings will attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
And confessed absolutely whatever bad actions, however small, He may have committed in this life or throughout the three times.
“Similarly, do you think that anything other than the real nature of the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty constitutes a bodhisattva?”
“Those who have no thought of ‘mine,’ Those who have abandoned all attachments,
“And if all of the various, infinite realms Were covered with gold from the Jambu River
or a body belonging to the realm of the Lord of Death were freed from their feelings of pain, and instead they found happiness.
“And how does that accord with the awareness of reality?
Young man, in that way bodhisattva mahāsattvas obtain the treasure of wisdom.
and adorned by trees made of the seven precious materials.
When they saw his handsome body they desired him.
The seers saw the venerable Saṅgharakṣita approaching from off in the distance
Wearing a red upper garment,
In death there is pain, lamentation, despair, and anxiety.
“Many incalculable, innumerable, Inconceivable millions of eons in the past,
The mind pacifies itself.
‘Oṁ, when there is terror, this is for confusing. Hūṁ phaṭ!’
In Vārāṇasī there lived two householders and friends, who had wished to go forth in their youth,
it can still cause its reflection to appear in water. Likewise,
Similarly, knowing that the eight aspects of liberation, the nine serial steps of meditative absorption, the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four assurances, the four unhindered discernments, great loving kindness, great compassion, the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, the thirty-two major marks of a superior man, and the eighty minor marks are all empty of inherent existence,
and who are alive at present, even now teaching the sacred doctrine,
The monk instructor’s eyes lit up with joy and the monk said to the nāga disguised as a brahmin,
Your Majesty, you are joyful,
As I exert myself to benefit all beings, I may well remain in hell.
There is a saying, “Boys and girls are born in the world because they are prayed for.”
Resting in the equanimity of the patience of selflessness. {35}
Worms are the action ḍākinī.
It is not suitable, O Friend of the World,
for which reason it always is the real nature. Therefore they are not two but indivisible.
The cord should then be tied to the wrist and the following should be recited:
“The transcendence of physical forms is not physical forms.
[9] It is rejecting that which should not be engaged in. [10] It is the aspiration to good qualities.
I will explain to the world about the origin and arising of things, And also about nirvāṇa, the cool state where suffering is pacified.”
Our heads would split into seven pieces, Like the blossom of a basil shrub,
“The wise ones always remain in happiness. They remain just as I have taught.
“With hundreds of paṇava drums and loud mṛdaṅga drums, With paṭaha drums, lutes, the excellent sound of flutes,
"བདག་ལ་ཡང་<tI, too, find ill will unpleasant; I do not wish for it, do not like it, and do not enjoy it. Therefore,
Su­vikrānta­vikrāmiṇ, Anupamamati,
They are full of attachment and affection.
someone whose mind is undistorted will have authentic attainment.
Many terrifying malevolent spirits approach, With wild matted hair, sheep heads, crooked bones, and goiters;
to produce images of the thus-gone ones, to restore shrines that have crumbled, to offer incense at shrines devoted to the thus-gone ones, to wash statues of the thus-gone ones with scented water, to sweep and plaster shrines devoted to the thus-gone ones,
Great Sage, no one has discipline like you.
their deaths and their rebirths, whether they have good color or bad color,
The surface of the entire billion-world galaxy was reflected in the interior of the great precious canopy,
the stride of he whose fingers are connected through a web and who has copper-colored nails,
In this regard, ‘excellent positioning of the feet’ means that the soles of his two feet entirely touch the ground.
the bodhisattva mahāsattvas should continuously possess this Dharma teaching, teach it, read it, and explain it.
Sūkṣmā prostrated at his feet and said this prayer:
they are not known, seen, or comprehended as such by sentient beings.
However, while indeed no beings exist, the ripening of karma does manifest!’
the nāga hastily transformed, cloaking his natural appearance and reverting to his conjured look.
“They go to millions of realms And bow down to the feet of the buddhas.
Similarly, those who follow the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas
“Consider, noble son, the analogy of the sun that rises to dispel all pitch-black darkness.
Sage, Buddha, you practiced emptiness!
Each of the trees had grown to a height of two and a half leagues with a trunk that reached a width of two krośas.
It is its nonperception, as one does not objectify a thing that is not perceived.
“Similarly, coming from the thus-gone ones and their bodhisattva retinues who reside in the pure realms, the wind-like bodhisattvas
Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, when that bodhisattva mahāsattva bhikṣu made that proclamation before a bhikṣu or bhikṣunī, an upāsaka or upasikā, or anyone,
Just as the sun manifests through the signs of heat, its yellow color, as well as its setting and rising, so, too, consciousness should be viewed through its signs.
‘Deceived by his priests, Śrīgupta made an offering Of poisonous alms To the protector, the Lion of the Śākyas.
did not take part in amusements, and did not go for walks.
He said this, which was soothing to gods and humans, And removed their doubt:
“This twelvefold dependent arising—which comes from several different causes and from several different conditions,
Alternatively Blue Acala is space,
I have not attained any store of qualities.
“Endowed with wisdom they will manifest many emanations That will go to millions of realms to guide beings.
Similarly, the wind-like bodhisattvas strike sentient beings who are elevated on peaks of pride, conceit, arrogance, and the view of the transitory collection.
They will contemplate many supreme dharmas. They will always teach many dharmas,
The deaf could hear.
It is free of the extreme views of beginning and end.
without being well presented or well dressed,
calm or not calm, void or not void, afflicted or purified, arising or not arising, ceasing or not ceasing, and as entities or non-entities,
In the same vein, they do not consider any real nature of [the attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, in which they should have confidence.
“A self-arisen one performs this method So that the wisdom of buddhahood may be realized.
I will teach the application of mindfulness that carefully considers phenomena in such a way that there will be no notion of them as wholes. These teachings will take place.”
We put them on, wrung our clothes dry,
“Nevertheless, Mañjuśrī, for those gods in the heaven of the Thirty-Three who have previously purified themselves,
or the moon god, or the sun god, or a garuḍa.
“Day and night, they will meditate on the supreme Dharma
Divine princes, the ten powers of the tathāgatas are also like a dream, like a magical display.
owing, Venerable Lord, to the fact that these phantom emanations of the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas are without conceptualisation,
If the holder of the Śākya lineage leaves, this royal line will be broken!”
“Similarly, they do not investigate the notions that omniscience is permanent or impermanent, and similarly, the notions that it is imbued with happiness or suffering, that it is not imbued with suffering or happiness, that it is a self or not a self, that it is empty or not empty, that it is with signs or signless, that it is having aspirations or lacking aspirations, that it is calm or not calm, and that it is void or not void.
“Yakṣas, rākṣasas, kumbhāṇḍas, and guhyakas Are gazing upon the supreme among humans.
The beings of the three lower realms were joyful, their sufferings freed;
I will seek refuge in the Saṅgha, supreme among communities.
When teaching this Dharma teaching, they will teach the Dharma with an equal joy in all the Dharma.
He has examined the meaning, evaluated it, and gained full certainty. He has cleaned away the insects, spider webs, faded flowers, various weeds, and sand from the memorials of the thus-gone ones. Therefore he is the One with Untangled Hair. “
These are my instructions and my guidance.’“
The others should be learned orally.
‘Among all sentient beings there is no one who, throughout all your changing lives,
Prostrations to all the Three Jewels in the ten directions.
They will not, therefore, be born in the realms of hell.
Ratnavyūha, Ratnajāli, Ratnaprabha, Ratnadvīpa,
The artist must eat the three sweets And abstain from fish, meat, and alcohol.
and the five companions, who tried to make diverse, happy, and pleasing conversation with the Thus-Gone One, sat a little apart.
But that they all would become Self-arisen guides of the world. {41}
“In that way those bodhisattvas live on these kings of mountains without thinking about food or drink.
He will teach in a way that is beneficial and brings happiness to the world, including the gods.
Why can I say so? Because, Blessed One, as noble children obtain this Dharma, that in itself becomes the cause of their irreversibility.”
the faculties that will enable knowledge of all that is unknown, the faculties that acquire the knowledge of all things, the faculties endowed with the knowledge of all things,
The earth was pleasant to the touch, like soft kācilindika cloth.
by not grasping at the eye and not perceiving form,
The supreme gods, with flowing hair, approached; Just when they emerged from the door, the whole trichiliocosm trembled.
Through magic-like meditative concentration,
some have two clairvoyances;
like an elephant,
in the same vein, being unskilled, they will not have cultivated [the fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas
When they see beings bewildered on a path of jewels Who are constantly caught in the trap of Māra,
an act to defeat bodhisattvas may be stopped, subdued, or confined to a separate location by various means.
at that time, in accord with Dharma, turned the Dharma wheel that had never been turned by any mendicant, brahmin, deva, māra, or Brahmā in the world:
“Why is it difficult to know? Because it is difficult to discern.
Strong dispassion indeed goes by the name Caṇḍa (Fierce One),
n one’s heart one should visualize the syllable oṁ, which is then transformed into a sun disk that illuminates all worlds, shining with a hundred thousand rays.
They point out which teachings belong to the Solitary Buddha Vehicle and turn one into a solitary buddha,
nor does the expanse of reality consider the sensory element of the eyes.
One would not be able to describe them fully.
and it was filled with many various kinds of precious flowers.
Despite their pleading, Kolita remained silent.
Many beings with wisdom will know This supreme peaceful samādhi that is taught. {7}
“What is guarding conduct? It is conduct that is unsullied.
Its enchanting, even grounds were covered with golden canopies and filled with various trees, such as mountain ebonies, campakas, trumpet vines, orchids, muchalindas, mahāmuchalindas, aśokas, banyans, persimmon trees, narras, karṇikāras, kesaras, sāls, and coral trees.
Monks, then the Bodhisattva thought to himself,
When they see poor and suffering beings They content them with possessions.
He sees all phenomena as illusion, Like a dream, and like clouds.
He is dedicated to dhyāna, attains perfect wisdom, And accomplishes the benefit of beings.
to embody the various types of discipline; not to be conceited about one’s discipline;
In the world system called Fearless abides the Tathāgata called Pacifier of All Fears.
many kinds of bathing pools,
When I returned to the house, the lamp asked me, ‘Head merchant, did you see?’
“This earth that supports beings, with its mountains And oceans, has been shaken in six ways.
To nail the mouth of the adversary,
“ ‘In the same way, this bhikṣu has fallen to the earth With a body beautified by the supreme signs.
This perfect son of hers will outshine The three worlds with his splendor.
They never hear the words of the Jina
the one with perfect wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world,
In the evening, one should ingest powdered yellow myrobalan with clarified butter and honey.
Monks, in order for the Thus-Gone One to turn the wheel of Dharma at the Deer Park by the Hill of the Fallen Sages in Vārāṇasī, the earth gods now formed a great circle around the Thus-Gone One. The circle was wonderful and beautiful to the eye.
It also moistens the seed of the aggregates,
Immediately the Bodhisattva looked around and examined the retinue of consorts.
Again, one should grind with dharmarasa, With yavatiktikā And the juice of ākhukarṇī For a period of three days.
Then, sitting cross-legged and upright, the Bodhisattva practiced concentration, Immersed in the virtue of the four concentrations.
They are prepared for liberation; They will quickly reach liberation. {72}
Or else the lord should be painted alone, without a consort.
compared to such a person, [someone who keeps in mind the various teachings of the Dharma with faith in the Tathāgata and who reads them, worships them, copies them or commissions their copying, and teaches them correctly to others] will have a vastly greater increase in merit.
This noble son has been continuously dedicated to receiving many teachings,
And in yet another life fools may eat her flesh, And in their ignorance enjoy it.
(6) definitive knowledge of whether the acumen of other sentient beings and other individuals is supreme or not;
Excellent Splendor, Layered Joy, Giver of Various Things, Excellent White Female Servant, Desiring Engagement, Surrounding City, and Mountain Protector.
“I then pondered what must be absent for consciousness not to occur and what must cease for consciousness to cease.
I understood the essential nature of phenomena And at that time I was healed of my disease. {5}
And always being attracted to and delighting in the Jina: That is the supreme Dharma that the Jina teaches. {84}
it is the tathāgatas’ pristine cognition of omniscience.
“Ānanda, remember this Dharma discourse and keep it in mind, retrieve it from memory, explain it, and teach it at length to others.
as well as those who have cultivated the transcendent perfection of generosity, and similarly cultivated the [other transcendent perfections], up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom, in the presence of the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas, numerous as the sands of the River Ganges;
then they will not know through their meditative stabilities that all things are sameness, nor will they have any cognition.”
He will establish them in the realm of phenomena, which is blissful, peaceful, deathless, and free from fear, suffering, harm, and stain.”
“The buddha who has passed into nirvāṇa Is seen in the form of a buddha.
If a woman rubs this on her vagina at the time of birth She will give birth with ease.
nor indeed are the ten powers of the tathāgatas and the [other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, discerned.
it is because they do not apprehend those levels of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, and they do not apprehend any thought that they should dedicate their physical, verbal, and mental ethical discipline to the level of the śrāvakas or to the level of the pratyekabuddhas.
Similarly, it should be applied to the fruit of entering the stream, and also [to the other attainments], up to and including individual enlightenment.
All roots and flowers should be wound into cords of various colors and fastened to swords, tridents, spears, and arrows.
I must examine my own faults and not blame others for their faults.
One should drink one pala of a broth from dried deer meat in goat’s milk.
and each told the Buddha his own adventure, recounting all his conversations with the Licchavi Vimalakīrti.
Some learned person might magically display each of the four elements,
the bodhisattva great being Nārāyaṇa mentioned to the Blessed One,
and they neither grasp nor disrupt them.
harbor doubts, hesitation and disillusionment with regard to this same profound transcendent perfection of wisdom.
At all times they have love for all the living And always bring infinite happiness to beings. {17}
As they saw it all, as clearly as seeing an āmalakī fruit right in their own hand, they were filled with joy and great happiness,
to the stūpa of the relics of the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Prabhūtaratna.
they correctly perceive that the defining characteristic of [the truth of] suffering is harm,
the inconceivably numerous accumulations of sūtras concerning the kleśas,
it is owing to the emptiness of internal phenomena, owing to the emptiness of external phenomena,
“Padmaśrī, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Gadgadasvara is a protector of the beings who have been born into the Sahā world realm.
They are seated, cross-legged, Upon lotuses that have a thousand petals. {22}
When those with little wisdom become proud, That is the root of increasing suffering. {32}
Ten thousand girls, headed by Yaśovatī, were also born,
That is why this abode of mine is bright and adorned with this golden light.
In a similar manner, other gods arrived in Jambudvīpa to exhort the solitary buddhas. “Noble ones,” they said. “Give up this buddha realm.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness as afflicted or purified constitute a bodhisattva?”
And practice what you teach.
This concludes the Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra, “The Three Bodies.”
‘I am now close to the city of omniscience!’
They know which teachings sever the ties of existence, dissolve the processes of continued existence, and truly deliver the transcendence of suffering.
At that time Śakra, lord of the gods, and the other gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three reflected, “We have been dismissed by the Bodhisattva.”
nor with the level of the genuinely perfect buddhas.
Son of noble family, once, an immeasurably and inconceivably long time ago—immeasurably further back than an incalculable eon—there lived a great sage by the name Supreme One.
“Child, how would you enumerate the number application to the smallest particles?”
A victorious one called Śākyamuni will appear; Offer these alms bowls to him!’
“Evil one, today you will be outmatched by the Bodhisattva, Like a firefly by the sun.
Noble son, bodhisattva great beings exert themselves in the practice of generosity starting by offering food, beverages, vehicles, clothing, and ornaments, until they are able to offer the marrow of their own bones.
“Your clothes already suit you well,
“The Buddha’s Dharma is vast. The teaching of its practice is vast.
Living alone in the wilderness is very trying.
All other bodhisattvas who are beyond the world of humans and gods also wished to venerate the Bodhisattva, and therefore they adorned the limitless buddha realms in the ten directions with an array of offerings.
“Śāriputra, few among paṇḍakas or ṣaṇḍhas take rebirth in the world of the happy destinies of the higher realms.
should respectfully write out this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.
“Those who hear this samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena, and, having heard it, write it out,
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is perseverance.
You obtained certainty in the unshared dharmas:
It is distinguished by the consecration of the wisdom of omniscience.
they do not become fixated on anything at all,
This, noble son, is referred to as suchness, the limit of reality, omniscience, the knowledge of all, the inconceivable field, and the field of no duality.
You, a pure being, went to the foot of the Bodhi tree.
Devas, humans, kumbhāṇḍas, and rākṣasas— Wherever beings lived, there was happiness and joy.
They are terrified of them, saddened by them, do not value them, take no delight in them, and have no attachment or clinging to them.
It is time to come forth. I shall ask you a few questions.
“What is the attainment of fearlessness? It is understanding the Buddha’s Dharma and developing the strength of dhyāna.
“They do not abandon the noble family. They have no hypocrisy or boastfulness.
observed those miraculous forms emanated through the miraculous abilities of the Tathā­gata.
neither the lord of the gods Indra, nor the most noble ones of this world, possess
Mahauṣadhi, it is likewise that sentient beings emerge in the hell realms.
But without correct conduct he is not able to flee, And will be killed by old age, illness, and death. {39}
This is the tantra for purification.
Venerable Subhūti, one who has neither any attainment nor realization has truly vanquished all forms of conceit.”
the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Jñānaprabhāsa, who was perfect in wisdom and conduct, a sugata,
Six hundred laymen and three hundred laywomen developed the unobscured and immaculate eye of the sacred doctrine.
The devas and humans experience the suffering of being poor, encountering what is unpleasant, and being separated from what is pleasant.
How excellent your dedicated diligence! How excellent your great aspiration! {6}
which is the Buddhayāna, ultimate omniscience.
On arrival, he wished the king success and long life then took a place off to one side.
“Those who are wise avoid it Like a vicious poisonous snake.
“They have transcended the level of words; Their knowledge of language is obtained from its nature.
May I complete the perfection of wisdom.
On the relative level, the eightfold path of the noble ones is a gateway to transcending all unwholesome paths.
Similarly, it indicates to these worlds that the four applications of mindfulness are empty.
and similarly, those who practice in order that they might grasp or reject the applications of mindfulness,
Once there, she sent a message to King Śuddhodana:
The relic of his body will not be divided but remain as one whole that will be placed inside a stūpa made of the seven precious materials.
for with it one will not be easily deceived.
and who are not separated from the transcendent perfection of wisdom and skill in means,
said,
Rather, they are born within the realm of desire, where there are beings to be trained and where beings can rejoice in the birth of buddhas.
So the lords of the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, and rākṣasas, all these powerful beings endowed with great supernatural powers,
which a bodhisattva must teach to the assembly of gods at the time of his passing.”
“Those countless qualities Are the refuge of the bodhisattvas.
Then the physician, feeling compassion for the born-blind man,
Youthful Mañjuśrī asked the Bhagavān,
as they also engage in the conduct of enlightenment, They recollect buddhahood itself.
They see the world as being terrifying And filled with calamities and hundreds of miseries.
“Look at our firm and voluptuous breasts,
Those who have the patience of profound Dharma have no desire for any phenomenon
’“Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara then caused divine rains to fall.
“Placing the sword against the disciple’s heart,
will not see these sufferings of saṃsāra.
Hair will not grow again.
Similarly, the earth element is non-arising, and [all other elements], up to and including the element of consciousness, are non-arising.
Therefore, children of noble family, one who creates a sandalwood maṇḍala and reads this mantra and this manual of instructions will not be harmed by poison,
for it surpasses all things created by merit based on material things.
He gave one half of them to the lowliest poor of the city, who had been disdained by those present at the sacrifice.
The bodhisattvas who practice in this way are carrying out the bodhisattva practices.
As for the sequence of absorption above,
Mahauṣadhi then asked,
Conclusion of the twenty-eighth chapter, “The Teaching on Correct Conduct.”
How, then, do they serve the Dharma?
Oh! An amazing being has been born in this world!
All the immeasurable, inconceivable Offerings that there can be
that they have lived the holy life, that they have done what needed doing,
“Similarly, the water element, the fire element, the wind element, the space element, and the consciousness element are also not a self, not a being, not a life force, not a creature, not a human, not a person, not female, not male, not neuter, not me, not mine, and not anybody else’s.
“Furthermore, Śāriputra, this bhagavān has an immeasurable saṅgha of śrāvakas, who are all pure arhats;
one billion realms of the Heaven of Concept-Free Beings,
Furthermore, they will think,
Thereupon the Bhagavān gave a detailed teaching on this episode from the past by chanting the following verses to Brother Ānanda:
Young man, if bodhisattva mahāsattvas have this first quality, they will attain this samādhi.
The bodhisattva who lives in the inconceivable liberation, for the sake of disciplining those living beings who are disciplined through immeasurable periods of evolution, can make the passing of a week seem like the passing of an eon,
Engagement in appropriation leads to a new existence, and if there is a new existence, there is birth.
they are nourished naturally, and they procreate naturally—these are the qualities they exhibit.”
“With this, we became crestfallen, upset, and lost our fearlessness.”
He is matchless, especially in effort.
In this pursuit, there is nothing to be done,
This was the practice method of the wish-fulfilling tree.
“Monks, this evening a group of gods from the pure realms came before me. Among them were Īśvara,
‘I shall correctly practice all the perfections’;
in order to retain all learning;
In her form of Hatred Vajrī.
have made offerings to Tathāgata Śākyamuni,
and they should also praise and rejoice in others who acquire an excellent life span.
“ ‘Lord, for seven days you did not eat. Arise and eat a meal in my home.
“Bhikṣus, then those fifty hundred thousand quintillion Mahābrahmās, speaking as one voice, recited these verses to the Bhagavān:
gaining comprehension of the points comprehended by the thus-gone ones,
that Arjuna is the son of Indra,
What wise man would not be vigilant?”
One should know, Su­bhūti, that space is non-existent because sentient beings are non-existent.
“Consider, noble son, how the radiant sun outshines all other lights.
‘Someone who is called omniscient Is someone who has the five higher knowledges.
He is the one who illumines all with the great light. He is never confused and so clarifies questions and offers predictions.
One may ejaculate or not, as one pleases, With the mind focused solely on pleasure.
Possessing conduct that is flawless,
and brandishes the sword of wisdom in his right hand.
Imagine a man who has a nightmare in which he is bitten by a venomous viper.
“Just as the sun and moon Appear in a bronze bowl
In the beautiful, completely pure realm An­avana­tā Dhvaja­vaijayantī.
One hundred karaphūs is called a hetvindriya.
a vermillion empowerment should be given:
They will come to firmly abide by the Mahāyāna, to swiftly complete the six perfections, and, before long, to manifestly and completely awaken to unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment. Such skillful means and wisdom will he also teach them.
“They create palaces with crescents, Round windows and aviaries, Incense, banners, and vases, And adorned with many jewels. {240}
In between each pair of palm trees, a lotus pond
“Excellent, excellent, noble son!” replied the Blessed One. “Thus it is, noble son!
That faculty of the ears will hear the sounds that the various beings make but the faculty of hearing will not be overwhelmed by all those sounds.
So the sage allowed the beggar to go forth.
The precious jewel of the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class appears just as before.
Its southeastern petal should be white,
The snare of these unfortunate times has caught beings,
Daṇḍapāṇi replied,
bad behavior,
However, great bodhisattva beings who abide in the transcendent perfection of wisdom
whoever genuinely contemplates it inside their home for either a single night, or a single day, ensures that non-humans will not enter there for up to a single year.
If the king sits down, the monk should do the same, yet if he does not, the monk should also not sit down.
and provides visiting monks and wanderer monks with all the supplies they need.”
along with their circumstances and their locales.
“The guides, through the power of wisdom, Teach many causes, parables, and supports.
The Tathāgata declared,
“Why is it devoid of anger? Because it brings the accomplishment of great love.
Although they know, blessed buddhas may inquire about what they already know.
“Here, inner dependent arising is to be seen in terms of five aspects. What five aspects?
O Venerable Lord! I pay homage to the transcendent perfection of wisdom, in which, although nothing at all arises or ceases, the aggregate of ethical discipline is still discerned,
“The thus-gone ones feel great compassion for sentient beings since all phenomena are devoid of substantiality and yet sentient beings think they are supported by substantiality.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of comprehension of humans. What are the four kinds of comprehension of humans?
"དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་གཟི་བརྗིད་ཆོས་ལ་གུས་པའི་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་སེམས་དཔའ་ཆེན་པོ་རྣམས་ལ་གཞན་གྱི་གནོད་པ་<tVimalatejā, bodhisattva great beings who have engendered devotion to the Dharma cannot be harmed in any way by others. 
Looking throughout the four directions, he extended his golden arm, adjusted his upper garment, and said,
Blessed One, when you see fit you, too,
and make them disclose those transgressions just as they have occurred.
“What is the absence of discord and the absence of quarrels? It is the absence of desire for worldly conversation.
They do not consider the recipient. They do not even rejoice in the ripening impact of their giving.
“With the birth in the family of a universal monarch,
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, omniscience is not one thing, and non-arising another.
The Blessed One then spoke the following verses:
“Such wishing gives rise to rebirth-producing actions by means of body, speech, and mind. This is what is meant by ‘appropriation causes becoming.’
Give up pride, arrogance, and harsh speech,
until all those sentient beings are no longer consumed with doubt concerning mundane, supramundane, contaminated, uncontaminated, conditioned, unconditioned, or any other phenomena, and
place it in a charnel ground in a pot, seal it,
“Su­bhūti, if you ask how great bodhisattva beings attract sentient beings through their purposeful activity,
“Rāhula, you will be the eldest son of the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Sāgara­vara­dhara­buddhi­vikrīḍitābhijña,
The sublime śrāvakas who wish to benefit sentient beings should encourage great bodhisattva beings who would attain unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
“Your Majesty! The Supreme One has gone to a farming village.”
{48} Mañjuśrī answered, “In the ocean I taught The Sūtra of the White Lotus of the Good Dharma and nothing else.”
Monk, as all phenomena are mutually contradictory conditions, they are non-arising.
“Ānanda, before long, when three months have passed, the Thus-Gone One will pass beyond suffering.
“ ‘Whoever has insight into the four truths of the noble ones Is liberated from existence in saṃsāra. Therefore, those dwelling in saṃsāra should know all four.
“I also had there five hundred daughters, Who were very beautiful and wore bejeweled shoes,
Śāriputra, I cause entry into the vision of the tathāgatas’ wisdom.
I make this praise
Whether I am present or have passed into nirvāṇa,
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is the emptiness of emptiness.”
and neither is it void, nor is it not void.
excellent patience that is not concerned with a purpose,
Those phenomena are indeed not their essential nature, nor are those words their essential nature.
If it has fallen on the giver of fearlessness, the student should study the removal of poison.
Shifting their attention from their games of pleasure and delights,
It is explained with intention as deep.
one should incant a peg made of cow’s bone, seven fingers long, with 108 recitations of this mantra, and
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection constitutes the ten powers.”
For these reasons, Senior Śāradvatī­putra, the non-arising of the transcendent perfection of wisdom is not the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
I can count each drop in those great rivers, but,
It began to quiver, tremble, quake, move, make sound, and roar, each in three degrees of intensity.
‘These two will become The foremost among all my disciples.
I became wealthy, possessing many riches
And are established in the domain of the tathāgatas. They bring their liberation to fruition. {24}
and with the great saṅgha of a hundred thousand bhikṣus, and accompanied by a multitude of bodhisattva mahāsattvas, he proceeded.
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti addressed the whole gathering of bodhisattvas:
Indeed he is like a savage, so it is inappropriate for the Bodhisattva to take his final existence in a family with wrong views.
Free all beings from the suffering of saṃsāra!
Let him, with his mind calm, tranquil, and totally at peace, Quickly follow the One Who Has Tamed His Mind.
What are those four observances? Venerable, from now on, though you be rebuked, do not rebuke in return;
My friends, if you aspire to that realm, you must strive in the perfection of knowledge in a manner free from reference points.
trustworthy correct conduct, honest correct conduct, correct conduct that was faithful to the vows they had taken,
the application of neither oneness nor plurality,
That is called the emptiness of ultimate reality.
Some of the yakṣas and rākṣasas attained the result of becoming a once-returner.
“Blessed One, where should I begin my teaching?”
Monks, such were the thirty-two omens in the dream of Māra, the evil one.
Bodhisattvas should not accept a kingdom that they would be unable to give away when others ask for it.
the noble lord Avalokiteśvara, standing beneath a blossoming aśoka tree.
it retains its merit and non-merit.
Later, as he was dying, he made this prayer:
t that time, even though great bodhisattva beings become equipoised in the meditative stability of emptiness as a gateway to liberation, as far as the realization of the finality of existence is concerned,
and are attentive to the notion that inner forms are emptiness, and so on, up to the notion that inner forms are the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities,
They do not practice in order to destroy the harms in cyclic existence, nor to destroy the self, sentient beings, living beings, or individuals.
Recall the prophecy of Dīpaṃkara.
and they were of imposing stature, with wide shoulders, and broad, firm chests.’ He relates all of the beautiful physical attributes of those people.
He gazed at Vajrapāṇi and said: “One should know the ritual of activity.
But they will not relish these meditative stabilities or the fruits of these meditative stabilities.
They must make offerings to the sages, to the gods, and to stūpas, and also pay homage to their ancestors.
A second time, the complete assembly of bodhisattvas requested the Bhagavān,
On the seventh and final day of this great sacrifice, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came there and said,
“Noble son, the kiṃnaras who rejoice in the Dharma in that way continually remember the name of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
Ah! This sublime being will be able to dwell at the seat of awakening, where the victorious ones of the past resided.
and similarly, they train in the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of non-entities and the emptiness of essential nature.
“For the highest enlightenment
They played many thousands of trillions of divine musical instruments.
the weapons of the executioners would break into pieces and be scattered around.
They are adorned with beautiful, radiant ornaments.
Through many ways, they also turn some sentient beings away from the meditative stabilities, the [formless] absorptions, the fruit of the meditative stabilities and the fruit of the [formless] absorptions,
while resting in equanimity with the thought, ‘Those whom I have freed have indeed crossed over.’
All the flocks of birds were in the sky Emitting their beautiful, perfect songs. {18}
Similarly, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are absolutely pure because they neither arise nor cease, and they are neither afflicted nor purified.
When he had accomplished the welfare of gods and humans, The Lord of Men proceeded to the banks of the Nairañjanā River.
the faculties that will enable knowledge of all that is unknown
They will never be without that restraint In any physical activity that they perform. {13}
Moreover, children, the old, and the young will be self-protected by the diagram.
There are no three yānas at all;
As soon as they sat down, the monastery vanished and the food and drink turned into molten iron.
They do not preoccupy themselves with the talk of the buddhas.
Do not fall under the power of distraction!
In his last life, in an eon named Mahāvyūha, in a world named Avabhāsaprāptā,
They do not consider anything to be classified as an entity or classified as a non-entity.
In the darkness, neither form nor feeling is visible and, in just the same way,
Of seeing and making offerings to sugatas and pleasing the buddhas. Yet there is no arising and no making of offerings. {10}
” Heeding the Blessed One’s instruction, Ānanda replied, “I shall do as the Reverend instructs.”
With body, speech, and devout mind, I go to them for refuge!
They make assumptions that the gifts are theirs,
swiftly attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment?
(1) Bodhisattvas achieve and maintain the first meditative concentration where there is freedom from desires, and freedom from negative and non-virtuous attributes, while ideation and scrutiny are present, alongside the joy and bliss that arise from freedom.
from their own regions, accompanied by many divisions of perfectly adorned horses and elephants being led without their riders, chariots, and infantry,
“Upatiṣya is intelligent. Were he to find such ambrosia he may not tell me and a situation such as this might happen again.”
Kāśyapa, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha appears in the world in that way.
But said, ‘You, śrāvakas, are my sons!’ {36} “The Lord of the World has said to us,
and to follow a spiritual guide.
“Here are the five sense pleasures, As exquisite as the divine pleasures in the god realms.
But a god of the blue realm called Vairocana told us the following:
“ ‘All these phenomena are like reflections,
Hero, we offer them to you.
This completes “The Noble Sūtra on Reliance upon a Virtuous Spiritual Friend.”
and so on, until birth is prevented, thus putting an end to old age and death, anguish, lamentation, pain, despair, and torment.
Bodhisattvas should be impartial toward all beings.
When the king heard this speech, he rejoiced and proclaimed: “Let everything you wish come to pass!
What are those ten? They have constant love, undifferentiated love, Dharma love, realized love, gentle love, beneficial love, equal love for all beings, love free of ill will, omnipresent love, and transcendent love.
When the followers of the Bodhisattva Vehicle hear this teaching, they will develop an extremely steadfast diligence.
After the tīrthika had offered back his training and returned to his community of tīrthikas,
When the supreme gods saw the Leader’s feet and nails, Copper colored, stainless, pure, and majestic,
“There is a profusion of languages, customs, and merchandise from different countries,
Sukuṇḍala offered him the divine jewels,
If someone were for a deva’s eon to serve tathāgatas, arhats, and samyaksaṃbuddhas as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges with robes, food, bowls, bedding, seats, necessary medicine, and utensils,
“The prince is dangerous and ruthless.
Ratna­mudrā­hasta,
(54) His eyes are clear, (55) stainless, (56) warm, (57) elongated, (58) large, and (59) resemble blue lotuses.
He became the king of physicians,
Puffed up with pride on account of her magical feminine charm.
Su­bhūti, whether or not they have attained the six transcendent perfections, irreversible bodhisattvas will respond precisely in the manner of an irreversible great bodhisattva being.
none of them would understand the field of experience of a single bodhisattva who has attained acceptance that phenomena are non-arising, nor his liberation, his analysis of ultimate reality, or his practice of bringing sentient beings to complete spiritual maturity.
In this way they crush pride as they think, ‘To my friends, close family, relatives, and kinsmen I am now like a dead person.’
The Bodhisattva supposedly entered into his mother’s womb, where he mixed with impure fluids. And yet he is said to have had such enjoyments.
Four-armed and of the color of kunkuma,
They bestow generosity that is equal to the unequaled. They perfect generosity that is equal to the unequaled.
“The young men complained,
The four thorough relinquishments are gateways to the light of the Dharma,
They have faces like tigers, snakes, and hogs, Elephants, horses, donkeys, and camels, Monkeys, lions, or bears.
Māṭhara repeated them and then said,
Oh, the suffering! Poverty is also suffering!
As soon as he had done so, Sunanda’s son, Rohiṇīkumāra by name, acquired insight.
Who follow vinaya and scripture
Su­bhūti, do you think that physical forms are apprehensible with respect to that which is inconceivable, equal to the unequaled, and so forth?
"By expounding the bodhisattvas’ collection of sūtras for the sake of humans,<tei:note xml:id=""UT22084-061-006-229""/> They will obtain great merit."
From Envy Vajrī:
May you, the one with supreme intelligence, be victorious!
He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of the noble eightfold path!”
The time of my death is close. Sons, do not be sad. Do not be unhappy. If you need great medicine, take this medicine.’
O my lords, please advise us! When we milked all your cows, they yielded clarified butter.
This is why, Great King, I cry and sigh so sadly.
If a lay bodhisattva may be endowed with such eloquence,
He carries his offering bowl and is not overbearing or haughty.”
From where did they first originate? Know that all phenomena are like that. {3}
Monk, as all phenomena are deep like space, they are deep.
“Yet even the aspirations of all beings
the samādhi named Practicing Yoga,
I myself will never speak about anyone surreptitiously,
It is a wheel without the all-ground. It is a wheel of the Dharma-way of nonconceptuality to its full extent.
and the ruler of many suffering beings.
“They will quickly attain the lineage of samādhis. They will never become ill.
Venerable Ānanda then turned to the god Ratnavara with the following words:
Good Ānanda, the holder of my teaching, Will in the future become a jina After making offerings to six hundred million sugatas.
‘When he travels with his miraculous powers, hold on to the corner of his robe.’“
One hundred gaṇanāgatis is called a niravadya.
“Blessed One, what is the nature of consciousness?”
Similarly, they teach the doctrine so that the bodhisattvas might cultivate the correct exertions,
He sat down for a bit and then said, “Father, open the door.”
“One should kiss her mouth For as long as one likes, again and again;
He renounced his beloved family and kinsmen And entered homelessness in that jina’s teaching. {51}
By offering what is suitable and pleasant, one will enjoy pleasant possessions such as beds and clothes.
malice, and wrong views; desist from fraud in weights, fraud in measures,
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas
Similarly, this mind [of the bodhisattvas] is unattached to sights,
One should drink milk or wine In order to make one’s desire arise again.
He had mastered the perfections of generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, mental stability, knowledge, and skillful means,
As an elephant does a mud hovel, Destroy Yama’s minions!
The family’s fortunes have come about from little merit, not a vast store of merit. They are impetuous, unstable, and fickle.
As the swords cut into them, they let out great cries of torment, and flee in all directions.
Their two eyeballs are ablaze;
since they do not apprehend those [bodhisattva levels], up to and including the tenth level, how could longing for them arise?
Wherever one may happen to be, There palaces will arise for him
Mistaken conceptual activity then gives rise to the superimposition of a self.
nor is there any element of consciousness apart from the element of dharmas.
unconcerned with other men.
At that point he will personally know the water’s cool quality.”
Those with poisonous gazes, those with poisonous snakes, and those with poisonous breath shot flames of fire at the Bodhisattva.
How does liberation arise In the process of the mind? {97}
Relish playing with us—it will bring great pleasure!
Dharma physician, you develop compassion And teach on the unsurpassed state of peace.
adorned with the auspicious signs and marks, and of such an appearance that he outshone the whole assembly.
“Having heard this unsurpassable sūtra They will not go in future
Your Majesty, quickly summon the priests Who are specialists in the Vedic treatises on dreams.”
This concludes the sūtra entitled “Destroyer of the Great Trichiliocosm.”
Then when they depart from that life, in their next lifetime, they will have a life in which they acquire ox-drawn carriages, horse-drawn carriages, elephant-drawn carriages, palanquins, boats, bull-drawn carriages, and the airborne palaces of a deity.
Nor would it measure one thousandth, or ever one hundred thousandth of it. In fact no number, analogy, or illustration would suffice.
He promised the prince he would do so and went off into the wilds.
Therefore, Ānanda, this transcendent perfection of wisdom is most important because through it the sentient beings of the world systems of the great trichiliocosm become established in accordance with the deeds of the buddhas.
“Similarly, Su­bhūti, physical forms are also inconceivable, unappraisable, innumerable, and equal to the unequaled.
Children of noble family, I would not describe as learned any bodhisattvas who do not expound in detail and correctly to others this absorption that encapsulates all merit.”
Or is it red or white?
When King Mahāpadma, who sat shut up in his upper citadel surrounded by his council, saw them depart, he asked his ministers,
It is also conscious of both its virtuous and non-virtuous actions,
You should also know it as The Questions of Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkam­bhin.”
(13) emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics,
In those two hundred thousand million world realms in each direction there were no villages, towns, market towns, districts, countries, or capitals.
They have no inhalation, no exhalation, and no connection with life.
Their eloquence is boundless.
The King of Aṅga found this message intolerable and commanded his ministers,
This is based on conventional usage, but it is not in the ultimate sense.
They bring benefit to sentient beings and pursue the aims of sentient beings, never relinquishing their commitment, and never abandoning their bodhisattva activities.
“Gentlemen, are there any opponents in my kingdom capable of settling a matter in debate with this brahmin?”
Then the bodhisattva mahāsattva Dharaṇīṃdhara rose from his seat,
“He cannot be seen or beholden,
empowers another great Brahmā as the controller of ten trichiliocosms,
one will destroy all fever:
It is not cognizant of physical forms due to the emptiness of inherent existence,
Like the completely pure lord of the host of stars, The full moon of the last month of autumn, The Teacher who is without equal was encircled {xlii}
who may assume this or that corporeal form by which they are capable of acting on behalf of sentient beings,
One should rub it in around the penis and so on.
causing the lilies among humans and gods to bloom.
When Māra Pāpīyān heard these words, he attempted to become invisible and escape. However, due to the power of youthful Mañjuśrī, he was unable to become invisible and escape.
He is then told: “Listen, venerable [newly ordained monk’s name].
You are striving for the benefit of many people, for the happiness of many people, and with compassion for the world.
based on that, would those people create a lot of merit?”
who has mastered the Vedas and all branches of Vedic knowledge.
The glows of the sun and moon, the stars, jewels, fire, Śakra, and Brahmā are no longer bright in front of his intense glory.
Just as, for example, the element of consciousness of an arhat who has reached the attainment of cessation remains cognizant after it has ceased internally, so, too, a dying person’s element of consciousness retains the capacity for recollection after it has abandoned the body and cast aside the elements.
Śāradvatī­putra! The purity of phenomena is not subject to rebirth in the world system of desire because the essential nature of the world system of desire is non-apprehensible.
‘Pāpīyān, you ought to cut down on your work.
He also showed a great display of meditative concentration.
By thus attracting them with material things,
They should also encourage others to acquire the eight aspects of liberation and the nine serial steps of meditative equipoise.
it would not be the transcendent perfection of wisdom if one were to apprehend its essential nature, or likewise if one were to apprehend its actualization or genuine origin.
and so on up to many eons of dissolution and eons of origination.
The numerous piśācas are running around And those without merit are burned by the fire.
“Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom will refine the buddhafields accordingly.
The past nightmares Will now come true. If you do not retreat,
Although the other monks ministered to him with medicinal roots, stalks, leaves, flowers and fruits, he continued to get worse.
Ānanda, you should know that, for as long as this transcendent perfection of wisdom is active in the world,
In this way, without weariness, they each collect whatever alms are appropriate, being content with a bare minimum.
Whatever you wish to know, ask and I shall explain it to you.”
Nakṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña, possesses this Dharma teaching, or teaches it, hears it, writes it down or has someone write it, makes a volume of it,
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti knowingly addressed those bodhisattvas who had come from the buddhafield of the Lord Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa:
“Where do you come from, venerable one?”
This will also stop attacks on a garden or field by birds, worms, locusts, and other pests.
then, Śāradvatī­putra, these great bodhisattva beings continue to pursue the paths associated with the ten virtuous actions, from the time when they first begin to set their mind on enlightenment.
they would not equal even one hundredth of the bodhisattva saṅgha of the Blessed One, the Thus-Gone One Samanta­raśmyabhyudgata­śrī­kūta­rāja.
A great fire started suddenly throughout the house from all sides.
It would not even count for one thousandth or one-billionth of it. It would not even count as any part, any number worthy of consideration, simile or approximation of any kind.
“ ‘All existences are nonexistent: they are concepts, They are insubstantial, they are like mirages and illusions.
“The wise bodhisattvas who seek to attain The highest, supreme enlightenment,
“You are a savant who only teaches the Ekottarikāgama while
Stay here until you are called.”
The bodies of some looked awful,
bhikṣus, the tathāgata teaches them nirvāṇa in accordance with their aspirations.’
However, on that day not a single being followed after them.
Lord of sages, in order to show me your compassion, Chief of devas, give your assent.” {vi}
not an object of thought or deliberation.
is adorned with various jewels,
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is an appellation for emptiness.
They will always be reborn in different ways.
Then, Senior Śāradvatī­putra addressed Senior Su­bhūti as follows:
suppose a man born blind,
Innumerable gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas anointed their own bodies with the scented water that had come into contact with the body of the Thus-Gone One.
Śata­sahasra­koṭipadma­vivara­saṃcchannā (She Who Is Enveloped by a Display of One Hundred Thousand Crore Lotuses), Padmā (She Who Has Lotuses), Padmasambhavā (She Who Was Born from a Lotus), Padmālayā (She Whose Abode Is a Lotus), Padmadharā (She Who Holds a Lotus), Padmāvatī (She Who Is Endowed with Lotuses)
beings wander in the darkness of ignorance and delusion; They suffer from the terrors of old age, sickness, and death. They are assailed by the sufferings attendant upon taking birth, And they suffer the onslaughts of enemies.
Just as hands cannot grasp or capture space,
And they will take pleasure in the vaginas of animals.
Dispirited, he replied, “Venerables, I have a small task to perform, so please wait here for a bit.”
Will not say that emptiness Is other than the nature of form.
“If you meditate on a worldly samādhi And do not eliminate the conception of a self,
If I were to teach this truth to others, they would not understand it.
the bodhisattvas’ awakening to unexcelled and complete buddhahood depends on accomplishing the aims of sentient beings.
In order to hear the stainless, unsurpassable Dharma He sat there with a devout mind. {7}
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Kṣitigarbha;
After entering inside he established three hundred and sixty million beings irreversibly in the Dharma.
It can be likened to the completion of a thus-gone one’s body endowed with the marks of a hundred merits and in constant equipoise.
And they will hear without exception The many different sounds in this world realm.
Upatiṣya asked this of Aśvajit:
Venerable Lord! Are non-existent sights unattached to non-existent sights?
Coming into the presence of the Blessed One, they prostrated with their heads at his feet,
By teaching us this supreme Great Vehicle.
Also, if that which does not exist were to arise, The barren woman’s son would arise too.
for it leads to being in accord with the entirety of the Buddhadharma.
For even such activities may be manifested By those perfected in liberative art.
The nāga lords Padma and Mahāpadma, And also Vāsuki, Ananta, and Phanaka,
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Āditya to beings who are to be taught by Āditya.
Then they train in the emptiness of internal phenomena and in the emptiness of external phenomena,
Illusion itself is the ten powers of the tathāgatas, and the ten powers of the tathāgatas are themselves illusion.
They make offerings from their own hands with respect and reverence,
with the presentation of many hundred thousand quintillions of
Thus he abides in the qualities of the profound Dharma.
When asked, they reveal that, because they are all of just that sameness by nature, all phenomena are sameness.
‘I bring satiation to all the world, Like a cloud that rains equally on all,
“Padmaśrī, in that way the bodhisattva mahāsattva Gadgadasvara has attained the development of the power of wisdom.”
“There are six superknowledges: the divine eye, the divine ear, knowledge of the minds of others, knowledge of previous existences, knowledge of miracles, and knowledge of the exhaustion of a person’s defilements.
“At one time a world appears, And later the entire world becomes space.
They think of women as women.
“Ānanda, there are five rākṣasīs who, along with 7,700,000 yakṣas, guard and protect the humans in the Jambu continent.
“If one never engages with the Dharma and is never separate from it, that is the way to genuinely engage with the Dharma.
If certain things have been dedicated to a shrine or to the saṅgha then bodhisattvas will not partake of them.
“Now that you have appeared, O Lord, The unfortunate states will become vacant! Gods and humans Will become filled with happiness!
He manifests [as being in the state of parinirvāṇa, as being born,] as a universal monarch,
Ānanda, if you ask what is that [sacred doctrine], it is this very transcendent perfection of wisdom.
The Bodhisattva therefore decided to disregard the words of the gods in order to avoid hypocrisy. Instead he decided to begin eating solid foods.
“Divine son, on the ultimate level, the utterly unarisen is a gateway in every way.”
When beings give up the very basis Of their conflicts, whatever they may be,
As an analogy, Mount Meru, the king of mountains, which is 84,000 miles in height, is encircled by the nāga kings Nanda and Upānanda for 30,000 miles.
The practice of following the Dharma of the sugatas,
One should blend the flowers of jasmine with sesame oil,
These sensory elements are like a phantom, and so forth.
Teach it to propagate this Great Vehicle.
all four divisions of the king’s army would be astonished and amazed.
“You offered Akṣobhyarāja a multistoried palace, and a flower garland to Lokapūjita.
The Buddha then said to the venerable Mahākātyāyana,
“It is merely a trace of his qualities That the gods, demigods, yakṣas, and mahoragas will ever possess.
One should draw a lotus flower with seven petals and apply the seven syllables to it.
If they wish, through the buddhas’ and gods’ blessings, they can live for a thousand years,
“In a place pleasing to the mind, Free from all distractions,
If a monk were to do such a thing, he would immediately disqualify himself as a monk,
Candana and Kāmaśreṣṭhī,
bring them before him, and present them to him.
Bhikṣus, the devas of Trāyastriṃśa erected for that bhagavān, who had come to the sublime, supreme Bodhimaṇḍa, a great lion throne, which was five hundred yojanas high, for the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
craving was purified,
Therefore, Father, Mother, it would be excellent for me to go before the Bhagavān.
“I remember many hundreds of eons ago There was a guide of limitless renown.
“Bodhisattvas are not born among long-living gods who let the births of numerous buddhas result in nothing and who are oblivious to the welfare of sentient beings.
How do they provide support?
All beings who were living in the hells along with those born as animals and all those in the world of the lord of death became instantaneously free from suffering and filled with every happiness.
He never loses his liberation, and therefore
Now, we are the followers of the noble ones’ Dharma-Vinaya and,
Then they circled and praised the Bodhisattva, Calling out, “This is the Buddha, the excellent Buddha!”
this is the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration possessed by great bodhisattva beings.
fourteen billion living beings were disciplined in the vehicles of the disciples and solitary sages,
in the eon called Vicaraṇa in the universe called Mahāvyūha.
The authentic tathatā is the not-at-all-tathatā.
I do not understand it, I am not interested in it, and I do not believe in it.
Thus, Mañjuśrī, through this explanation you should understand that ‘non-arising and non-cessation’ is an appellation of the Tathāgata.”
When practicing generosity by giving away horses, elephants, and chariots,
One should cultivate the clear understanding of great compassion.
Having rejected this kind of sūtra They will be legless, moving on their stomachs.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is a field of morality.
Consciousness is what causes the element of dharmas to be accompanied by attention,
Sensation, notions, formative factors and consciousness do not come from anywhere.
Similarly, they should not abide in sights.
I will practice the six transcendent perfections by any means until these sentient beings can no longer be distinguished by their color, and, distinct from them, they acquire a golden hue, beautiful to behold, with a fine and splendid physique, and the finest of complexions.
The bodhisattvas will know from their aromas
The Thus-Gone One sees them,
Next follows another method:
And due to the prayer that they made, they have gone forth at the mere age of seven,
Knowing that many devas and humans had assembled in order to hear the Dharma,
without corruption,
And not being dependent on them or attached to them.” {71}
“The divine, sublime sound of thousands of instruments And the beautiful songs of deva maidens,
“The bodhisattvas will perform many activities. Beings will constantly make offerings to them.
How extensively would the first man be able to praise the hoofprints of an ox?”
Even if they were to bring such offerings continuously until the final eon, it would neither eclipse nor exceed the merit that is associated with that single hair follicle.
Similarly, the ten powers of the tathāgatas are revealed therein,
“Some resolute ones, standing with legs together, Join their palms in homage before the guides.
“One should insert into the loose vagina the powder from locusts and moths. The vagina will then become firm.”
Furthermore, for a minister, harming those who have taken ordination with the Bhagavān—
“Monk, do you think that there is a difference such that your dreaming mind and your waking mind are separate and distinct?”
‘May the Dharma be proclaimed, the Dharma which is no less than Exactly what the Victorious One understands!’
You who see all, please accept them,
With compassion, Lord of Dharma, you benefit the world. Through your kindness you wish to benefit beings. {6}
Prajāguru, The divine son Mātali,
Six thousand upāsikās attained the result of once-returners.
That is repeated a second and a third time. The petition to ask about impediments before the saṅgha.
In the emptiness of all intrinsic defining characteristics, the emptiness of all things is not discerned.
When anyone enters into union with this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, as it has been revealed, they will generate many merits, greater than those.
[Imbued with renunciation, dwelling in solitude, maintaining detachment, and remaining in a state of cessation], they should cultivate the support for miraculous ability combining meditative stability of perseverance with the formative force of exertion.
Sixty-four, paired, Is concealed in the amount of thirty-two.
[6] they are invincible to the māras; [7] they are unshakable to all adversaries;
It is shaken six times When he attains supreme enlightenment. {220}
And there is no pleasure in being separated from women.
they become perfectly awakened within unsurpassable, complete, and perfect awakening, and
“Noble son, because they possess ten qualities bodhisattvas have a fluent eloquence.
And with his face covered by a red silken cloth, The disciple should enter there.
What is the bodhisattva mahāsattva Gadgadasvara’s samādhi for guiding this many beings?”
“What is the level of buddhahood? It is the attainment of all good qualities.
Known as the robbers , they eat the brains of women.
the world, including the bodhisattva Kṣitigarbha, the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, and gandharvas rejoiced
Then later, Noble Lord of the Śākyas, you can retreat to the forest!”
for with it one will not be led astray.
and he will cross the ocean of saṃsāra.
His joints are not visible.
(39) of pure appearance, and (40) shines with a light that dispels all darkness.
Seven dust particles on a sheep is one dust particle on a cow.
The rays assist all these beings by producing causes for what will come later, and increase their wholesome dharmas.
nor by the mind.
Also, when any great bodhisattva beings, through their attention endowed with omniscience,
Similarly, owing to the fact that physical forms, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are non-existent,
one who sees the Dharma sees the Tathāgata.’
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline accordingly will swiftly perfect the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline.
In whatever situation he may be, The yogin should visualize the divine form.
When bodhisattvas are generous,
“Mañjuśrī, it is difficult to feel conviction in the ultimate truth.”
When they have rejected a sūtra such as this
Having purified your own conduct, you have reached the culmination of conduct.
And with the eighty thousand million others He came before the Lord of the World. {49}
For all beings, old age overcomes youth.
If they are thinking of Avalokiteśvara Immediately the enemies will be pacified.
and adorned by beautiful, vast, high, golden mountains.
How you are worshiped by gods and humans!
“Disperse all the darkness and turbidity of ignorance With the lamp of knowledge.
Noble sons, it is the prayer of this noble son that this will be the cause for bodhisattvas reaching perfection.”
and similarly, they undertake verbal actions imbued with loving kindness, and mental actions imbued with loving kindness.
From now on, I will never have doubts. I am ripened in this supreme yāna. {1}
“Blessed One, what is meant by suchness?”
“In the moment that I have attained This samādhi, the path of great wisdom, Having attained this supreme samādhi
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain the eighty secondary signs of a great being.
All the gods in the sāl forest revealed half their bodies from among the trees’ leaves and remained there, bowing.
“Bhagavān, we will have faith in whatever the Tathāgata says, thinking, ‘The Tathāgata speaks infallibly. The Tathāgata knows the truth.’
He said that unless he awakens to perfect and complete buddhahood, he will never again enter the city of Kapilavastu. So he will not return with you.
“At that time he had a shining saṅgha
Even millions of māras cannot disturb The one who has trained in this restraint of the body. {30}
Free of the stains of darkness, you have realized the immortal state.
Nārāyaṇa, even if all beings included in the great billionfold universe had the same amount of merit as Śakra, their collected merit would still not match one hundredth of the amount of merit possessed by Great Brahmā; it would not even bear comparison.
They have wisdom and train correctly. Having trained they liberate many lost beings. {6}
“For a full two thousand years The Jina taught the Dharma.
Whoever desires many such qualities, And the happiness of existence as well as nirvāṇa, And wants to utterly perfect all qualities,
So please assemble everyone who is skilled in the arts!
“Through my giving the gift of the Dharma I developed a pleasing following;
see sentient beings whose conceptual notions are perverse, who lack genuine views, whether mundane or supramundane, who habitually indulge in non-virtuous actions, and who propound inaction,
and having set out had second thoughts on the way down
“Bodhisattvas who maintain the aggregate of correct conduct, Who practice the conduct wishing for benefit,
The Blessed One answered the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya,
Those desiring clothes received clothing, those wanting a mount received one, and those wishing for wealth found riches.
who brings relief to turtles, crocodiles, and fish;
I will go back now—quick, turn my chariot around!
until he reaches the essence of enlightenment.
And were even to practice them For an entire eighty billion eons,
Some had their eyes closed, some had them open, and some were rolling their eyes.
Noble children, this sublime being has produced roots of virtue in the company of ninety-nine trillion buddhas.
some of crystal,
At that time the Bodhisattva stood to one side while the five hundred Śākya youths wrestled among themselves.
Great prosperity and a generous attitude.
Further, it involves giving up the company of those who are fond of social activities, the lazy, those who are fond of cyclic existence, and those who turn their back on awakening, as well as avoiding association with householders.
Śāriputra, just as I now praise the inconceivable qualities of those bhagavān buddhas, likewise,
the realm of phenomena was understood,
To live in such peace is to enter into nonduality.”
to embrace the true Dharma and ensure the continuity of the Three Jewels.
All of them bowed to the feet of the Thus-Gone One And returned to their own abodes, in magnificent arrays.
“ ‘The guides of the past, who had the ten strengths, Who had pacified senses, and kindness,
“Friends, this sūtra known as The Play in Full is a very extensive account of the Bodhisattva’s playful activity.
Having pulled out the root of a white uccaṭa plant, Once consecrates it with fifty recitations of the mantra.
and they should become equipoised in the [other meditative concentrations], up to and including the fourth meditative concentration.
and having done all those things, there would be no sin in that nor would any sin come from it.
a powerhouse since he was endowed with the ten powers,
causes them to become discernible in the god realms and the human realm.
“Furthermore, the element of consciousness, after it has left the body behind,
They became free of hunger and thirst. {2}
That is to say, they do not depend on physical forms, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness,
“In the past you made these and other offerings, Manifold and marvelous, to the best of beings.
having been incinerated, they will become sentient denizens of the great hells in other world systems.
“In the later times, during the later times of the last five hundred years of the Dharma,
for those striving toward enlightenment, like a rosary. Thus does he appear.
hose with hands of webbed fingers, those with no lips, those whose bodies are marked, or the very old.
With great compassion he goes to the three realms.
The supreme all-knowing one, The Tathāgata, the great physician, Who has the nature of compassion, Appears in the world that is stupefied by ignorance.
They who have massive bodies, Where did they come from?
and make a tika with this substance.
and was praised and revered by one hundred thousand gods.
“The bodhisattvas who maintain the aggregate of correct conduct Make the greatest, most special offering to me.
and so they are generous without any hope that the causes, conditions, or bases of their generosity will bring any reward.
With the root of Indian licorice, one will kill worms in one’s teeth.
she broke through the earth’s surface and revealed her upper body, adorned with all sorts of jewels.
goat’s milk, yellow myrobalan, the three hot substances,
“It is not the level of ignorance. It is the arising of wisdom.
Monks, through the blessing of the Bodhisattva, Chanda told King Śuddhodana, the Śākya princess Gopā, the retinue of consorts, and everyone else among the Śākyas what had happened in order to alleviate their suffering.
Saṅgharakṣita sees the effects of actions with his own eyes.
"མི་<tWill they sniff at its stench or not?”
They do not see the phenomena and they do not perceive the phenomena of
“As soon as that guide had taught He sat cross-legged, and in that instant
They do not consider whether the nose is connected with the tongue.
Endowed with such disciplines,
“Dwelling constantly in the sky, O Sage,
When this has mingled with the mercury, Emeralds and so forth are also to be infused.
Say you brought all the beings in the great trichiliocosm together, and all of them had the quantity of merit made by engendering the meditation of Great Brahmā’s love.
Therefore, Padmaśrīgarbha, listen very well and keep in mind what I will now explain.”
Or else are they practicing the essenceless doctrine?
Rather, boys and girls are born when three circumstances are present.
For that reason, we ask that you send the noble Saṅgharakṣita with us across the ocean.”
The Bodhisattva, the Great Being, has donned the great armor.
the Lord replied,
[5] in meditating they meditate with a non-abiding meditation;
“The eye does not think, ‘I serve as the basis for the eye consciousness.’
and having done so, they emanate the array of a universal monarch,
He has reached the perfection of all good qualities And is renowned throughout the worlds in all directions. {71}
The excellent king commanded his entourage, “Make the finest preparations in the upper quarters of the palace.
Ajita, in the same way that the directions of east, south, west, north, above and below, and the intermediate directions in the element of space have no end.
I will practice the six transcendent perfections by any means until even the name of the acquisitiveness of those sentient beings—from their acquisitiveness regarding physical forms to their acquisitivenesss regarding consciousness—is no longer heard. I will even refine the buddhafields. I will also bring sentient beings to maturity.
logic,
while the monastic community of that one will be innumerable.
A virtuous spiritual friend, a virtuous companion, a virtuous support is half the holy life.
“Dear boy, listen.
he entered the samādhi named the state of infinite instruction;
for it leads to the complete perfection of the entirety of the Buddhadharma.
Similarly, owing to the fact that physical forms, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are indestructible,
Monks, everyone followed the commands issued by the king.
“Young brahmin, having met you, we have another question.
They are focused one-pointedly on the Dharma,
The aspect-less is explained as transcending comparison.
Some are the size of humans and some the size of dogs.
in the presence of a crowd of common folk, may deceive childish persons by conjuring up the four corps of an army—the elephant corps, the cavalry corps, the chariot corps, and the infantry corps
His body is free of any blemishes or dark spots.
because it recollects its previous bodily state,
The Bodhisattva, with the pristine divine eye beyond that of humans,
How does one stay in a solitary place? How does wisdom increase? {7}
And liberate quintillions of beings!’
Just as wild horses or wild elephants will not be tamed unless the goad pierces them to the marrow,
“Well then, Gautama, whatever teaching I know, you also know. And whatever you know, I also know.
They praised the one who is like the bayur tree, or the campaka;
Through those teachings those beings will have happiness in this life and at death will be reborn in happy existences.
They do not consider the fact that they are not practicing it.
The tathatā is purity;
Through hearing that, enlightenment will be attained.
adorned with scattered flowers.
And then we and all beings Will reach the highest enlightenment.
or it is white, or is colored white, or is like white, or shines with white light;
If the Blessed One was about to foretell rebirth as an animal, the rays of light would fade into his ankle.
and similarly, when they establish, cognize, and become fixated on the notion that [the other sensory elements], up to and including mental phenomena, are non-entities—
if they are not inclined toward extensive [acts of virtuous conduct],
Though he will pass into nirvāṇa, his sacred Dharma will remain for 84 trillion eons.
Later the food will have spoiled.”
Great bodhisattva beings who abide accordingly in this transcendent perfection of wisdom do not apprehend the designation of physical forms
Are continuously making an offering to all the buddhas. {279}
And hurled it far outside the fair city, Beyond seven of the city’s moats.
The great Brahmā placed this drop into a beautiful vessel of beryl and offered it to the Bodhisattva.
In this way the mind corrects itself.
Therefore, what need is there to mention the importance of keeping in mind the Dharma, reading it, copying it or commissioning this action, or accurately teaching it in a detailed way to others?
“Noble ones, those two boys, through performing those miracles, guided their father, King Śubhavyūha.
In that way the yogins fly through the air, Unimpeded like the wind and the clouds. {48}
They should have compassion for all those beings who are not yet dedicated to enlightenment.
“I am from the West.”
“Relishing those different kinds of sensations, taking delight in them, clinging to them, and having that clinging remain is what is meant by ‘sensation causes craving.’
“You know the conduct of all beings. You have the wisdom of all phenomena.
Those who engage in writing out the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, are engaged in writing the eighty-four thousand compilations of the Dharma.
also constantly travel to other realms Where they will praise thousands of buddhas
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, the six extrasensory powers are non-existent and non-apprehensible.
It is with this in mind that the Blessed One has taught, ‘Space does not stick to the palm of one’s hand; so too, are a spiritual practitioner’s qualities.’”
or write the mantra on the wall of a house with incanted chalk.
There were no Kāla mountain ranges. There were no Mucilinda or Mahāmucilinda Mountains.
“They speak with unimpeded words, like the voice of Brahmā, Have a voice like the song of a goose, a voice like a kiṃnara’s song,
I was able to quickly escape from the burning house through the door.
Avalokiteśvara said,
Yet if a listener received a prophecy, that would not be the case.
They attain measureless wisdom free of darkness. These qualities from attaining samādhi are measureless. {194}
But these things do not originate from the nāgas’ bodies or minds.
Having gone up into the air, they lay down there, they walked in the air, they shook themselves free of dust in the air,
Gardenia, aśoka, and kachnar trees, As well as red lotuses, blue lotuses, night lotuses, and white lotuses. {9}
The Tathāgata knows the weakness of the aspirations of beings.
Other bodhisattva mahāsattvas, as numerous as the atoms in one four-continent world realm, heard this Dharma teaching and developed the aspiration to the highest, complete enlightenment in one lifetime.
Perception is the internal description of things after apprehending their particular forms.
“If you ask what is the ‘knowledge of the origin of suffering,’
In the same way, all endeavors of a yogin, who relies on meditative cultivation, will be successful.
And the forty misdeeds I eliminated here at the center of the earth.
‘Listen! I shall explain all These tiny, minute herbs, Those that are small in the world, And the other medium and large herbs.
Is he like a blind man, or does he know the country and seek advantage?
“It was not with knives and arrows That he defeated Māra’s army.
Noble ones, whatever the Tathāgata has to do, that is what the Tathāgata does.
“Even if one were to speak for countless hundreds of eons, It would be difficult to conclude the praises,
We will now mete out the punishment
Get up!
They experienced emptiness, remained within the absence of marks, and were free from any fixation on wishes.
“You arrive evenly and go evenly,
and who was to take his last body, died and passed from the lofty heights of a god and entered his wife’s womb.
Just as this bow was drawn by the Sage Without rising from his seat,
gets attached to it and enjoys its taste,
I would not have quickly attained the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood in this way.
Even those who make a little offering to the relics of a sugata, Who play music on just one instrument, {93}
“Śāriputra, the tathāgatas do not lie. This one yāna, Śāriputra, is the Buddhayāna.”
That they would see as many guides of the world
To attain accomplishment and bliss, He remained calm and diligent.
He walks with his eyes toward the ground at a distance of six feet.
The buddhas and bodhisattvasWho engage in the supreme conduct of secret mantra
After a time, the saṅgha elder lifted his cup of water.
In this way he rested in wisdom.
They will pass genuinely beyond the danger of taking birth as animals.
Acceptance of the Dharma of nonarising is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
will be guarded, protected, looked after, and brought peace and well-being by them!
its rivers, lakes, fountains, streams, oceans, and other bodies of water;
This sentient being has vast beliefs,
Then the Bhagavān, in order to give this Dharma teaching on entering the patience of profound Dharma, recited these verses:
When bodhisattvas observe discipline,
it will accrue these qualities and advantages in this life and in the next life.
that all views are encapsulated in the view of wishlessness, and
he is called the Destroyer of All Adversaries.
So surely the Tathāgata will indeed wish to expound and spread the king of sūtras of the great vehicle called The Teaching on the Extraordinary Transformation that is the Miracle of Attaining the Buddha’s Powers.
He knows the phases [and the degrees].
in the same way, Su­bhūti, the attributes of the tathāgatas are inconceivable and equal to the unequaled.
It is not due to a person’s skill. It is not due to his overpowering ability.
He was a master of generosity in bestowing the gift of the unexcelled great Dharma.
I gave away my wealth, grains, cowries, and gold to help those who were bound by attachment, anger, and ignorance.
“Young man, it arises from training in the great, higher cognitions, and it is known as the tathāgatakāya.”
At which point the ordinand says: “It is excellent.”
the universe of gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas rejoiced and praised his words.
There is the meditative stability named Lamp of the Sun.
At that time, the daughter of Sāgara, king of the nāgas, had a jewel of the value of an entire realm of a billion worlds.
The Bhagavān then asked all those bodhisattvas,
Vibhūtī (Abundance)
The Blessed One was dwelling in the Jetavana, Anāthapiṇḍada’s grove in Śrāvastī.
“When Māra, powerful and persistent, arrived, You defeated him with your insight, diligence, and love, And then you attained the deathless supreme state.
Amid all this activity, while the Bodhisattva was exiting through the eastern gate of the city on his way to the parks,
When the yakṣas are engorged, Having ferociously eaten other beings,
Similarly, if they abide in, cognize, and are intent on sights,
“ ‘It is the seat of love, because it is equal to all living beings.
Therefore, Bhagavān, it would be fitting if the Bhagavān were quickly to give us the prophecy of our attainment of the highest, complete enlightenment.”
They will encounter no impediment. {9}
One should smear and rub it with the previously described preparation For three days, and it will become healthy and strong.
gaining acceptance that phenomena are nonarising.
At that time the Bhagavān spoke these appropriate verses to Bodhisattva Maitreya:
They do not stay in mountain caves, and they do not hide from water.
In order to guard the Bodhisattva,
“Śāradvatī­putra! This purity of phenomena is due to absolute purity.”
Their mouth is fragrant.
“ ‘Speaking little, pleasantly, and articulately, Speaking good and gentle words to others,
“The power of love is the residence. Patience and gentleness is the robe.
one should start on the first day of the bright fortnight and proceed as before until the day of the full moon.
It is a wheel utterly ungraspable. It is a wheel beyond effort and effortlessness, an inexpressible wheel.
Expert in the deep analysis of things, you teach their ultimate meaning.
“Su­bhūti, even if the evil Māra were to approach great bodhisattva beings in the guise of a buddha,
“Mañjuśrī, it is difficult in many worlds to be able to hear the words, the sound, or the name of this Dharma teaching.
“If we are permitted, reverend, we would obtain the going forth, ordination, and monkhood in the well-proclaimed Dharma and Vinaya.
Monk, as all phenomena are like a body of space and an empty hand, they cannot be grasped.
“O, the Blessed One has revealed this sacred doctrine which is incompatible with mundane things.
With this mastery, there is instantaneously a complete knowledge of such areas as the thus-gone ones’ ten powers, fearlessnesses, correct understandings, unique qualities, excellent marks and signs, and sacred complete awakening, as well as the number of extremely subtle particles in all buddha realms throughout time.
Similarly, they should be attentive to the notions that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are impermanent, and so on, up to calamitous.
At the same time hundreds of buddhas, residing in the ten directions, all became silent.
“Nārāyaṇa, please pay heed and understand this well.
That sounds are not heard is the lack of reference point.
“Visualizing it as nectar, expand it greatly. Through two expansions, purify it.
he will display the form of the Buddha and utter these words:
Tunnel beneath the earth and I will yank you up as if with a hook.
Knowing the characteristic of the true Dharma, He brings to an end all illusions. {226}
In addition all the chief gods believed that the mother of the Bodhisattva remained only in the residence they had given her, and not anywhere else.
The beings who remember your name will have good thoughts.
Through all of this, fiery sand had not fallen on a number of scrawny nāgas either, prompting him to ask,
Alas! He is leaving. The vow he made in the past is now being fulfilled!”
“I took a vow to remain fasting.
‘I have understood the Bhagavān’s teaching to mean that he does not praise the perfection of generosity,
has given birth to all the tathāgatas, the arhats, the perfectly enlightened buddhas;
Some to be converted strive for the roots of virtue that arise from commissioning statues, images, and representations of gold, silver, and brass.
The wife with whom he had sported, made love, and indulged all of his desires then gave birth to a son,
“You may wonder, noble son, what these qualities may imply, from the bodhisattvas’ dispelling of the darkness of ignorance through to their being the joy of virtuous beings.
Bodhisattvas should be like a father or mother to all beings, giving them things that are helpful and pleasing.
He cried out and collapsed on the ground.
this, Śāradvatī­putra, is the transcendent perfection of wisdom, originating from the skillful means of great bodhisattva beings who practice the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable aspirations, and the formless absorptions.
the uppermost 68,000 leagues of the earth’s surface in those world systems would be demolished when the bodhisattva took those seven steps after being born.
Great king, why are you and this great assembly of people here before me crying out loudly,
So needless to mention that an insightful person would not feel any desire either.’
Because the awakened ones know,
Bhagavān, we have lived in great hardship.
dying precious gems, dying clothes, creating optical illusions, dream analysis, bird sounds,
In this way the wind amasses great cloud formations that yield a constant and continuous downpour of rain,
one’s words will be heeded.
Then Brother Ānanda bowed his head to the Bhagavat’s feet and departed.
It is the teaching of the Dharma that causes the acquisition of the vision of the tathāgatas’ wisdom,
one should make offerings to her, the Blessed One.
“The vinaya of the hearers does not embody the ten strengths, the various types of fearlessness, the unique qualities, or omniscient wisdom.
Likewise this city of Kapilavastu will become prosperous And replete with treasures.
The priest Nārada pronounced a curse.
seven realms with discerning awareness, seven realms lacking discerning awareness,
when noble sons and daughters accept it, repeat it, understand it deeply, write it completely, and, making it into a book, honor it,
why should I be fixated on phenomena?
They are non-apprehensible because emptiness is indeed emptiness. So
Similarly, eight million four hundred thousand goddesses from each of the realms of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, the Heaven Free from Strife, the Heaven of Joy, the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations, and the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations
“Maitreya, the transgressions of a minister are also five in number.
And will quickly attain supreme awakening.”
“Noble son, the ocean does not allow a dead corpse to remain.
It has not been revealed so that the sensory element of the mental faculty, the sensory element of mental phenomena, and the sensory element of mental consciousness might be grasped or not grasped.
“This samādhi is not difficult to attain For those who understand the natural results That come to those who become envious of wealth And to those who seek and enjoy it. {6}
The domain of the realization of the unborn nature of all things, yet of the perfection of the body, the auspicious signs and marks, and the ornaments of the Buddha, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
‘In accordance with the aspirations expressed by the thus-gone ones, through this gift of wealth, grains, and stores
would not attain manifestly perfect buddhahood, in which all things are signless, free from recollection, and free from attention, and they would not become established in uncontaminated phenomena, in the real nature.
In order to create the precious images Of statues that possess the thirty-two signs:
The Protector of the World came to the city in Magadha; Peacefully, he stayed as long as he wished.
Giving this world realm of a billion worlds filled with the seven precious materials to all the buddhas, bodhisattvas, śrāvakas, and pratyeka­buddhas is not comparable.
“The nature of phenomena is like that of space, Inexpressible, beyond speech and words.
Kumārabhuta, “Mañjuśrī, how is the spiritual community of hearers that belong to the Blessed, thus-gone, worthy, perfect Buddha Ratnaketu?”
and similarly, they oppose [all the other causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including omniscience.
of skill in erudition, consummated by religious practice;
“Śāradvatī­putra, if you ask what are the ‘ten powers of the tathāgatas,’ they are as follows:
I will definitely practice generosity by giving away crest jewels and crowns!’
and the eighteen distinct qualities of a buddha. Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.
Since they derive from imagination, who in fact is scolding or striking me?
Fearless when enemies descend, you are unharmed by their attacks.
and when they are ovulating;
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities relinquish the eight unfree states.
This sacred doctrine is compatible with the fruit of individual enlightenment.
Noble one, this Dharma offering of giving away your own body is the preeminent, the highest offering
Su­bhūti, it is because there is nothing which the tathāgatas, bodhisattvas, pratyekabuddhas, and the śrāvakas of the tathāgatas apprehend outside the expanse of reality.
dress yourself in colorful robes. You must make an effort to be sure that he falls under your power!’
“Desire is like poison and has endless faults; It pushes beings into hell and the realms of hungry spirits and animals.
Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva lived according to the Dharma.
They should dwell outside the monastery.
garuḍa,
Such a mind is unclear, just as is the case, for example, with the obscured mind state of someone who has just been woken up from a deep sleep.
The time has come to utter melodious speech!
“ ‘Destructible’ and ‘indestructible’ are dualistic.
Su­bhūti, all things have a modality that does not arise;
Su­bhūti, the bodhisattvas bestow all their gifts in order to release all sentient beings from suffering.
“ ‘The Dharma is taught through illusory words And all those words cease in that instant.
“The power of insight‌ and the power of means, The power of miracles and unattached love, The power of correct discernment and complete truth— Today I will accomplish those.
in the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth,
not perceiving dharmas, the mind-consciousness has no ground to stand upon.
And that they lead away from the noble path of wisdom,
The newborn Bodhisattva had already practiced good conduct for countless trillions of eons, and he possessed great diligence and strength.
It is taught to superior persons
The Blessed One expressed his approval to the bodhisattva noble Avaloki­teśvara, saying,
“Noble sons, Ānanda and I together, at the same moment, developed the aspiration to the highest, complete enlightenment in front of the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Dharma­gaganābhyudgata­rāja.
Those are the four retentions. The four retentions are those.
“I am someone who has the great strength that comes with being a mighty and powerful strongman.
What type of phenomenon does my mind engage with?’
the great Queen Mahāmāyā
“He is the one who is supported by large gatherings of worthy ones.
“ ‘Those who know the unceasing Dharma Will always know the unceasing Dharma.
Some live on just one mouthful of food, or anything up to seven mouthfuls.
“They understand the mind as being like an illusion, Like a dream, and similarly like a mirage,
They joined the palms of their hands and prostrated toward the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni while they called out, “Homage to the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni!”
Except for the tathāgatas, no one could easily express the excellent quality of that being’s accumulation of merit and of his or her roots of virtue.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of existence. What are the four kinds of knowledge of existence?
At one point venerable Śāriputra, venerable Mahāmaudgalyāyana, venerable Mahākāśyapa, venerable Ānanda, and venerable Rāhula all went to see the Blessed One;
Noble son, bodhisattvas possessing these ten qualities are similar to fire.
owing to the non-apprehension of the arising of [all other attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience
“Venerable Lord! Why are all phenomena gathered in the expanse of reality?”
robes, parasols,
“Friends,” replied Śakra, “wait until the best of the superior gods come into the presence of the Blessed One and delight him.”
Of all the lords of the worlds, And they have no doubt in the Dharma of the Buddha. {55}
has equanimity without any attainment of equanimity—he enters the absence of conceptual knots.
Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha, who is the great King of the Dharma, while he is the King of the Dharma sees the śrāvakas and bodhisattvas battling with the Māra of the skandhas or the Māra of the kleśas.
consider a filthy, rotten, and foul-smelling corpse of a dog with repulsive, dark bluish-green skin, completely full of maggots, lying on a roadside.
And the Tathāgata realized them, precisely in the way in which they are empty.
“The merchants asked me, ‘On what day should we go?’
not to hope for a reward from the ripening of one’s spiritual or material generosity.
and their bodies, beautiful without ornaments,
One who wishes for a girl will soon obtain the one he desires.
I myself will never [speak covetously to anyone,] order others to speak so, [or rejoice in someone so speaking to anyone!’]
The four elements and the four mothers;
In that way it is similar to space, and therefore it is described as such.
or whether its limbs are well-proportioned.
“Reverend, what the Blessed One has done for me, my father did not do for me,
You should not make assumptions on account of these resources.
“Even Brahmā, the peaceful and compassionate one, Who speaks lovingly, awaits you, thinking, ‘I must request this lord of men To turn the unexcelled wheel.’
is not interested in the Dharma but is interested in verbalization.
She was overcome by sorrow and cried out,
They held aloft vast white parasols and beautiful yak-tail fans;
“As I was teaching them properly the benefits and virtues of renouncing the world,
One has the notion of happiness as happiness and suffering as suffering.
Though a hundred spears strike them a second time, they will not die.
venerable Aniruddha,
The saṃbhogakāya remains the same meditative absorption for all the buddhas
Hence, to know that affliction is indeed the very nature of the realm of phenomena is what we call purification.
Venerable Lord! If all things are non-arising,
“Rudraka, the son of Rāma, is really in charge of a group, indeed a large group; he is the head of the congregation and, moreover, well-known, popular, venerated by the masses, and recognized by all scholars.
There were the superior kings of great power, renowned as having great power,
I shall go forth.” He then said this to his son,
The god said, “Mañjuśrī, you should not deliver this Dharma teaching when beginners are present.
while they are seated, with their divine sense of smell
those spirits that dwell in mountains, forests, thickets, trees, rivers, fountains, ponds, pools, wells, and reliquaries.
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities will never separate from their spiritual teachers.
Of the best beryls and likewise sapphires:
This completes the fifteenth chapter from “The Transcendent Perfection of Wisdom in Ten Thousand Lines,” entitled “The Transcendent Perfection of Tolerance.”
it is the termination of any focus of the mind;
You have bodies as infinite as the element of space.
They have wisdom concerning states of existence. They have complete understanding of all phenomena. {224}
When he had completely liberated the beings there, he went to the city of the pretas.
tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas in other hundreds of thousands of quintillions of world realms,
He is free from feeling, from all absence of feeling, from all perceptions, all thoughts, and all ways of directing the mind.
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, never develop thoughts of desire.
From the development of insight comes buddhahood.
“Divine being, the Thus-Gone One has prophesied your awakening to true and perfect buddhahood. You have gained something excellent.”
He will teach so that all opponents are defeated,
“How does it not involve transmigration?
Ultimately, all phenomena up through nirvāṇa itself are unarisen.
the inconceivably numerous accumulations of sūtras concerning teaching the composite,
together with many hosts of vajra yogins and yoginīs,
like a special one,
in the same way, Śāradvatī­putra, the meaning of the term ‘bodhisattva’ as a great bodhisattva being, abiding in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, is non-existent.
abandoned and let go of my child,
He is without activity, without birth,
My friend, take this precious jewel and go to the big city, and
“Su­bhūti! If you have conviction in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, you should not have conviction in physical forms.
The body is ownerless, being the product of a variety of conditions.
Their words are not meaningless; Their teaching of the Dharma is fruitful. {132}
Even the tathāgatas do not have Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s prowess.’
Abhorring the wickedness of the mind, Never abandoning the mendicant’s discipline,
who has eleven heads;
“They are always beside the doorway to deathlessness; They are always close to stainless enlightenment.
“Divine princes, there is no one at all who will receive this transcendent perfection of wisdom, which is so profound, and so forth, up to so immaculate and sublime, and which is to be known by the learned and the wise alone.
Arise, wise one, come into my home And teach the Dharma to the city’s women. {v}
considering all elements to be present in the fire element,
“I will not kill living beings,
and the noon hour arrived, Śakra, the lord of the gods,
“Monks, prosperity is appealing, singled out, considered valuable, pleasant, and highly appreciated by everyone.
Wherever the most sublime being happens to walk.
“Lamp of the World, we have been made content Through having heard this prophecy.
Whoever desires the divine and human enjoyments, Or all the happiness of the three realms of existence, Or the bliss of concentration and the happiness in solitude,
I will myself repeat and recite them.”
You prophesied my supreme enlightenment In front of the world and its devas. {14}
I have a few questions for the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha.”
Bodhisattvas, as numerous as the sands of the River Ganges, accepted that phenomena are non-arising.
“ ‘Gods and men worship your ocean of qualities, And I with my sons offer worship as well.
So it is, Su­bhūti, that great bodhisattva beings who wish to enter into the irreversible level should train in this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom.
With these words of praise, the gods And bodhisattvas, with their vast knowledge,
He is not stuck in the past, future, or present mind. As he practices in this way,
It is the intelligence that is far removed.
Having heard it I had longing for what had been described. Free from uncertainty I embraced enlightenment. {134}
owing to the emptiness of great extent,
When doing pūraka, one gazes at a bush of common milk hedge.
“These phenomena are not present; There is no presence to be perceived.
At this, the Bhagavān, knowing the thoughts in the minds of the fourfold assembly,
“ ‘Seeking the wisdom of buddhahood I offer to the lords of the worlds
Noble son, when bodhisattvas have received ordination they will have little wealth yet be fully content with the wealth of the Dharma.
“They do not have faith in this sūtra, Nor are they generous toward the Buddha’s teaching.
However, if shelterless bodhisattvas are physically unable to endure that, they should take up residence at a temple.
Right absorption is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
not acquiring things through pretense and flattery, not acquiring things by making hints, not acquiring things by covert urging, not acquiring things through improper avenues, not acquiring things through non-Dharma, not acquiring things through impure ways, not being attached to acquisition, not desiring acquisition, not growing weary, and being content with the acquisition of the Dharma.
Su­bhūti, it is because physical forms, and similarly, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are absolutely pure.
(6) sensory contact, which arises contingent on the six sense fields;
will be afraid and terrified
“Even in a million trillion eons it will be Very difficult to find a supreme Dharma such as this.
“Those who are well disciplined by your precious Dharma Are free of vain imaginings and always deeply peaceful.
Relinquishing the attachment of desire,
they grant their generosity with a mind endowed with omniscience, and dedicate this for the sake of unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, making common cause with all sentient beings.
They themselves should turn the wheel of the sacred doctrine.
who will all be heroic, brave, handsome, and triumphant.
Bhagavān, I will do anything so that this Dharma discourse is not practiced in Jambudvīpa.
“Then, noble ones, at that time the boy Vimalagarbha and the boy Vimalanetra recited these verses to their birth mother:
“Śāriputra, in that way a tathāgata accomplishes that one deed and one action, that one great deed and great action of the tathāgatas.
Son of noble family, through these four instructions will one attain the absorption that encapsulates all merit.
At this point the full refrain should be extensively applied, exactly as indicated [above], in the middle of this chapter.”
“And also, of such measure, the side, the altar, The garland, the half-garland, and the paṭṭikā.
imbued with suffering, not a self,
Please teach us this point, And we shall follow your advice!’ “
One perspires and drools. One falls asleep repeatedly.
“What is meant by the foolish rejecting it? It means that it is difficult for all who are foolish to understand.
Such was my aspiration and it has now been perfected; my pledge has now been fulfilled.”
Bodhisattvas think as follows: ‘All that I have heard of the profound tune of the thus-gone ones’ voice is true.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of the kleśas. What are the four kinds of knowledge of the kleśas?
“That which is taught by the wise, fearless ones Is the supreme sūtra among all sūtras
One will also stop torrential rain.
Pāpīyān, the Blessed One has taught, “Mundane beings are engaged in the appropriation of karmic action.
And thus will have eternal confidence and pure sight. Those wise ones will always have
When the ruling-class families are dominant in the world, the bodhisattva is born into a ruling-class family.
proclaimed his victory and called out, “You have conquered Māra’s army! Hero of the World, be victorious!”
should he too travel the realm without a reliable instructor?” “Upāli, he should not stay.
the means of attracting disciples, and unsurpassed merit and wisdom.
What, then, constitutes their pacification?
As Potalaka sat engrossed in prayer,
Whose are these perceptions?
When bodhisattvas are occupied with the wellbeing of others and set aside their own welfare, such bodhisattvas are endowed with skillful means.
‘These airborne palaces of the Brahmās have become very beautiful, bright, radiant, glorious, and majestic. Who is this a sign of?’
“The Tathāgata is neither generosity nor avarice,
“For example, Su­bhūti, space is neither expressible, nor is it inexpressible.
and the one who abides in great equanimity. “He is called the one who is diligent in gathering sentient beings,
As a comparison, were there to be as many bodhisattvas like myself as there are grains of sand in twelve Ganges Rivers,
and in the same vein, those who practice in order that they might grasp or reject [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas—none of these can cultivate the four applications of mindfulness.
Before him were assembled devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans, who were gazing upon him, and
who practice without alertness,
A woman who carries this mantra, written on birchbark, on her waist or arm will have her fetus protected.
insight through perfecting knowledge by means of the threefold knowledge,
Thus, they avoid socializing with women, men, boys, and girls. Refraining from involvement in worldly distractions, they leave all social ties far behind.
The yakṣas and flesh-eating rākṣasas throughout the four directions loudly proclaimed:
The householder Buddharakṣita then said to Saṅgharakṣita,
constantly venerated by the lord of nāgas and by demigods.
As numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges,
Blessed One, how does someone experience, in another world, the roots of virtue accumulated in this world?
As the fruition of that act, they have come to resemble trees, leaves, flowers, and fruit.
“It teaches the lack of forgetfulness of phenomena and is a gateway to diligence with respect to all phenomena.
If you ask why, it is because they do not consider the nature of physical forms.
Similarly, Su­bhūti, all things have the modality of ethical discipline, tolerance, perseverance, meditative concentration, and wisdom;
the lion of the Śākyas, the king of the Śākyas,
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection does not apprehend the two extremes.”
accomplishing the benefits of the qualities that come from the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
“Imagine that the yakṣa kings— Jambhala and Pūrṇabhadra, Maṇibhadra, Kubera, Samprajñāna, Guhyasthāna, Pāñcika, And Bījakuṇḍalī—
“If they are able to understand it Just as the Guide knows it,
If someone wishing to be ordained approaches any of you, ask him if he has reached twenty years.
at the last moment of beings’ consciousness, you will have the capacity to eliminate their obscuration of afflictions, their obscuration of karma, and their obscuration with regard to phenomena, and send them to the completely pure buddhafields.
You who have great love, arise and speak to me! {iv}
At that time, when they saw the form of the Guide’s body, They developed the aspiration for the supreme wisdom of buddhahood.
Enjoining him to dwell in tranquility.
Similarly, it indicates to these worlds that the paths of the ten virtuous actions, the four meditative concentrations, the four immeasurable aspirations, and the four formless absorptions are empty.
For people without the mantra, no enjoyment can be won.
“In that respect, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata is everywhere the same, neutral, without concepts, and does not make any distinctions.
Su­bhūti, this is because all phenomena are naturally void.
in the same way, the unmistaken real nature, the reality, the expanse of reality, and maturity with respect to all things are without foundation
that is why you shine today!
Maitreya and 10,000 other bodhisattva mahāsattvas endowed with clairvoyance had also assembled there.
Moreover, Satata­samitābhiyukta, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who possess this Dharma, read it, teach it, explain it, or write it out will attain twelve hundred qualities of mental activity, and their mental faculty will be purified.
and likewise, the twelve sense fields and the eighteen sensory elements.
He will become a universal monarch, ruling over the four continents,
The tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Bhīṣma­garjita­svara­rāja had taught this Dharma teaching in twenty hundred thousand quintillion times a hundred thousand trillion verses.
They are the inconceivably numerous words of unquantifiability concerning the composite,
a great Dharma teaching emanates for the sake of varied sentient beings with diverse beliefs.
They attain the station of the lord of the gods And become lords of the triple universe.
But just then, some gods who had seen buddhas before came together and told the others,
And if there were intelligent beings of good disposition.”
When these latter phenomena are present, the terms death and birth are designated.
the samādhi named Lion’s Play,
“Blessed One, Teacher, Vajra Holder, Please explain the supreme ritual For the oblation that pacifies obstacles.
“Su­bhūti, by mastering the Mnemonic Incantation of the Inexhaustible Cornucopia, and
Holding bows and arrows, swords, spears, and weapons,
Moreover, there were a variety of tree blossoms:
see sentient beings acting vindictively toward one another, or those who frequently get angry, whose minds are disturbed, or who harbor ill-will for one another, striking out with clods of earth, with clubs and swords, depriving others of their lives, they should reflect,
We have never seen such a thing as this before.
As soon as he attained that samādhi,
circumambulated the Bhagavān many hundreds of thousands of times, and
The plants and bushes drink them According to their strength and location.
Śāriputra, I cause the realization of the vision of the tathāgatas’ wisdom.
“What is the negation of attributes? It is realizing that all phenomena are like a dream, and the extinction of things.
the tathāgatas engage in the perception of pristine cognition which is unobstructed with respect to phenomena.
“He is known as the member of the royal class because he is the only one who carries the jewel parasol.
“So it is in these ways that there is the discernment of phenomena through knowing phenomena
Su­bhūti, do you think that you should consider this illusion-like mind?
“If you ask what is the ‘emptiness of external phenomena,’
There was no thought, no movement, no conceptual mind, and no change, yet it was all-pervading and not dependent on anything.
“Understanding such flaws, bodhisattvas engage in the practice of contemplating emptiness for the sake of going beyond all mental constructs.
and who, having blossomed, will be freed.
Is something that cannot be stated. {5}
May I give everything away without miserliness.
You illuminate darkness everywhere in the world;
Kauśika, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom in that manner should not dwell on anything at all.”
“But great bodhisattva beings should not cultivate disparate thoughts of vacillation, thinking, ‘Perhaps I should not keep my former vow to become the protector of unprotected sentient beings, to become a sanctuary for those without sanctuary, and to become a guide for who those without a guide?’
As they play, intoxicated by their games.
‘That would be a sin and I reject such ignoble principles.’“
The bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha stood up,
If they were thinking of Avalokiteśvara They would quickly cease to be poisonous.
one whose discipline has lapsed will suffer torment at the time of death.
At the center of the lotuses, one could see the upper body of many women,
have an inquiring nature, unrelentingly seek the Dharma, have the Dharma as their goal, desire the Dharma, delight in the Dharma,
the indeterminate were accepted,
he sat at the feet of a wavy-leaf fig tree and a sal tree.
then please share it with us!”
if one sows the element of a seed in the ground,
“Our aggregates are the self,” or “Our aggregates contain the self,” or “Our self contains the aggregates,” or “Our self possesses the aggregates.”
If you are free, you can liberate others;
When Sujātā had finished cooking the porridge, she placed it on the ground where, full of devotion, she had already prepared a seat for the Bodhisattva by scattering flowers and perfumed water.
Oh! Oh! Tamed one who follows those who are tamed, Who is peaceful, and who has pacified senses.
“ ‘Skill in the vinaya, knowledge of the ripening of karma, The pacification of conflict and quarrels,
The bodhisattva great beings then began to venerate the Blessed, Thus-gone, Worthy, Perfect Buddha Śākyamuni with exquisite offerings,
Now that with this worthless body I may acquire the Dharma—what a wonderful opportunity I have!’
“Venerable Su­bhūti, did you just say that unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment is also like a dream, like a magical display?
Another received him with parasols, victory banners, and standards.
“Bhaiṣajyarāja, if any man or woman asks,
“That the tongue-consciousness does not perceive is signlessness.
I say that they are not sublime beings, I say that as they conceptualize, they are corrupted.
Secret and extremely hard to come by,
“If, however, he leaves his family behind and becomes a monk, he will become a buddha.
From the left side, Śatabāhu said:
And the cessation of the three aspects of an action: That is what the Jina, the Lord of the Dharma, teaches. {77}
After agreeing to a short window for repayment, he released the debtor, who thought,
“ ‘This wise bodhisattva Śrīgarbha, Who has realized the immaculate wisdom,
He is the essence that is the reality of performance,
“ ‘Kaṇṭhaka, because of your meritorious deed, You will be magically reborn in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three.
With their minds blinded by desire, they will be preoccupied with their households.
the body is impermanent, but should not exhort him to renunciation or disgust.
Because these two holy beings abide in that absorption, and thus are present in all buddha realms.
“If you ask what constitutes uncommon phenomena from the perspective of ordinary persons, they include the following:
“if someone worships this Dharma teaching and makes an offering to it of a single mustard seed, with a mind inspired by veneration and respect,
Śiva is the māra of the afflictions,
The foliage and the flowers in the trees disappear, and the trees blossom no more.
nor that of which one is ignorant, the ignorance, or the one who is ignorant,
Since they do not apprehend even emptiness, how could they possibly be fixated on emptiness!
When the group of six heard him say this, they asked,
Venerable Lord! How do great bodhisattva beings, after abiding in the transcendent perfection of generosity, acquire the transcendent perfection of perseverance?
Noble son, endowed with these ten qualities bodhisattvas possess a mind that is free of doubt.
“When those beings you saw who were shaped like pillars were monks,
“It’s not right to bring ill repute upon your family, so do not behave like this.”
Then Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, and those gods of the pure realms reflected, “We have been dismissed by the Bodhisattva.”
And above it the syllable hūṁ.
If there is a seed, the sprout will form and so on, until finally, if there is a flower, then the fruit will form.
“In this regard, if you ask what constitute the four applications of mindfulness,
Happy is the abstention from injury, in this world, Of the one restrained toward living beings.
Even the names of the links of dependent origination do not exist internally, nor do they exist externally, and nor do they abide between these two.
She has made vast prayers. She cares for all beings as she would for herself.
and even those among them who teach the sacred doctrine,
He will liberate from birth the infinite number of beings who are born.
Eventually, I gave away my arms, legs, eyes, and head, as well as my beloved sons, spouses, and daughters.
They enter the divine hall called Sudharma
If you ask why, Su­bhūti, it is because great bodhisattva beings who practice this transcendent perfection of wisdom transcend the levels of the śrāvakas and the pratyekabuddhas, and after transcending the maturity of the bodhisattvas, they will attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
Their lack of understanding and insight occurs randomly and by chance.
Divine son, because on the ultimate level nothing manifests, and therefore all phenomena are pacified.
like the fun of games for one who wishes to die;
“Bhikṣus, in the past, in a time gone by, beyond and even further beyond the most countless, innumerable, incalculable, unquantifiable, inconceivable asaṃkhyeya eons ago,
He has completely ripened many trillions of beings.
their designation as arising or ceasing, and their designation as entities or non-entities [do not constitute a bodhisattva]?
long arms, a broad forehead, eyebrows that meet, and a prominent nose.
and similarly, if feelings were one thing, perceptions another thing,
As soon as the Bodhisattva touched this great earth, it shook in six different ways.
In the same vein, they themselves will have renounced [all the other non-virtuous actions], up to and including the holding of wrong views, and
“Dark green is said to be for expelling.
“Three times a day and three times a night I develop the aspiration to enlightenment
Your Highness, please grant me a favor!
“At that moment, son of noble family, faced with the great sage Supreme One’s devotion and eagerness, that god of the demonic legions became ashamed and vanished on the spot.
Similarly, the moon-like bodhisattvas ride the supreme Bodhisattva Vehicle and illumine infinite and limitless worlds.
It is produced only through the right cause. And the cause is union with a woman; There is no other cause, ever.
the samādhi named Sublime Vajra,
“Bhadrapāla, consciousness commands the following constituents:
“You are unborn and unceasing; Without a body, inconceivable,
Your body shines with divine light, radiant like a golden mountain.
and get them back to a village, city, or market town,
They manifest as microscopic grahas In the bodies of humans.
If they engage with the notion that physical forms are empty, or that these are not empty,
His heels are broad.
Gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas revealed the upper halves of their bodies, and festooned wreaths of flowers and woven silk from the sky.
This does not cease throughout eons; Beings continue in saṃsāra for millions of eons. {53}
“Ānanda! You should know that the sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who hold, maintain, recite aloud, master, and are attentive to this transcendent perfection of wisdom in the right manner,
He has been continuously joyful and never wearied,
We will revere it and spread it.
“What is the knowledge of the cause? It is the knowledge that ignorance is the cause of saṃsāra.
As it leaves the element of earth behind, it takes up the element of dharmas,
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, great bodhisattva beings should practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom in a non-conceptual manner.
Now that you yourself are sated, be kind; Please satisfy those who have thirsted for so long.
“Sthitottara, Śānta, Sudāntacitta, Sudānta, Śāntendriya, Śāntamānasa,
"ལྟ་བར་གྱུར་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་མཚན་མ་མེད་པར་<tthat all views are encapsulated in the view of signlessness,
‘Oṁ, Vajriṇī, let your vajra fly!—so commands the master of gods. Set alight, set! Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ!’
or perhaps the sun or the moon?
like, for instance, a heap of grain.
Even the names of the unhindered discernments do not exist internally, nor do they exist externally, and nor do they abide between these two.
“When all existents have ceased to exist And they remain in nonexistence,
the Blessed Buddha Kāśyapa appeared in the world,
“Moreover, Kāśyapa, which one among the two would be largest, best, foremost, and most valuable?”
enthusiastically saying,
They know the infinite qualities of a buddha.
The four branches of the King of Aṅga’s armed forces scattered to the four directions.
yakṣas,
“ ‘Ah! Come here, you who have the face of a full moon! Ah! Come here, you who are upon the ten bhūmis!
five hundred gods and men conceived the spirit of enlightenment,
It is a wheel that is like the nature of phenomena. It is a wheel of entering the sameness of all phenomena within a single sphere.
praised, esteemed, honored, and extolled the forsaking of lying.
Gods, since I have seen the supernatural powers and miracles of extraordinary transformations that are the skillful means of the tathāgatas of the past, I know.
Nobody in our fine city heard it, Having been lulled to sleep by the gods.
on the meditative absorptions in compassion, empathetic joy, and equanimity.
Such instructions that involve focus do not exist there.
Mañjuśrī! You are very welcome!
those dharmabhāṇakas, Bhagavān, should know that this Dharma teaching has come into their hands through the power of the bodhisattva mahāsattva Samantabhadra, and through the magnificence of the bodhisattva mahāsattva Samantabhadra.
Would those beings have an even greater quantity of merit?”
through that merit they accumulate they will attain the throne of Śakra, the throne of Brahmā, and the lion throne of a cakravartin.
namo ratna­trayāya. namaḥ sarva­buddha­bodhi­sattvebhyaḥ. namo ˈṣṭasarpa­pudgalāya. namaḥ samastebhyo buddha­koṭibhyaḥ.. tadyathā. oṁ hrīḥ hrīḥ hrīḥ sarva­nāgānām ananta­kulānāṃ vāsuki­kulānāṃ takṣaka­kulānāṃ śaṅkha­pāla­kulānāṃ karkoṭa­kulānāṃ padma­kulānāṃ mahā­padma­kulānāṃ kulika­kulānāṃ varāha­kulānāṃ puṇḍarīka­kulānāṃ ghana­kulānāṃ megha­kulānāṃ jalada­kulānāṃ jala­dhara­kulānāṃ jīmūta­kulānāṃ saṃvarta­kulānāṃ vasanta­kulānāṃ airāvata­kulānāṃ kumuda­kulānāṃ kahlāra­kulānāṃ saugandhi­kakulānāṃ hana hana śareṇa bandha bandha cāpena tāḍaya tāḍaya utpalena bhītānām abhayaṃ dehi pralaya­kāla iva jala­dhāram avatāraya varṣaṃ tān nāgān vaśīkuru kuru phuḥ kulāpaya kulāpaya phuḥ phuḥ, oṁ kurukulle hrīḥ hūṁ phaṭ svāhā phaṭ
Know that all phenomena are empty And quickly reach the highest enlightenment. {87}
It is the seat of all things, because it is perfectly enlightened with regard to voidness.
“Noble Saṅgharakṣita! Is that you? Welcome!” “I have come.” “Where are you headed?”
To eat your impurities?
They do not ripen upon the element of water, upon the element of fire, nor upon the element of wind.
Instead, they sleep for the sake of maintaining and replenishing the great elements, while continuously aiming toward virtue.
if they are unskilled in the transcendent perfection of wisdom
Likewise, the more you teach and demonstrate virtuous qualities to others, the more you grow with respect to these virtuous qualities.
When this is applied to a woman’s breasts, they will become healthy and strong.
This wheel is indestructible because it preexists its own turning.
all inferior beings who lack diligence, who are foolish and dumb, ignorant like sheep, and incapable of passing beyond suffering,
Bodhisattvas who practice in this way are indeed carrying out bodhisattva practice.
Potalaka was delighted and in his delight thought,
ignorance causes formations. Formations cause consciousness. Consciousness causes name and form. Name and form cause the six sense sources. The six sense sources cause contact. Contact causes sensation. Sensation causes craving. Craving causes appropriation. Appropriation causes becoming. Becoming causes birth. And birth causes aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, despair, and anxiety.
Our master and teacher
“They maintain the knowledge of contemplation And then that knowledge also ceases.
At that moment all the bodhisattvas, the lords of the gods, the lords of the nāgas, the lords of the yakṣas, the lords of the rākṣasas,
She enthralls the three worlds.
Called Sole Hero,
Viṣṇu is the māra of death,
Likewise five hundred roars of buddhas I perfectly comprehended here.
He tried to get up from his bed, but did not succeed;
Ah! Arise, you who maintain unequaled retention.
considering that the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas become absorbed in the adamantine meditative stability and
“ ‘Sage, throughout an ocean of eons,
Therefore, they become negligent, and ever more negligent, and their ethical discipline degenerates.
O Bhagavān, after hearing these teachings
he will be invigorated and greatly relieved from all his fear.
If it were an incarnation created by the Tathāgata who spoke thus to you, would you be afraid?’“I answered, ‘No indeed, noble sir!’
Just as, Su­bhūti, space accommodates countless, innumerable sentient beings,
When, through rejoicing, encouragement, inspiration, and instruction they cause others to rejoice, encouraging them, filling them with enthusiasm, and instructing them,
are taught as four.
be extolled by all who keep pure conduct.
These childish beings are controlled, like elephants by the mahout’s hook.
They have no regard for mendicants and no regard for brahmins.
The liṅga is so called because they dissolve into it.’
and similarly, no ten powers of the tathāgatas
A rotten smell will come from their mouths And they will be possessed by yakṣas that enter their bodies.
then, while the group of six were sleeping, the nāga made the monastery vanish and slipped into the ocean.
The Bodhisattva heard the story as well.
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ expertise in terms of unmistaken insight consist in?
Their navel is deep.
Goddesses, companions, and beautiful songs Are like the audience of a play.
Su­bhūti, because the voice of the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas, endowed with its sixty aspects, is not an entity,
Instead, as they are then heedful, their unsurpassable and complete awakening will be certain.
Open and direct in all regards, You reside so perfectly pristine,
Invoked with the wisdom syllable
Monks, in this way ten months passed, and the time came for the Bodhisattva to take birth.
Which has deceptively emerged from causes and conditions.
The qualities and behavior you have described,
The tassels of pearl fall off and the ocean is stirred;
As they offered these along with flower garlands and silken tassels, they bowed in the direction of the seat of awakening and the Bodhisattva, and sang this verse:
and the one who sits off in the distanceas he seeks to memorize the Dīrghāgama has a noxious touch.
and worship those who teach it with flowers, incense, perfumes, flower garlands,
Ānanda said, “Bhagavān, I shall keep this Dharma teaching.”
They possess the ten powers and have come here to venerate him.
strewn with various flowers,
Take him to my palace, shackle, fetter, and yoke him, and make him my gatekeeper!
Noble sirs, you should also strive in this.”
Feeling provides the causal condition for craving.
for it endows one with the intelligence of perfect realization.
Monks, at the right side of the road the Bodhisattva now noticed a grass seller, whose name was Svastika, who was busy cutting grass.
The many different kinds of light— All those lights are eclipsed by the brilliance of the Jina’s light. {38}
“Throughout time these heroes Will be protected by merit,
“Countless women, The moment they saw Bhikṣu Kṣemadatta, Ceased being women. {40}
“As I am grown old and cannot gain more riches,
When the time for battle has arrived, victory is of no bad consequence;
What is such a triple-initiation fully ordained monk like?
and so [with the other transcendent perfections], up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom, which is empty of the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
the tree of enlightenment of the Tathāgata Akṣobhya;
Similarly, Su­bhūti, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are also without limits.
“Similarly, knowing that the twelve sense fields and the eighteen sensory elements are empty of inherent existence,
Similarly, feelings, and likewise of perceptions, formative predispositions,
Therefore, when you have heard this kind of Dharma taught by a self-arisen one,
They brought out the two bullocks Sujāta and Kīrti,
Jñāna­garbha
Twenty thousand kings from the borderlands Came before the king, saying, “O King, may you be victorious! We have come.
Bhikṣus, those people who entered the jungle are astonished and think, ‘We are freed from the jungle. We will stay here where we have attained relief from misery.’
The one who is inspired too is non-arising,
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom perfect the transcendent perfection of meditative stability, maintaining the five acquisitive psycho-physical aggregates which are dreamlike,
A light that is not obscured by clouds, Beautifully illuminating the world,
These people will be filthy, wild, and stupid.
Not only are those actions formless, but the essence of the condition of maleness or femaleness is also formless.
Moreover, the three times are known, simultaneously and perfectly, in one instant by the unimpeded wisdom of the thus-gone ones.
“Worship the central deity and also his retinue; Make offerings in sequence.
He will appear in the world as the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha, the one with perfect wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the unsurpassable guide who tames beings, the teacher of gods and humans, the buddha, the bhagavān named Dharmaprabhāsa.
We bow to you, leader of all living beings, Who fully manifests the special qualities!
then the luminous gods paid homage to the Thus-Gone One sitting at the seat of awakening with a plethora of flowers, incense, perfumes, garlands, unguents, parasols, standards, and flags. When the offerings had been made,
How, O Lord, may he develop insight?
The sages give you offerings,
“The vinaya of the hearers opposes all disturbing emotions.
“Whatever topics of knowledge are circulating in this world of humans— Numbers, scripts, mathematics, the permutations of the elements,
Oṁ, Aditi, give me such-and-such a girl! Please give! Svāhā!
In the same vein, they discern that physical forms are not a self, and do not focus on them.
It will not be possible to know an end of counting them.
thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I have comprehended suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose
Each one of these bodhisattvas had a following of bodhisattvas as numerous as the grains of sand in sixty Ganges Rivers,
they comprise (1) correct view, (2) correct thought, (3) correct speech, (4) correct action,
“Young man, at that time and in those days, the dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu
Some arrive adorned with precious stones, holding jewels in their hands; With these gems they cover billions of realms.
Similarly, Śāradvatī­putra, just as when an eon of conflagration will occur, all that is included in conditioned phenomena will be without foundation
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that one is liberated by perceiving the sensory element of the ears, the sensory element of sounds, and the sensory element of auditory consciousness as entities and non-entities?”
will gain eight hundred qualities of the body,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existents concerning teaching the composite,
the things associated with the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, the things associated with the transcendent perfection of perseverance,
They were well-versed in questioning the innumerable buddhas,
and when they cultivate in all respects the meditative stability of emptiness, the meditative stability of signlessness, and the meditative stability of aspirationlessness,
they will enter into the maturity of the bodhisattvas, and
the samādhi named Supreme Vajra Victory Banner,
Such an army had never been seen before, or even heard of, in the realms of gods and humans.
They no longer entertain any notions, contemplation, views, or entanglements with respect to body, feelings, mind, or phenomena.
“The one who previously had been King Mahābala Appeared in the world as Buddha Jñānaśūra.
Women and men, And likewise boys and girls, And infants in the womb are terrorized. Those in the animal realms are also harmed.
O gods, this doctrine is profound owing to the profundity of the sensory element of the mental faculty, the sensory element of mental phenomena, and the sensory element of mental consciousness.
That is called the emptiness of the unlimited.
certainty regarding the Buddha’s qualities because of having knowledge through direct perception;
“Ensuring that one’s hermitage is private
Grant us your supreme speech, which is like the beat of a drum. What is the reason that we saw you smile? {74}
Yet, out of consideration for me, this brahmin Tiṣya has offered to share our prize––a most beneficial arrangement.
The rich man, through a round window, sees his son clearing away the rubbish,
the quicksilver will fuse with the other ingredients. Ingesting this
For those who abide in this manner, there is never any occasion for miserliness or acquisitiveness to arise.
for the sake of unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, great bodhisattva beings should abide on the path of perfect enlightenment by practicing the transcendent perfection of generosity, and
She could see this as clearly as if she was looking at her own face in a spotless mirror.
n the quarter down below, the light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Ratnagarbha, who resided in the Samanta­vilokitā world of the Thus-Gone One Samantadarśin’s buddha realm.
they teach the perfection of patience,
They are the inconceivably numerous words of limitlessness concerning the composite,
Then, even as they stood to one side, the gods inhabiting the world system of desire and the world system of form asked the Blessed One,
The nature of this is described in these verses:
I have said what I had to say about your request.
‘Hail, Caṇḍālī! Enthrall such and such! Svāhā!’
“Padmaśrīgarbha, then the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha spoke the following verses to the two beings:
Countless thousands of millions of eons ago, A length of time that is inconceivable, I attained the highest enlightenment And I am always teaching the Dharma.
They actualize the five extrasensory powers.
to grasp at marks and signs concerning delightful and repulsive forms;
through the mantra, so do the faults associated with the composites of the tongue
“ ‘It is always longing for good qualities. It is always avoiding bad qualities.
I will give Śārikā to him as a wife.” Māṭhara then said to his wife,
“With a mind free from the vast range of impurities,
Desire, anger, and delusion: These are the three poisons in the world.
Su­bhūti, it is the case that things are not apprehended because, owing to its utter purity, non-conditioning [and so forth] is non-apprehensible.
They overcome all the māras And do not fall under their power. {13}
the bodhisattva great beings Harisiṃha, Siṃhamati, Su­pratiṣṭhita­buddhi, Anupamamati, Dharaṇīṃdhara, Agnidatta, Varuṇa, Ratnākara, Guhyagupta, Bhadrapāla, Vidyutdeva, Vairocana, Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta, Jñānākara, Anikṣiptadhura, Amoghadarśin, and the bodhisattva great being Maitreya.
Similarly, since sentient beings are non-apprehensible, the six transcendent perfections are non-apprehensible,
He adopted the lifestyle of a renunciant in order to act in agreement with the perception of worldly people, and also because he felt compassion for others and wished to mature them.
The dharmabhāṇaka thought and thought about this. Then a voice came from the sky saying, “Give him the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās!”
I cry for myself because,
“Bring me the stolen goods and the bandits. And be quick about it!”
impure conduct,
Sage, your concentration is supreme and your insight is a clairvoyant wisdom; With your intent fulfilled, please remove the fever and turn the supreme wheel.”
He goes to the king and says, “Your majesty, please grant me your attention.
and in the same vein, there are also those who can see with their eyes of flesh across one world system comprising all four continents.
he saw on the road a man suffering from disease.
If bodhisattvas hear such words from others, or if they hear unpleasant words about the Buddha, the Dharma, or the Saṅgha,
Created by the ripening of his own meritorious karma, the body of Candra is completely pure, stainless, bright, and clear.
he is the One Who Is Endowed with the Unimpeded Wisdom Vision That Sees the Past, the Future, and the Present without Attachment.
“Free from concepts, free from what belongs to a self,
Venerable Lord, if the notion of sights as void is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of sights as not void become a bodhisattva?
the fruit is not established by eradicating conditioned elements or unconditioned elements.
excellent insight based on sharp faculties;
A monk ward or apprentice
In the presence of all the tathāgatas, each of them confessed that the faults consisting of all their negative actions had indeed been committed, and
Is someone who is dedicated To listening to this lion’s roar.
His words were not harsh. They were free from stammering, and they had no animosity. They were not erratic but smooth, gentle, sweet, and pleasant to the ear.
The six sense fields provide the causal condition for contact.
do not try to pour the great ocean into the hoof-print of an ox;
Su­bhūti, just as when an emanation of the tathāgatas projects many thousands of phantoms,
In order to bring liberation to all beings.
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings make offerings to the reliquary stūpas of the tathāgatas with divine and human music.
They will bring sentient beings to maturation, they will completely refine the fields,
Crossing over them, it will travel magically through space to the south,
The leader of beings guides beings In the way that they are to be guided. {228}
Alive, you can practice the Dharma.
Similarly, they encourage others to cultivate ethical discipline, tolerance, perseverance, meditative concentration, and wisdom.
You are the compassionate and loving lord of this world!
“In the past, in this world named Jambudvīpa, There were two excellent sons who were not heedless.
Hence this city is not worthy of the Bodhisattva, either.
The buddhas always keep them in mind.
as well as [the other branches of their scriptures], up to and including the narratives and the established instructions, without mentioning or disclosing that such [forms] are the creations of demonic forces.
What is the transcendent perfection of wisdom with which great bodhisattva beings are endowed?
How should they train to achieve rebirth among the priestly class, standing out like a tall sāl tree?
And went to the bank of Nairañjanā.
This is how, Mahauṣadhi, consciousness that is bound for a meritorious rebirth comes to be reborn among the gods.
so eloquently do they speak, so wise are they.”
The ordinand is then sequestered out of hearing range but within sight.
know all things to be empty of inherent existence, and then
and who did not confer its transmission
they then become skilled in the formation of [speech] that is without syllables.
He is not dependent on others regarding the basis for acquiring merit.
“Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom well know that this is not the time for actualization, but rather it is the time for investigation.
“The sprout is not created by itself, not created by another, not created by both, not created by Īśvara, not transformed by time, not derived from prakṛti, and not born without any cause.
They do not consider whether sights are afflicted or purified, and the same goes for [the other sense objects], up to and including mental phenomena.
Through learning, one will not do evil.
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess these ten qualities give up unwholesome company.
Therefore, one who sees such sameness makes no difference between sickness and voidness; his sickness is itself voidness, and that sickness as voidness is itself void.
Your words are excellent! Great being, this is utterly excellent!
They will have the power of patience and bliss. Those wise ones will always have a tranquil mind. {6
Alternatively one should anoint them with honey and long pepper.
“Divine son, ultimately, bodhisattva great beings turn back from thoughts.
After all, since the earth contains many gems, its surface is covered with one beauty after another.”
Vinaya also means understanding disturbing emotions.”
In hell, Bhadrapāla, their bodies increase in size. They do not count their heads and they become twelve feet tall.
Seeing the body, what wise person would not think of it as an enemy?”
In time, the lad went with a peer to a house,
one perceives scent on account of the nose.
Their beds are beautified with combinations of various colors.
These paṇḍakas and ṣaṇḍhas have not fainted to the floor;
“Then, noble ones, those two boys guided King Śubhavyūha into the teaching of the Tathāgata,
This vast sūtra, this great discourse, Was taught by all the victorious ones of times past.
What is that? I have abandoned all disturbing emotions and actualized arhatship.
“Similarly, emptiness is not something other than the noble truths. Nor are the noble truths something other than emptiness.
angry Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa Will kill the practitioner
“Divine son, just as the food of a destitute man is poison for a universal monarch, likewise, divine son, are the discipline and diligence of the hearers and solitary buddhas, who rely on reference points, for ill-behaved and lazy bodhisattva great beings.
All those flowers, incenses, perfumes, garlands, ointments, powders, robes, parasols, banners, divine flags, banners of victory, long necklaces, short necklaces, jewels, and precious materials came to this Sahā world realm.
the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Mahābhijñā­jñānābhi­bhū, who had come to the sublime, highest Bodhimaṇḍa and was seated on a lion throne at the foot of the Bodhi tree.
“The thousands of bhikṣus were pleased, As were the devas, humans, asuras, and yakṣas, wondering,
Ah! You are a hero who has power over the ten bhūmis— You, who have power over life, where you have gone? {iii}
those that have been learned will not be forgotten.
There will be many thousands who will hold The extensive sūtras of the Protector.
The man gave that command wishing to help them,
“When walking, sitting, or standing, They desire the wisdom of the best of beings,
One succeeds by means of the inverted conduct alone.
and the monks thought,
It should be applied to the ten powers of the tathāgatas, and it should also be applied to [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
“Noble son, the thus-gone ones are in constant and continuous equipoise.
Then, causing a downpour of Dharma, they put an end to all decay.
many hundred thousands of beings, many hundred thousand quintillions of beings, who have seen past buddhas and are endowed with wisdom,
“The absence of existents, the absence of aspiration, The absence of attributes, and emptiness—
Nonetheless, from the combination of the union of the parents, the period of ovulation, and other conditions,
“Just like the past of a sound, So are the characteristics of phenomena.
For these reasons, Venerable Lord,
The Tathāgata knew our inferior aspiration,
Similarly, Su­bhūti, this vehicle also neither arises, nor does it cease, nor is it stable, and alterations are non-apprehensible.
Are you not in segregation? Are you not fallen? Are you not a tīrthika?
Knowing the strength or weakness of their faculties, and being gifted with unrivaled eloquence, he taught the Dharma appropriately to each.
These will be your homes supplied with food. These will be your homes supplied with drink. These will be your gardens for you to enjoy.
The postulant would make the following petition: “Revered saṅgha, please listen.
If they engage with the notion that physical forms arise, or that these are non-arising, then they are merely engaging with mental images.
As it is led away by half-human savages, it thinks, ‘Alas! Now the beauty of the world is lost to me.
quickly awaken to unsurpassed and completely perfect buddhahood.
The lord of kings of tantras, the supreme,
Some even hold mountains, While others hold swords and disks.
What good is it to cover their faces?
The outer form of his Dharma remained for hundreds of thousands of quintillions of eons, as numerous as the atoms in four continents.
when two of Upananda’s novices, Kaṇṭaka and Mahaka,
‘Oṁ, skull, hold, hold the blood of all the enemies! Hūṁ phaṭ!
Pursuing the five types of sense-objects.
(17) Their understanding is perfectly pure. (18) Their behavior is excellent.
“The jinas, the lamps for the world, Taught whatever Dharma would be beneficial.
because there is no deficiency of requisite causes and conditions,
“ ‘It is said: the sky is his liṅga,
While seated among the saṅgha, the arhat elder explained the situation at length to his fellow student.
heir minds accept that this exactly accords with the teachings given by the tathāgatas,
Amoghadarśin, Susaṃprasthita,
The crow in a thicket of palma christi Roosting on the bank of Ganges— The messenger—may he drink water! May the pregnant woman be delivered of her child!
oozing rashes, dry rashes, welts, scabs, consumption,
No sooner had the Bhagavān spoken than all those assembled in the retinue saw the manifestations in the same way they had previously seen, heard, understood, and known them.
When practicing generosity by giving away wealth, grains, and stores,
The prayers he made as he lay dying
It is like a mother for children.
It would not be easy to enumerate them entirely even in countless eons.
How do they quickly awaken to unsurpassed and completely perfect buddhahood?
and of its exact features, whether impaired or not.
to speak honestly always;
“There are many thousands of beings throughout the ten directions; Let the Dharma be heard by those who seek it! May you make haste to turn the wheel in detail! May you liberate those thousands of creatures from existence!”
which filled the entire great trichiliocosm and brought pleasure and happiness, both physical and mental, to everyone that it touched.
Senior Su­bhūti, are the unconditioned elements also non-conceptual?
How do they abide in compassion?
The moment the Bhagavān placed his right foot, adorned by a precious wheel from the accumulation of countless roots of merit,
use this as an errhine.
The yogins practice the field of that conduct, And reject that which is not the field of that conduct. {17}
Then the bodhisattva Vyūharāja made offerings to the Thus-Gone One in the form of displays both mighty and divine, as well as a great rain of flowers.
“If those wishing for merit Were to offer to the jinas Whatever flowers and incense exist
without apprehension, neither crestfallen nor gloomy, he pledged to do as he was told.
Similarly, owing to the utter purity of all things, they do not apprehend the world system of desire;
sarvāśāṃ pari­pūraya, dehi me varam buddha­satyena bodhi­sattva­satyena, svāhā.
Instead, they establish others in that very training.
When there is no consciousness there can be no name and form, nor the six sense sources, nor contact, nor feeling, nor any craving either.
Bathed, perfumed, well dressed, and with her arms bejeweled,
All of those sentient beings whom [the bodhisattvas] have brought to maturity will be born alongside them in those buddhafields.
Thereby they realize supreme enlightenment.
He honored him, asked him questions, obtained answers, and was able to understand what was spoken.
In this way the Blessed One’s fame, renown, and praise extended far throughout the immeasurable worlds of the ten directions.
The lion throne had arisen from the Tathāgata’s previously developed roots of virtue. As soon as they saw it, all beings would immediately reach the stage of accepting that phenomena are not produced.
“Why do you recite the rudiments of mantra in such a debased way?”
Do so, noble son!
Similarly, they practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom whenever they do not engage with the notions that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are with attachment or that they are without attachment.
he offered eighty-four quintillion
What are the four great brahmavihāras? They are great love, great compassion, great joy, and great equanimity.
However, the blind man never saw the actual forms of those people. What do you make of that, Bhadrapāla?
If they were thinking of Avalokiteśvara They would stay in the sky like the sun.
“They themselves should also cultivate the understanding through which individual enlightenment is actualized, but through which the finality of existence is not actualized.
Monks, at that point the twenty-eight great yakṣa generals, such as Pāñcika, met with the five hundred sons of Hārītī and voiced their concern:
When the emanated monk had given them this teaching
In addition, one who possesses mental perseverance, which is included within the path and the branches of the path free from contaminants, will perfect the four applications of mindfulness, the four correct exertions, the four supports for miraculous ability, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven branches of enlightenment, the noble eightfold path, the three gateways to liberation, the four immeasurable aspirations, the four formless absorptions, the eight aspects of liberation, the nine serial steps of meditative equipoise, the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four assurances, the four unhindered discernments, the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, and all virtuous attributes.
“You teach the Dharma with words that are without error.
will he then be able to relieve all those beings of their cataracts?”
“I must go out and defecate.”
at that time they do actualize all things that are free from contaminants,
The gods in the sky then called out to King Śuddhodana and the masses,
“ ‘The stainless, pure, ultimate state— Peace, complete peace, without stain, free of stain—
Noble son, bodhisattvas are aware that within the world of gods, humans, and demigods, including Māra, Brahmā, and all the gods, mendicants, and brahmins, there is no one whose insight matches that of the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha.
must have accumulated roots of virtue before thus-gone ones of the past,
At which point the novice says: “It is excellent.”
just as a donkey could not muster an attack on a wild elephant,
No moving about is non-division.
and similarly, they will engage in the conditioning of feelings, they will engage in the conditioning of perceptions, they will engage in the conditioning of formative predispositions, and they will engage in the conditioning of consciousness.
all attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment dependent on this transcendent perfection of wisdom.
So please consider departing now!
Contemplating thus, the one who possesses love Will abandon the emptiness devoid of mind
Su­bhūti, bodhisattvas are uncreated, undestroyed, and unconditioned.
(1) having no faith in the sacred doctrine, and lacking conviction and volition with regard to this profound doctrine, through the machinations of Māra;
that great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom
Months, fortnights, seasons, and the annual cycles will no longer manifest in the world.
‘Great King, I have the Dharma teaching of the supreme sūtra called The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.
“Why is that? Because they are beyond the realm of thought.
Do not be apprehensive. Answer simply by saying what is so is so, and what is not is not.
There are many present who are foolish and proud. They will not understand and will reject my teaching.” {34}
Venerable Lord! Is there a reason why great bodhisattva beings may be styled ‘irreversible’?
There is the meditative stability named Obliterating Defects of Speech, Transforming Them as if into Space. And,
At that time, the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha will show himself to them as an ordinary person.
He kept it, read it, propagated it,
but instead they will answer as one would who has attained the enlightenment of the wisdom of buddhahood.”
Having meditated authentically on the great seal,
This is the desire realm.
“Gentlemen, what can one do to expunge an evil act?”
“The one for whom you have been making offerings has relaxed his discipline and decided that he will once again eat nourishing and solid food.
The young brahmin then said,
the four applications of mindfulness, and likewise all those [aforementioned causal and fruitional] attributes, up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. These are uncontaminated phenomena.
When this king of mantras, written on birchbark or cloth and enclosed in beeswax, is put in the Gaṇapati’s abdomen and
These are the eight accumulations that one will perfect.
Rather, emptiness is the transcendent perfection of wisdom and the nature of the transcendent perfection of wisdom is empty.
may it be suspended in the air above the circle of the assembly.
He accomplished a vast benefit for beings. He passed into nirvāṇa and was a guide like a lamp. {i}
They should also praise and rejoice in others who perfect the transcendent perfection of generosity.
he rose from his seat and
They see separation from the desired and beloved, and encounters with the disliked.
Oṁ, Tārā, powerful Tārā, please liberate! O Jivaṃvaradā, svāhā!
without one who nourishes,
they will commit more negative actions based upon or caused by their attachment.
Because that emptiness by virtue of which the view of the transitory collection is empty is also the emptiness by virtue of which the single traversed path is empty.
when listening to these sacred doctrines.
By meditating on the Dharma they will reach the true nature. They will attain samādhi and will see the Jina.
“O Buddha! O Dharma! O Saṅgha! O the well-spoken Dharma
As numerous as the Ganges sands, Were established in the highest enlightenment.” {37}
The three jewels are my refuge;
Oh! Oh! Everyone in the realm of sick beings Is afflicted by the illness of desire.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of eloquence concerning teaching the composite,
which is the union of all the buddhas in one body,
and other great śrāvakas; and the student Brother Ānanda;
“Since I live like that, I have attained the highest perception, So I do not worry about my body and my life.
“I’ve come from the seashore.”
Su­varṇa­garbha
Bodhisattvas should be as utterly stable as a doorsill.
without any weariness look to the realms of the world in the ten directions.
may I adorn the body of all beings with the precious flowers of retention, eloquence, and the branches of awakening!’
At that time the sun and moon, fire, lightning, and gems Will no longer be what shines
And their wisdom, moreover, partakes of everything without obstruction.
“Replying to the provincial kings, the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class will respond, ‘May you rule your respective kingdoms according to the Dharma, and not by what is not Dharma.
they correctly perceive that feelings are utterly ripe and utterly painful, resembling, for example, the [fleeting] condition of a bubble in water.
He strives for the benefit of all beings and is shielded by the armor of diligence.
Those gods will think to approach great bodhisattva beings who practice accordingly, and
Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata is momentary,
having seen all things as emptiness,
“Reverend, the dirt the Blessed One takes from the tip of his fingernail is less,
One should grind seeds of black plum, seeds of citron, and seeds of flea tree, and
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings make offerings of divine and human unguents to the tathāgatas of the world systems in the great trichiliocosm, as well as to the reliquary stūpas of the tathāgatas, and to bodhisattvas, pratyekabuddhas, and the śrāvakas of the tathāgatas,
The apsarases engaged in singing divine songs.
If ignorance does not arise, then formations do not manifest and so on,
Seeing that they had become repulsive,
I would not even behold the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas.
The last of the three syllables sits clearly at the end of the eight.
The young brahmin was entrusted to eight nursemaids: two to cuddle him,
“Moreover, this Great Vehicle of great bodhisattva beings comprises all the gateways of mnemonic incantation and all the gateways of meditative stability.
“In the dreadful future era, The fools will be deceitful,
this will encourage the buddhas to praise and accept them.
then his claim to have found no ambrosia is not true.”
The ineffable state, untainted by language, Suchness, the sky-like nature of phenomena,
The excellent songs that bring delightful sounds to the mind, Do not equal a fraction of the Sugata’s speech. {86}
“I am the leader of the world;
Bodhisattvas should be like Śakra, worthy of being relied upon by all beings.
‘Oh! We shall work on the preceptor or instructor’s begging bowl or have another do so.’
“The supreme beings resound like thunder, Geese, cuckoos, peacocks, and swans,
likewise, if they abide in, cognize, and are intent on the ten powers of the tathāgatas and [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas,
Sarva­devatābhiṣiktā (She Who Was Empowered by All Gods)
“If you ask what are the ‘six extrasensory powers,’ they comprise (1) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of [miraculous] activities, (2) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of divine clairvoyance, (3) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of divine clairaudience, (4) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of other minds, (5) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of recollection of past lives, and (6) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of the cessation of contaminants. These are called the six extrasensory powers.
Noble one, that is the kind of power that the bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has.
Without pursuing any desires at all,
As a transformation of the utpala, It should be visualized to the left.
There are no results or fruitions from performing good deeds or bad deeds.
King Śuddhodana had put some spies in place and ordered them, “Report to me if the boy’s eyes linger upon any particular girl!”
“Through the way this path is taught By those who have faith,
To him you must go.”
they are not subject to harm, they are everlasting, and they are still and solid like a pillar.
Leftward gaze combined with kumbhaka Should effect enthralling.
there is no life;
Rejecting the profits of the intellect, Teach this Dharma to the people. {19}
One should amply infuse yellow orpiment in the sweat and foam from camel’s jowls, and camel’s urine.
“When they find food that is delicious and pleasing, They consume it without engaging in the discipline.
after they have actualized the finality of existence, they will become śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas.”
Their worship is not done through material things.
“In exactly the same way, by partaking of these impurities,
A god of gods, revered by gods and humans alike.
From the river of craving—the fount of nonvirtue— Is dried up by the sun of my wisdom.
his faculties cease and he loses his constituent elements,
When the Bodhisattva saw the man, he asked his charioteer the following, even though he already knew the answer:
Thereupon the Bhagavān taught this topic in detail in verse:
But take delight in the lower vehicle, Their powers will be one-sided indeed.
The Dharma is not a secure refuge.
A deep pit formed where the elephant landed.
Therefore, I will definitely practice generosity by offering the marrow of my bones!’
He follows the ways of all the world, yet he reverses all states of existence.
and countless beings were benefitted.
Immature beings do not understand ultimate reality; Their experience is a complete mental construction.
In the same vein, when they practice the other transcendent perfections, up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom, they do not apprehend the transcendent perfection of wisdom, and so forth. They do not apprehend [the causal attributes], up to and including enlightenment.
he is the One Who Is Skilled in Teaching the Dharma to Others according to Their Capabilities.
To the right and left of the vowel letter of Hayagrīva
it is having no pride in the aggregate of samādhi,
“When a conception arises for anyone, Even a buddha could not find any such phenomenon.
‘Their cognition is a gateway to all dharmas because they are hollow, empty, and void.
as they appear in the discourses of the Thus-Gone One.’
And yet they appear to arise, and they appear to remain and cease.’
and together with eighty quintillion bodhisattvas,
How should they investigate the meditative stability of aspirationlessness?
Ultimately there is no affliction or purification and nothing is afflicted or purified.”
Neither will they say anything at the wrong time.
Those beings that develop a strong inclination to attain unsurpassable and perfect awakening will develop a strength that brings down a rain of the great teaching.
they offer gifts and make merit.
promulgate it, and make it widely known to others.
Innumerable, countless bodhisattva mahāsattvas attained the great, higher cognitions.
“He is a buddha acting for the welfare of the world.
they are not humans. They are rākṣasīs.’
Lord, please look upon all beings as if upon an only child; Think benevolently and lovingly with a composed mind.”
Also, after my passing away, there will be Maitreya, Who at that time will also prophesy to them. {60}
when the Bhagavān is seated for a long time, we too are in the assembly for that Dharma teaching.
In that same way the Guide, Knowing we had inferior aspiration,
Having listened, understand correctly The inconceivable ripening of karma. {20}
“Noble ones, when King Śubhavyūha saw the miracles that those two boys performed,
Ānanda, in your opinion,
they inquired of the Bhagavān, “Bhagavān, do you have few troubles, do you have little illness, are you happy?
They embrace all wandering beings throughout space with the realm of phenomena.
You will never make an error. For what reason did you smile? {62}
And it is always obtained by the bodhisattvas: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {106}
They will always be engaged in familiarity with them And they will reject completely this samādhi. {9}
and attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, and that,
All beings in this Sahā world realm saw all the devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans paying homage to that tathāgata and saw him teaching them the Dharma.
who creates excellent minds,
When thwarting the works of the māras, they are irreproachable.
The magnitude or measure of the merit of those bodhisattva great beings who live by them is beyond comprehension.
When unstained by worldly qualities, they are irreproachable.
You love moral beings and immoral beings equally.
We are here to please gods and humans and grant complete satisfaction. Awakening is hard to gain, so change your mind;
Bhagavān, what are we able to do?
At will they may assume the incarnations that they wish,
if they abide in, cognize, and are intent on [the other sense organs], up to and including the mental faculty,
Venerable Lord, if sentient beings are invariably unfound and not apprehended, how could they become bodhisattvas!
‘Such and such a benefactor gave me such and such a thing, which I was able to make such and such fine use of.
Therefore, great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the emptiness of inherent existence,
with trillions of yogins and yoginīs, headed by those just mentioned.
and took his seat before Padma­netra.
He is the one without darkness,
Their depth is immeasurable.
In a pit the shape of an aśvattha-tree leaf, which is the pure nature of the place of birth, one should light a fire with wood from the aśoka-tree.
proper understanding that cyclic existence blazes with the fires of desire;
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
and endow them with realization and eloquence as well.
Indeed, the entire gathering was satisfied by that food, and the food was not at all depleted.
“Bhaiṣajyarāja, those who write out this Dharma teaching to create a text and carry it on their shoulder carry the Tathāgata on their shoulder.
“The buddhas did not obtain awakening.
And they do not gain knowledge for the sake of rebirth in the higher realms. {76}
The third great merit results in becoming Śakra, lord of the gods.
That man, that lord of generosity, that lord of great generosity, would have generated vast merit through that causal factor, through giving to those beings the things that bring happiness—
bound all the great kṣatriyas in stocks and shackles, and took them to a copper cave.
It is through my attainment of the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood that I have accomplished all this diligence and heroism.’
“Son, go and join in the festivities for the nāga kings Giri and Valguka.”
They are covered with excellent rugs Decorated with geese, that are worth billions.
“Noble son, imagine that all the beings in all the universes throughout the ten directions, as infinite as the realm of phenomena and present as far as space, had reached the tenth ground of the Cloud of Dharma.
Thus they act in the service of the Dharma.
No-ground-to-stand-upon is non-division.
When Śāriputra had thus spoken, the Bhagavān asked him,
they should train accordingly in the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, in the transcendent perfection of perseverance, in the transcendent perfection of tolerance, in the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, and in the transcendent perfection of generosity.
But after the Guide of the World has entered nirvāṇa How will beings be able to believe in this?
and to be a tight-fisted instructor with respect to giving teachings.
Do you have a plan for us?’
“What an amazing place! It is so pleasant!
the red Rāmadeva;
eat it. The result will be the same.
I possess the transcendent perfection of generosity.’
Anyone whose eyes have been anointed with this substance will steal the hearts of all wanton women.
Moreover, Su­bhūti, whenever great bodhisattva beings cognize in that manner,
“ ‘They were riding in chariots,
We must go warn the King of Aṅga.”
“Divine son, just as the wealth of a person who is only concerned with his personal achievements is not sufficient to ensure the wellbeing of a whole city,
the world system of desire, the world system of form, the world system of formlessness,
They had reached the final culmination of complete mastery over mind and were experts with respect to the realm of phenomena.
In time, the young brahmin Kolita reached the village of Nālada and asked Upatiṣya’s parents,
And together with those who had listened to them They made offerings to those supreme humans.
With that vision, it sees the six kinds of gods of the realm of desire.
“When was this, master?” “At such and such a time, a long time ago.”
Rather, with an unagitated mind, they should give their own bodies to those assailants and assassins.
Su­bhūti, for these reasons omniscience is uncreated, undestroyed, and unconditioned.
Dundubhisvara, Durabhisambhava, Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta,
Since this transcendent perfection of wisdom is absolutely void,
Within one month, one’s lifespan will increase to five hundred years.
These constitute conditioned phenomena.
For these reasons, Senior Śāradvatī­putra, that which is termed ‘physical forms’ is to be counted as imperishable.
They are the inconceivably numerous recitations concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous recitations concerning teaching the composite,
“Ānanda, let me also explain Bhadrapāla’s celestial chariot.
sustaining the intrinsic nature of the thus-gone ones and guarding against all negative and unvirtuous actions.
A vast mind is rare.
the Blessed One taught the inhabitants of this and other worlds, each with its gods, Māra, Brahmā, monks, nuns, and priests. To all these beings, gods and humans alike, he taught what he himself had realized, and what he had thereby actualized and accomplished.
lack of appropriation; activity free from distracting social ties;
“Mañjuśrī, how does one set out with superior intent, how does one become endowed with skillful means, and how does one depart by means of the perfection of insight?”
the ray of light known as the light of wisdom‌ free from attachment that arouses the memory of the buddhas of times past shone forth from the protuberance on the crown of his head.
There where there is no being, soul, or person: That is where the bodhisattvas dwell. {56}
and for the rest of their lives they will not incur a single transgression.
The whole sky is filled with gods.
Addressing the two hundred monks, the emanated monk asked them,
His fellow student then also rejoiced, as did the saṅgha,
All the bodhisattvas of that realm partake of the delightful sustenance of concentration, the delightful sustenance of absorption, and the delightful sustenance of the Dharma.
Lust is clear light, ignorance is perfect peace.
“I have neither attachment nor anger; I do not perceive anything permanent, attractive, or with a self.
“Son, if you are a male, how has a female vanquished you?
This jewel among men has finally appeared— The one who has conquered the enemies of birth, old age, death, and disturbing emotions.
“Noble son, great caravan leaders are venerated by everyone, including kings and royal ministers.
“There is no activity of conceptualization; Incorrect views have completely ceased.
the past limits [of all other attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, are neither fettered nor liberated
There were four bodhisattva mahāsattvas who were the principal ones among that great gathering of bodhisattvas, that great aggregation of bodhisattvas.
Śāradvatī­putra, the sensory element of the eyes does not consider the expanse of reality
“He possessed the conduct and discipline of the Sage And as soon as he spoke those words and no others,
As he sees it, he will think to himself,
It is a recitation that brings liberation.
When the names of these vajra beings are continually upheld, One will neither incur peril, nor be overcome.
The monk who inquired into confidential matters then stands before the senior monks,
Because the great fruition is perfectly realized, it is taught in this tantra but fully concealed
You have truly practiced with a true motivation. I pay homage to you who have true wisdom. {16}
the Bhagavān said to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Samantabhadra,
I have no life and yet I do not die.
All these buddha realms could be seen permeated with the light streaming from the Bodhisattva.
“Rishi King, I said that this was a man of doom who had come, but you did not pay heed to what I said.
experience tastes with their tongues,
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, what is a consistent basis?
“These senses are unreliable. Their nature is material and neutral.
the samādhi named Rescuing from All Existences,
He gracefully touched his hand to the earth So that the earth resounded like a copper vase.
‘I teach the Dharma with one voice, Doing so always for the sake of enlightenment.
Bodhisattvas will then teach them various virtuous skills such as reading, sciences, finger calculation, numbers, and mathematics, while avoiding showing them any unvirtuous skills.
this is the time to stay in solitude,
They have dispelled the four demons, and have thus vanquished demons and hostile forces.
Though they see, blessed buddhas may inquire about what they already know.
“When they spend their time in the equilibrium of meditation,
The instructions of the hearers
They will also train in great loving kindness and great compassion.
owing to the profundity of the expanse of reality,
The Bhagavān, knowing the thoughts that were in the mind of Bhikṣunī Yaśodharā, said to Bhikṣunī Yaśodharā,
“At midnight of that night, causes ended And he was extinguished like a flame.
To everyone else, it was invisible.
"འདི་ལྟ་སྟེ། མཆུ་མཆོག་<tthat are known as the great lips, the lump concealers , the wind expellers , and the desire catchers .
What are those ten? They are pursuing the welfare of all beings, accepting alms in order, not becoming weary, being content, being fond of sharing, being detached, consuming alms in moderation, pursuing virtue, gathering roots of virtue on a large scale, and not entertaining the idea of a singular whole.
As for the thousand sons of the King Ratnacchattra, they are now the thousand bodhisattvas of the present blessed eon,
Then, Vajrapāṇi and the others, all the vajra holders, Śakra, Brahmā, the protectors of the world, and the four kings spoke these words to the Blessed One:
Portray the palms of two hands being placed together in the gesture named the lord-of-all-kings.
“This is the verse of the five disciplines:
I also am presently examining them.
So now enjoy yourself, like the lord of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, the lord of the gods, the one endowed with a thousand eyes.
You destroy delusion, beliefs, and ignorance, and unfold brilliance and glory!
Sarva­rṣi­pavitra­śrī (Glory That Is the Purity of All Seers)
All the eight thousand bhikṣus, with their hands together in homage, bowed toward the Bhagavān and said to the Bhagavān,
“Moreover, young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I will practice completely pure physical conduct in that way.’
When bodhisattvas see sentient beings who suffer, who have no refuge, no protector, no support, and no resort, they engender the mind of awakening.
A woman who is of blue color
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is pure, stainless, and without disturbance.
“Śāradvatī­putra, with regard to [those phenomena] that commence from the five psycho-physical aggregates and extend as far as the link [of dependent origination known as] aging and death,
May you light the great lamp of the Dharma!
Monks, while the Bodhisattva was staying in the midst of his retinue of consorts,
Similarly, do you think that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are one thing, and that illusions are another?
“The goddess who influenced the king And protected the dharmabhāṇakas
“All of these great beings, Protectors with dedication, These bodhisattva heroes, Where did they come from?
overspread with divine canopies,
Śāriputra, the Tathāgata possesses many treasuries of wisdom, strengths, and fearlessnesses
“For so long he has abandoned evil ways and adopted the virtue of goodness. He has avoided bad actions and their maturation, and praised good actions and their maturation.
“What is the knowledge of accomplishment and definite accomplishment? It is sharp wisdom.
nor diminished when not eulogized.
“For a hundred million years he entered homelessness And practiced a pure and perfect celibacy.
Mahādevī also went toward the Bhagavān, paid homage at his feet, and circumambulated him three times.
Remaining fixed means that they do not move;
“Blessed One, there is an extensive collection of discourses on the Dharma that bears the name Lalitavistara (The Play in Full).
“If he was giving me the principle and interest in a timely fashion, why did I accost him?
Likewise, this tathāgata, although he has not yet accomplished all the deeds of a tathāgata, is also extolling and teaching nirvāṇa.
“What is the nature of consciousness that transfers from the body?”
on account of the fact that sentient beings worship them, venerate them, construct relic stūpas, create images, recite their names, and preserve and venerate the holy Dharma, liberate beings
“Then the sādhaka, visualizing himself in the form of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa and
Their bodies will feel no hunger or thirst.
A rain of sandalwood powder and celestial flowers fell from the sky, and divine light shone throughout the world.
Some of the bandits abandoned their spoils and fled while some were killed.
“ ‘Furthermore, noble son, the Dharma-worship consists of determining the Dharma according to the Dharma;
or among the priestly class, standing out like a tall sāl tree;
and their wisdom was perfectly free.
Namely the victorious master of illusory displays— Enacts his part in that very form
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of action concerning the composite,
“Noble son, it is difficult to obtain his name.
They do not see unwholesome qualities as fully established, yet neither do they see wholesome qualities as truly established.
“Elder, now they must be inspired.”
Prostrations to the glory of the bodhisattvas, all the great illuminators;
Chakras are also taught as four-fold: Conditional, secret, natural, and empowered.
covered the Thus-Gone One sitting at the seat of awakening with a jewel net studded with many trillions of gems.
In the west, one should draw Red Acala;
and from the cloudless sky,
On the other hand, Nārāyaṇa, say some people made a gift of the seven precious substances filling an entire millionfold universe.
speaking with reason is to ensure that the meaning is not lost;
see that this great earth is made of clay, covered with stones and sand, and full of dust, gravel, pebbles and boulders,
that all views are entirely beyond the three realms, then
We do not have the strength to make that effort.
“We have all given our own teachings, noble sir. Now, may you elucidate the teaching of the entrance into the principle of nonduality!”
he is the One with the Power to Know What Liberates Various Inclinations, Many Inclinations, and All Inclinations.
they have been introducing beings to the wisdom of the buddhas, and they have been teaching the wisdom of the buddhas.
‘I will undoubtedly attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
In such ways will they be established.
“I am, Mañjuśrī. I am one among the Thus-Gone One’s hearers.”
let alone bodhisattva mahāsattvas with bodhisattva followers as numerous as the grains of sand in half a Ganges River,
Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is like space.
If you ask why, owing to the emptiness of inherent existence these minds are not minds.
Instead, what do bodhisattvas wish for?
venerable Gayākāśyapa,
To gather the treasures of the Dharma, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
will actually attain manifestly perfect buddhahood.
Drawing on all he had heard, he taught them the Dharma so that they abandoned all disturbing emotions and actualized arhatship,
Divine princes! The enlightenment of the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas is inexpressible and it cannot be explained.
In that buddhafield where I will have attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment,
the accumulations include wisdom, view, intellect, ignorance, elements, objects, and consciousness.
Which is situated at the center, Four finger-widths above the upper tip of the relative,
having eliminated covetousness and sadness with regard to the inner physical body, continue to observe the physical body.
“As soon as the Bhagavān rested in meditation there fell onto the Bhagavān a great rain of coral tree flowers,
Knowing them to be the very dregs of this assembly I, the Lord of the World, gave them leave. {40}
With the qualities of music of various kinds of melodious sounds, Make an offering to the Guide with a pure mind. {51}
with Prajñā in front,
The dharmakāyas are the buddhas. That is seeing the buddhas. {32}
Bhagavān, for the sake of showing compassion to us, enjoy these airborne palaces of the Brahmās.
“Delighting in patience, residing on the path of patience, Even though your body was cut into pieces you were not angered;
Then the goddesses of the desire realm perceived that the Thus-Gone One on the seat of awakening had attained higher knowledge, fulfilled his purpose, and become victorious in battle.
The method for creating an image of Kurukullā, The mere painting of which Brings fruition to the practitioner— I will now explain in full.
they will not actualize the finality of existence, but, after cultivating the meditative stabilities of emptiness, signlessness, and aspirationlessness, they will become perfected.
And patiently endured the wrong deeds of ignorant people.
“In that way the bodhisattvas, The pure beings, the protectors,
owing to the non-appropriation of all things, they do not grasp all the gateways of mnemonic incantation and [other meditative attributes], up to and including the gateways of meditative stability.
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, They will have exceedingly sharp wisdom, supreme wisdom;
A woman who is pink
and many hundreds of thousands of other female kiṃnaras were gathered there.
The three suchness channels Are located in the secret place and give rise to bliss.
Yet, if there is a seed, the sprout will take form and arise, and so on, until finally, likewise, if there is a flower, the fruit will take form and arise.
If you ask why, Su­bhūti, it is because the real nature, the expanse of reality, the finality of existence, sameness, and the inconceivable expanse never exist and they are non-apprehensible. This being the case, how could they possibly come and go?
Then, Senior Śāradvatī­putra again addressed Senior Su­bhūti as follows:
having set one’s mind on the task to be accomplished. If one goes to sleep without speaking,
“Consider, noble son, how the time when the sun’s rays appear is referred to as the sunrise.
the purity of his gnosis reflects the purity of his doctrine;
diligently contemplated, meditated on, and studied the Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma for eighty-four thousand years.
in that case, Venerable Lord, those bodhisattvas would undervalue the transcendent perfection of wisdom and keep far away from it.”
They said, ‘What this bhikṣu is teaching is not the Dharma, It will be meritorious if we kill him.’ {55}
and free from desire.
Venerable Lord, if the notion of physical forms as with signs or signless is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of physical forms as such become a bodhisattva?
The fourfold assembly was amazed and astonished on seeing the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Prabhūtaratna, who had passed into nirvāṇa many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of eons before, speaking.
Cuckoos, mynas, and peacocks, And similarly cranes and other water birds—
Although the other monks ministered to him with medicinal roots, stalks, leaves, flowers, and fruits,
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is the emptiness of non-dispersal.”
Then a god from the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations approached King Śuddhodana and spoke to him:
Then, turning them away from such [indulgences], the bodhisattvas establish them in the three vehicles.
Turn the wheel of the Dharma!
Elephant and horse, and so too cow and dog.
“By such truth and true words, as follows: of all kinds of assemblies, gatherings, multitudes, and retinues, the saṅgha of the Thus-Gone One’s śrāvakas is called ‘supreme.’
Especially protect you With health and well-being! “In a section of the north, There are eight goddesses:
When one is in the midst of an enemy army And weapons are falling, It should be smeared on the vital points, And one will easily escape.
It is good that you prompt me so.
“Knowing the nature of phenomena
I employ skillful methods And teach them three yānas.
Which quantity of merit would be greater—the amount of merit from such a gift, or that of Brahmā?”
Abiding in every form.
“If the heaps of merit that bring forth all the hair follicles were multiplied by a million innumerably many times,
“Noble one, I do not know anyone else.
Hearing the melodious sound of these instruments, even the gods will be pleased!
“Why is it the completion of the doorways to liberation?
“I will most certainly approach and solicit the Thus-Gone One to turn the wheel of Dharma!”
that is caused by the appearance of a beautiful woman.
and piles of cushions covered in celestial cloth sat upon it.
“Why is that? It is because they do not see phenomena;
It is the equanimity of those with compassion. It is the love that brings anger to an end. “It is the delight of those with peaceful minds.
These are the miracles of the Thus-Gone One!”
“If he abandoned them, needless to mention That he would leave the pleasures of love with a woman!
He is not produced from causes, nor does he depend on conditions.
In order to play with the five superknowledges, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
Monks, sickness is neither appealing, nor is it singled out, considered valuable, pleasant, or highly appreciated by anyone.
“He said to the Blessed One, ‘Blessed One, these aggregates do look awful and smell terrible; they ooze blood and pus; they are like wood, clods of dirt, walls, or roads; they are insubstantial and inert.
“Those who thus know the body Of the buddhas are the progeny of the jinas.
“When the king and his princes had entered homelessness, Many thousands of other beings also at that time
and they were completely satisfied by the supreme flavor of divine food.
Holding the bow of calm abiding, he will shoot the arrows of empty lack of self,
they are fixated on physical forms, and they are fixated on [the other aggregates], including consciousness.
“What are the six objects of the senses? They consist of the sensory objects of form, sound, scent, taste, touch, and mental objects. These are the six objects.
It has not been produced by the ten powers of the tathāgatas,
And the foot thus put down then vibrates, It should be understood that a treasure is present there.
“Luminosity by nature is non-affliction.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of limitlessness. What are the four kinds of words of limitlessness?
Perceiving the [transcendent perfection of wisdom] in that manner, when asleep they will have no inauspicious dreams,
He teaches the final reality. He teaches the final reality well.
feeble in perseverance,
“All those greatly renowned buddha heroes Also cause those realms to shake.
“They who, desiring liberation, possess this stainless samādhi Are pleasant, good company, have a gentle mind,
So it is, Su­bhūti, that great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom perfect the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline.
I shall send devas and yakṣas In great numbers to be his companions.
The monk replied, “I petitioned on his behalf, I cut his hair and beard,
Reverend Ānanda, do not bring shame upon us, but go in silence,
he has heard the teaching in this way and
One who wishes to attain emancipation in things without defining characteristics merely wishes to attain emancipation in spiritual attainment and [consequent] happiness.
‘So where does the genuine view of the noble ones come from?’
“Dṛḍhabala said to the prince, ‘The Lord of the World is still present.
They should also praise and rejoice in others who have become equipoised in the meditative concentrations, up to and including the fourth.
and Varuṇa came from his stomach.
the Bhagavat was dwelling on the Vulture Peak Mountain in Rājgir, on a summit of infinite gems, in the Womb of Dharmadhātu Palace,
“Padmaśrīgarbha, you may wonder what that ‘expertise in the mode of Dharma known as the boundless seal’ might be.
‘Oṁ, pull, pull! Bewilder, bewilder!
All the devas and their sons felt pleased, delighted, thrilled, joyous, happy, and glad, and they emitted cries of joy and laughter.
and in the same vein, if they abide in, cognize, and are intent on [the other sense objects], up to and including mental phenomena, I say they will not be released from suffering and so forth in subsequent rebirths.
When he said the letter ña, out came the statement: ‘Making known (jñāpana).’
leading a retinue of a hundred thousand quintillion bodhisattvas, they all at the same time vanished from the Vairocana­raśmi­prati­maṇḍitā world realm and came to this Sahā world realm.
Similarly, the real nature of the transcendent perfection of generosity and
He has performed great sacrifices and possesses an exceedingly excellent accumulation of merit.
At that time, the monk called Stainless Light came to the great city of Vaiśālī to beg for alms.
The bodhisattvas are empty of the bodhisattvas.
and that are baseless non-entities, with the essential nature of non-entity, and empty of intrinsic defining characteristics,
It is the same in the three times, and is cut off from the three spheres.
In this way, the awakening of bodhisattva great beings also appears, relatively.
for it leads one to not praise oneself.
Even the name of great loving kindness does not exist internally, nor does it exist externally, and nor does it abide between these two.
“When the learned ones analyze the coming and going Of speech, voices, sounds, and tunes,
the lords of the asuras, the lords of humans, the carakas, the parivrājakas, and the nirgranthas all shed tears,
Though they lived the holy life for the remainder of their lives,
And why? Because those bodhisattvas’ generosity is boundless.
“Even if the entire trichiliocosm with its cities and towns Were filled with stainless and beautiful gold,
“The monk Vīradatta said,
For many millions of eons he has practiced ethics and disciplined conduct.
and the one who genuinely abides on the path.
“Even though the orb of the sun has shifted, the shade of his tree does not leave Prince Siddhārtha—who has the highest and most sublime marks of virtue and is as brilliant as the sky—while he practices concentration, motionless as a mountain.”
On the twelfth or eighth day of the month, one should perform ablutions and make offerings. Then one should wrap the shell in silk and wear it on one’s arm.
The same goes for the sensory element of the eyes and [the other non-existent sensory elements], up to and including the non-existent sensory element of mental consciousness.
“Divine son, there is. A lazy bodhisattva great being is unlike those diligent hearers, solitary buddhas, and extremists who employ an easy form of diligence that involves focus.”
When engaged in proper conduct without truly observing any phenomena they are free from evil.
“Those who make offerings to the relics
Are you not a paṇḍaka? Have you not violated a nun? Are you not an impostor?
Kauśika! You have said that great bodhisattva beings who practice this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, and who do not succumb to doubt and are undeluded with regard to those things, even though they investigate these things, achieve that which is difficult.
he again heard from the Bhagavān countless, innumerable verses describing the benefits of the qualities that come from the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena;
All great medicinal plants that remedy all sorts of diseases grow in the earth and emerge from it.
Venerable Lord! I will guard, protect, and offer sanctuary to those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who hold, maintain, recite aloud, master, and are attentive to this transcendent perfection of wisdom in the right manner.
The acceptance of great bodhisattva beings has been taught,
We have heard many dharmas In the presence of the world’s lord,
And looking again saw many amazing sights on the earth, mountains, and oceans.
all heard this samādhi also and were delighted, rejoicing, and joyful.
Those other monks spend their time in mental distraction.
He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of internal and external phenomena!”
Śakra, Brahmā, the guardians of the world, and many hundreds of thousands of gods then bathed the Bodhisattva in perfumed water and scattered flower petals over him.
When the sage Asita looked at the Bodhisattva,
the inconceivably numerous words of conduct concerning the kleśas,
do you think that they would generate many merits on this basis?
Which thus resounds throughout Countless, innumerable millions of realms. {227}
White Acala by Delusion Vajrī;
The body is the issue of the four main elements, and in these elements there is no owner and no agent.
“Chanda, look to the pure sky where a divine light shines so beautifully!
the drops turned into hoarfrost, then grew hot, and evaporated.
“The foolish who are untrained Take up the wrong paths.
Where is the seed of that sprout located? Is it in the stem, the leaves, or the buds?
They see correctly the specific characteristics of those phenomena.
‘Where does the sound come from and where does it go?’
They enjoy complete mental rest in the absence of mental movement.
The way he looked ahead and to the left and right was also beautiful.
the bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha, the monks, and the many bodhisattvas, as well as the world with its gods, men, demigods, and gandharvas, rejoiced and praised what the Blessed One had said.
he perfectly and completely awakened, thus-gone arhats, who have neither fear nor terror,
What are those ten? They are to know clearly which path is smooth, which path is fearsome, which is delightful, which is appropriate, which has water and which does not, where there are resting places to be found, which paths are well established, which paths are fast, which are direct, and where the paths begin.
Monks, when King Śuddhodana heard those verses,
the bodhisattvas, the lords of the gods, the lords of the nāgas, the lords of the yakṣas,
of benefit to a great many beings, prodigious, and teaches widely and perfectly among gods and humans.”
Settling the breath at the location of the navel,
except for those who are engaged in the practice of the level of the śrāvakas.
Bhagavat, is there yet another pore?
Similarly, they will have achieved and maintained all the other meditative concentrations, up to and including the fourth meditative concentration, where both bliss and suffering have been abandoned, and neither suffering nor bliss is present because blissful and unhappy states of mind have both previously subsided, while equanimity and mindfulness are utterly pure.
And wishes to enjoy the divine pleasures Of the goddesses and the divine delights, Let him serve the one with a face like an immaculate moon.
and nor should they abide in the notion that the aggregates, from physical forms up to and including consciousness, are aspirationless.
omniscience are indivisible:
“ ‘Also, the other sublime qualities of a buddha, Which are inconceivable and beyond measure,
White is the mirror-like wisdom,
The great light appeared even in those places.
“In a beautiful vessel, Place many excellent articles Such as food, drink, and so forth.
As they gather the factors of awakening, they will become free of grasping at a self,
“Make a commitment to attain enlightenment And make all the good offerings that there are in the world,
when between the villages he saw a poor, eyeless blind man, a destitute beggar. At this sight, he felt compassion.
Placed within a phuḥ syllable, It should be drawn on the doorstep.
As numerous as the grains of sand in fifty, in forty, in thirty
The eldest of those sons was named Jñānākara.
My parents said,
One should perform all the following rituals with this mantra while visualizing Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa:
“Though beloved in the world of gods and humans, you do not gravitate toward sense objects;
in the same vein, the non-arising, non-affliction, and non-purification of [all other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, are without foundation.
His buddha realm was delightful, as flat as the palm of a hand,
As soon as we die and pass from this life, we will be reborn among the denizens of hell and will have to live there in such straits.
If neither has reached twenty years,
Whoever has discipline also has perceived the wisdom of liberation.
In the southeast, white Delusion Vajrī;
the purity of the living beings reflects the purity of his gnosis;
the samādhi named Viewing All Worlds,
or among the priestly class, standing out like a tall sāl tree, or among the householder class, standing out like a tall sāl tree.
Pavitrakeśā (She Whose Hair Is Purity)
similarly, knowledge of the ten powers of the tathāgatas,
Though the earth was destroyed it would be unchanged. {14}
Dīpaṃkara was that dharmabhāṇaka, And I was then that princess. {42}
Continuously meditate throughout millions of eons With that kind of unsurpassable power of patience,
“The bodhisattvas in meditation Do not long for any phenomenon.
and an observant passer-by, on seeing them,
and directed his attention to nirvāṇa.
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, when bodhisattvas practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom in that manner
She delights in granting practitioners the siddhis they desire.
Through such causes, conditions, and bases they will embrace and uphold the sacred Dharma without any concern for life or limb.
With a body free of impediment They go to the buddha realms. {18}
The emptiness of internal phenomena has been taught without apprehending anything
All of you do not know even the names of the scripts That he has learned before, many tens of millions of eons ago.
Their lives become meaningful and their humanity serves a purpose.
The world realm Vistīrṇavatī will be as level as the palm of a hand.
“Bhikṣus, as soon as the Bhagavān sat on the Dharma seat,
having bowed their heads at my feet, withdrew to one side and asked me,
This can be remedied by washing the hand.
Then the god Lord of Peace and Calm bowed to the Blessed One
“You may wonder how bodhisattvas bring assurance.
also attain the extrasensory powers of the bodhisattvas.
“No, Venerable Lord!” he replied.
This completes the ceremony by which a person becomes a lay devotee.
Liberation can be found where there is bondage,
What is the cause and what are the factors for that?”
Then Śakra, mighty lord of the gods, addressed Senior Śāradvatī­putra as follows:
knowledge of demigods,
will appear in the world as the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha, the one with perfect wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the one who knows the world, the unsurpassable guide who tames beings, the teacher of devas and humans, the buddha, the bhagavān named Śālendrarāja, in an eon named Abhyudgatarāja, in the world realm Vistīrṇavatī. “
and went to the great city of Rājagṛha, to his tall, vast, great, divine home.
with its resplendent gardens, resplendent groves, resplendent pools, and fine hedges.
They are concerned about the happiness of their future lives. “ ‘Why is that?
at midnight they went to the bank of the Nairañjanā River where the Bodhisattva was staying.
After you died you were reborn in the divine realms.
owing to the fact that [all those other attributes], up to and including buddhahood, are emptiness,
It does not enhance enlightenment; nor does it diminish it.
they encourage others to keep dispensing the gift of the sacred doctrine and worldly gifts.
Red is the wisdom of discrimination,
and cast off the elements, assumes the element of dharmas, feeling, and virtue and non-virtue.
“Or else one could commission someone to paint Sole Hero on a canvas and practice as before.
they may become absorbed in the meditative stability known as the yawning lion.
until he has obtained, without obtaining, the wisdom of omniscience that is endowed with all supreme features.
they engage in the conditioning of feelings, in the conditioning of perceptions, in the conditioning of formative predispositions, and in the conditioning of consciousness.
If you ask what constitutes signlessness as a gateway to liberation,
And all these forms are of myself
Such is the bodhisattvas’ vast diligence.
Śāradvatī­putra, the transcendent perfection of wisdom does not establish anything at all in an apprehending manner.
However, as soon as the Bodhisattva touched them, they were unable to withstand his splendor, brilliance, physical strength, and stamina.
and who even walk away from this assembly.
After the heavy deluge of rain has fallen, the hills and the valleys are quenched.
Then, when the sufferings of those who frequent the world of Yama, the Lord of Death, have come to an end,
Their bodies do not experience the sufferings that humans do.
He will completely perfect this wisdom And
They will experience the same type of joy and faith toward their preceptor as they have for their teacher.
“Monks,” instructed the Blessed One, “say this to the people of Rājagṛha who say such things: “
they do practice the transcendent perfection of generosity, but they do not apprehend that generosity, and then they also practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom, but they do not apprehend that transcendent perfection of wisdom.
It is the true nature of all phenomena; it is equality; it is the absence of inequality; it is devoid of notions;
“Venerable Lord! This purity of phenomena is neither attained nor is it manifestly realized.”
If the poison were to be extracted from the body,
“Just like the nature of the past protectors And like that of the jinas in the future,
“They do not preoccupy themselves with the talk of kings.
“The bhikṣu had love for them
[432]“For so long he has never lied or spoken harsh words. Nor has he been rude or dishonest, or sought to humiliate others. Nor has he been unpleasant, or attacked others’ weak points.
Similarly, are feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness free from contaminants and not included within the three world systems, owing to the emptiness of inherent existence?
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is unsullied.”
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, what is it to be ungraspable,
At that time, the great bodhisattva mahāsattva known as Great Nail of Brahmā bowed down toward the Bhagavān with folded hands and said:
Similarly, the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty are themselves omniscience,
to actualize arhatship, and to inspire the conversion of so many?”
They will reject this skillful method of mine,
Since they possess the seven riches, they will also be wealthy.
clouds of divine flowers, clouds of divine fruits, clouds of divine garlands, clouds of divine incense, clouds of divine garments, clouds of divine powders, and clouds of divine Dharma robes, divine umbrellas, divine banners, and divine standards.
and is free from something to be expressed,
“Śāradvatī­putra, since you always have had opportunities to question the Tathā­gata, you may ask whatever you wish,
knew the Dharma, plumbed the depths of the Dharma, overcame his skepticism,
They do not apprehend the notion that conditioned elements are empty, or the notion that they are not empty.
At this the Bhagavat arose from his previous seat and
“Divine son, ultimately, when they are without exertion that aims to understand,
Your time has now come— The time for leaving home, Disciplined One! “Conditioned things are impermanent and without stability;
An immeasurable radiance shone in the universe
When with that great assembly the Sugata proceeded on the path, Wherever the feet of the one with the ten strengths trod
Also, how do these circumstances come about?”
Would the other man be able to express a fitting praise of the ocean?”
he freed himself from any stains or miserliness, and was fully in control of his thoughts.
they become absorbed in the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable aspirations, and the formless absorptions, but they will not be reborn and they will not be captivated on account of these [absorptions].
For many millions of endless eons This kind of Dharma will never be heard.
Since the result of that activity is so beautiful, Beings never tire of beholding you.
This, Śāriputra,
In those hundred thousand world realms where those tathāgatas were present,
“Those who continuously worship this sūtra Will be reborn in the buddha realms.
External phenomena are also empty of external phenomena because they do not endure and they do not disintegrate.
and likewise with regard to those commencing from the three gateways to liberation and extending as far as the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities,
However, they should do so without apprehending anything.
“Mañjuśrī,” replied the Blessed One, “you should begin by teaching the nature of the realm of phenomena.”
“That bodhisattva should avoid the householder life, avoid associating with non-spiritual friends, and give up all personal possessions.”
Why is that? Because, free from all forms of unevenness, the body is at that point equal to the bodies of all bodhisattvas.
They too heard the exhortation of the gods, rose up into the sky to the height of seven tāla trees and,
They know that it is composed of the unsurpassable wisdom of omniscience.”
May you gather a single syllable within the forty-two syllables!’
He is neither mentally constructed nor not mentally constructed.
In this regard, Su­bhūti, the vehicle will not come to rest anywhere.
Please tell us
If someone wishing to go forth approaches any of you, ask him if he has reached fifteen years.
or who, after similarly holding and teaching it, are attentive in the correct manner to the pristine cognition of genuinely perfect buddhahood
Bhadrapāla, when life ceases in this world due to the exhaustion of karma at the time of death, the element of consciousness undergoes transfer under the direction of karmic obscurations.
The power of accomplishment will be known and spiritual attainment made permanent.
The Blessed One has said, “Monks, there are five things one never tires of looking at and which are in no way displeasing to the eye.
exclaimed, “Homage to the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha!”
When they came there, they circled the Bhagavat three times.
How can both be void?
die among hell realm beings and are reborn among gods.
consider that I am worthy of being honored, venerated, respected, and granted offerings.
These are indicative of the saffron of the Buddha.
(68) Their speech is pervasive, in conformity with their assembly, but it does not extend outside their assembly.
they secure them in happiness.”
He arrives at the city Where his father lives.
“His father comes near and says to the men, ‘Don’t bring this man in this way!’
‘Oh, you sir, while you are still burning, should encounter, be provided with, delight in, enjoy, and indulge in the five sensory pleasures!’
The hairs of their heads point upwards, finely and curling into locks.
Similarly, mundane phenomena, supramundane phenomena, contaminated phenomena, uncontaminated phenomena, censurable phenomena, non-censurable phenomena, conditioned phenomena, and unconditioned phenomena will not be attained.
I will form a boundary one league to the east.
“Divine son, in the same way the vinaya of the bodhisattva great beings is like the ocean.”
May they always protect you! “Their lord and king Is Kubera, borne by men. May this lord of all yakṣas, Together with Maṇibhadra, protect you! “May his many sons, wise and mighty, All ninety-one of whom are called Indra,
“ ‘Words do not go anywhere if spoken. Words are not diminished if not spoken.
who cultivate the path to nirvāṇa, and
while those who only recite and advise others are not.
And indeed Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī raised the prince well.
the bodhisattva great being Siṃhaketu,
At times, they make gifts of it to mendicants, brahmins, parents, friends, relatives, or kinsmen.
“Do not simply follow what other people say;
When the ornaments were completed the Śākyas went before King Śuddhodana at the time of the constellation of Puṣya and said,
Should meditate on Passion Vajrī.
Therein, there is no attainment of completely perfect buddhahood, and no genuinely perfect enlightenment.
Similarly, they know the modalities of the sensory elements, and yet
One should rejoice in those who have set their mind on the aspiration toward unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
Yet when the wealth is spent and suffering sets in, One is abandoned, just like an empty wilderness.
an illusionist or the apprentice of an illusionist, standing at a major crossroads,
He is going to send down a rain of the Dharma.
no one had heard any word of you.
The Blessed One then addressed Senior Śāradvatī­putra as follows:
a yard, a rotunda, a hall, a veranda above a vestibule, a rooftop shed,
Owing to the utter purity of all things, they do not apprehend pratyekabuddhas.
“They who possess this stainless samādhi Attain the ten powers, and attain the eight and two bhūmis.
Su­bhūti, it is because the essential nature of an arhat whose contaminants have ceased is empty of the essential nature of an arhat, and similarly, the essential nature of a pratyekabuddha is empty of the essential nature of a pratyekabuddha, and the essential nature of a tathāgata is empty of the essential nature of a tathāgata.
“Gentlemen, have I not already prohibited you from collecting tributes and taxes?
in uninhabited places, mountain basins, mountain caves, and huts of straw;
would lead his parents, brother, sister, wife, son, daughter and daughter-in-law from that wilderness safely and securely,
The bodhisattva great beings, who thought that they were beholding Ratnaketu,
“What is the equality of the dhātus? It is renouncing the dhātus as being like apparitions.
“ ‘Śukra, who was renowned as my upādhyāya, was also present at this time and said to me, “This is a person who brings doom. He will certainly cause you an obstacle.”
“Bhagavān, the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Kamala­dala­vimala­nakṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña asks after your welfare, saying,
Excellently adorned with these marks, the bodies of the tathāgatas radiantly shine.
“If we present this brahmin boy to his grandfather, he will give him a name.”
Thus concludes the chapter on all the rites involving mantras, twelfth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called “The Sole Hero.”
so instead I shall go forth among the ascetic sons of the Śākya, for they have secured from the king the liberty of a prince.”
In this time of the destruction of the supreme Jina’s teaching. {47}
Although they see all dharmas with their dharma eye, ultimately they see nothing whatsoever.
In this way they have no conception of a self And, liberated from that concept, they have no fear. {28}
Having understood these Dharmas, these beings will reach the higher realms.’
Eight trillion four hundred thousand million beings purified their eye of Dharma regarding phenomena so that it became stainless and unobscured.
“Once, when I was sitting in my father’s park under the shade of a rose apple tree,
“Blessed One, a lion’s roar,
Through these prostrations with devotion to the Three Jewels,
Of those who had the six higher cognitions, the three knowledges, Subdued senses, great powers, great miracles,
He thought, ‘There is no reason why I should give inferior carts to my children.
“ ‘ “A noble son or noble daughter who wishes to enter that maṇḍala should write the names of the entire lineage of his or her family and first of all cast those names into the maṇḍala.
The teacher, Vajradhara, Emanated light from his eyes.
With the bodies of skeletons, They terrorized many people.
they practice the path of the śrāvakas, the path of the pratyekabuddhas, the path of genuinely perfect enlightenment, and all [other] paths.
“teaching the Dharma among such sentient beings is a tremendous feat displayed by that thus-gone one.”
the unconditioned,
Abiding in those meditative stabilities of the bodhisattvas [and so forth],
I will satisfy human beings By providing the beverage with the taste of liberation.
Inside the women’s quarters, jeweled shoots sprouted forth. Scented water, saturated with fragrant oils, flowed forth.
“With your goal accomplished, you reached independence.
I teach the Dharma to those with little capacity, To those with inferior and those with higher understanding.
Tasting and offering the ambrosia Is taught to be the “practice of offering.”
“Here, there is nothing whatsoever that transmigrates from this existence to the next.
Ultimately, their knowledge is born through not apprehending ignorance as something to be exhausted.
‘Reverend Mahākāśyapa, to avoid the houses of the wealthy, and to favor the houses of the poor—this is partiality in benevolence. Reverend Mahākāśyapa, you should dwell on the fact of the equality of things,
Then the Bodhisattva wondered, “What is the prerequisite for the six sense fields to emerge?
‘Oṁ, when there is crying or wailing, this is for removing it. Hūṁ phaṭ!’
Your doubt is army number seven;
So if bodhisattvas become fixated on some viewpoint, even if it is the Buddha’s teachings, or the view of the transcendence of suffering, they disappoint the thus-gone ones.
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings should themselves acquire an excellent life span.
eyebrows that met, and a prominent nose.
and there is no one indeed who can attain manifestly perfect buddhahood with respect to that in which number and calculations are non-apprehensible!
Anything that is conceptualized neither arises nor ceases, and is only conventionally designated by names and symbols.
Su­bhūti, that which is innumerable
Weeping, I adorned that king of horses And gave it to the most exalted among men.
These ten powers of the tathāgatas are merely names, and the same applies to [all the remaining fruitional attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience.
I oversaw his bath, I inducted him into the novitiate, and I ordained him.”
They crush their pride as they think, ‘I must please my masters, my gurus, and those worthy of offerings.’
“Reverend Śāriputra, impropriety for one who has renounced the world for the discipline of the rightly taught Dharma consists of constructual thought and discrimination, yet the elders are full of such thoughts.
but the lord buddhas, in order to develop living beings, do not reveal all at once the pure realm of the Buddha.
The brilliant sun and moon would never bow down before a firefly.
In order to obtain gain and honor, And teach it in the middle of assemblies.’
The domain of living with the five powers, where one delights in the ten powers of the tathāgata, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
The Bhagavān said to Brother Mahākāśyapa,
In this way, the essential nature is said to be empty of the essential nature.
When resting in concentration and attainment, they are free from evil.
“Abiding in these attributes,
Reverend Śāriputra, these eight strange and wonderful things are seen in this house.
Likewise the sufferings experienced by beings in the realm of the lord of death, such as hunger and thirst, were also pacified.
The lifespan of humans in that world Will be eight intermediate eons.
“It would have been good had the ascetic Gautama, who was prophesied to become king of the world, become royal priest.”
“Certainly, Blessed One,” he replied.
the entire gathering of countless, innumerable bodhisattva mahāsattvas,
one will increase all one’s abilities.
and praised him with the following hymn:
“What are your attainments, and what type of realization have you gained, that you now cover yourselves with your upper robes before Mañjuśrī?”
In that way there sounded The words of the Guide of the World. {5}
And imagine that Śakra, lord of the gods, could be seen there, playing and enjoying himself with the five divine objects of pleasure.
In the presence of millions of buddhas Was profound and subtle,
How is it established in order that one might not appropriate and become fixated on [all attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience?
fragrant herbs, incense,
the nose-consciousness-base,
Imagine, noble son, that the Thus-Gone One were to live for an eon,
Monks, the monk who served as monk caretaker in that life was none other than the monk Saṅgharakṣita.
(7) the total consummation of yellowness,
some goddesses were holding vessels of powdered blue lotuses, pink lotuses, water lilies, and white lotuses;
shows the ultimate,
This is what such statements mean,”
yet the element of water is not apprehended as the white lotus,
When he said the letter va, out came the statement: ‘The best vehicle (varayāna).’
They waved divine cloths in the sky above him.
flowers, incense, perfumes, flower garlands, ointments, powders, cloths, ornaments, parasols, banners, streamers, banners of victory, jewels, precious stones, gold, silver, pearls, horses, elephants, chariots, infantrymen, carriages, flowering trees, leaves, fruits, boys, girls, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, Indra, Brahmā, the world protectors, humans, and nonhumans.
“Many thousands of millions of light rays As numerous as the sands in the Ganges
Senior Pūrṇa, enlightenment too is neither fettered nor liberated. Similarly, Senior Pūrṇa, the understanding of all phenomena, the understanding of the aspects of the path, omniscience, and the bodhisattvas are also neither fettered nor liberated.
They are not the actions of holy beings.
after actually realizing those very truths [imparted] by the lord buddhas,
After prostrating at Śāriputra’s feet, the householder Buddharakṣita laid out a seat and invited the venerable Śāriputra to sit.
At that time, Mañjuśrī, while the great Brahmā, who controls ten trichiliocosms, looks upon all the classes of gods,
These included the omniscient venerable Kauṇḍinya, and the venerables Aśvajit, Vaṣpa, Mahānāman, Bhadrika, Vimala, Pūrṇa, Gavāṃpati, Mṛgaśiras, Uruvilva Kāśyapa, Nadīkāśyapa, Gayākāśyapa, Jaṅghā Kāśyapa, Mahākāśyapa, Amogharāja, Sumati, Śāriputra, the eminent Maudgalyāyana, Parvatarāja, Nanda, Upananda, Ānanda, Rāhula, and so on
‘Even covetous people find covetousness unpleasant; they do not wish for it, do not like it, and do not enjoy it.
Some are frightened by the eight flaws and hence relish the taste of the eight-fold path of the noble ones.
(61) Their joints are extended. (62) Their hands and feet are utterly pure.
producing the superknowledges to actually accomplish all duties of benefit to living beings;
One will attain such a seat While turning in cyclic existence.
This supreme peace of samādhi. {1}
The moon has the nature of the five elements and
Yet, Mañjuśrī, sentient beings with varied beliefs perceive the speech of the Tathāgata, issuing forth in accordance with their manifold inclinations.
“Bhaiṣajyarāja, that noble son or noble woman should be known to have attained the highest, complete enlightenment.
Do not speak words that are unture In front of their parents or teachers. {66}
and which is the imperishable teaching of omniscience.
to familiarize oneself with the absence of marks and thereby become free of expectations;
Transcendent perfection is the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities. Transcendent perfection is extensive in all enlightened attributes.
They cause the abandonment of avarice, immorality, malice, laziness, forgetfulness, foolishness, and jealousy, as well as bad convictions, adherence to objects, and all opposition.
Śāradvatī­putra, it is in this way that bodhisattvas become unskilled in the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
“ ‘Great King, although the five aggregates are insubstantial, childish ordinary beings think of them as being substantial.
This completes the Noble Mahāyāna “Ākāśagarbha Sūtra.”
So his time came and he died, and he was reborn among the denizens of Avīci, the Great Hell of Unrelenting Torment.
Thus, they endeavor in practice.
“Mañjuśrī, bodhisattva mahāsattvas should expound this Dharma teaching in the later times, in a later era, by maintaining four qualities.
Once they have left their homes, they practice urgently, as if their hair were on fire, for the sake of attaining this Dharma.
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish to attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood
They do not apprehend even the transcendent perfection of wisdom, through which anything could be actualized, nor do they apprehend anything that could bring about actualization.
“It is the equality of the different kinds of beings. It is skill in examining phenomena.
those who are not attached to wealth and honor,
Do not violate other people’s wives.
Similarly, they attain individual enlightenment,
With his palms together, he bowed toward the Blessed One,
At this moment, auspiciously, a hundred thousand bells rang out.
She cut her hair and took off her jewelry.
“The great brahmin descended from the deva realms to the island of Siṃhala.
“In seven days the prince will demonstrate his prowess in the arts.
And she will only thrill your heart and mind more and more.
Kauśika, in this regard, the emptiness of physical forms is indivisible with this emptiness of the bodhisattvas and they cannot be bisected.
In that mansion divine maidens can assemble to serve and venerate the Bodhisattva by making music, singing songs, and playing instruments.
Śāradvatī­putra, such bodhisattvas are unskilled in the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
spewing fire,
Similarly, the sensory element of sights, the sensory element of visual consciousness; the sensory element of the ears, the sensory element of sounds, the sensory element of auditory consciousness; the sensory element of the nose, the sensory element of odors, the sensory element of olfactory consciousness; the sensory element of the tongue, the sensory element of tastes, the sensory element of gustatory consciousness’ the sensory element of the body, the sensory element of tangibles, the sensory element of tactile consciousness; and the sensory element of the mental faculty, the sensory element of mental phenomena, and the sensory element of mental consciousness all indeed are like a dream, like a magical display.
they began to search for him in the spring, summer, and winter palaces, and in his private rooms and apartments. Unable to find him, they all began to wail like fish hawks.
a repository of the teachings that he had studied,
Always engaging in righteousness, she should be unimpressed with flashy displays; She should always be pure in body, speech, and mind.
one billion realms of the Heaven of No Hardship,
It is mixed with one pala-measure And afterwards with sixty palas.
The hot season, the winter, and the great clouds, storms, rain, and lightning of autumn all assailed the body of the Bodhisattva.
and the samādhi named Complete Stability.
“Bhaiṣajyarāja, I declare to you, I proclaim to you that I,
silk cloth and
Then, from within the retinue, 960 million gods, men, and other beings called out in a single voice,
They should not dwell on the notion that physical forms are a self, nor should they dwell on the notion that these are not a self.
Bhagavān Śākyamuni departed from his Śākya clan into mendicancy,
Oṃ śūnyatā­jñāna­vajra­svabhāvātmako ˈham
Do you accept not to engage in such things?” The newly ordained monk responds: “I will not engage in such things.”
a being in search of his final rebirth, who had grasped the essence of liberation,
I identify with individual enlightenment. I identify with omniscience. I possess omniscience.
Will generate much merit, Which will be beyond measure.
After rubbing an iron dish with it, the dish will look like copper.
like fire burning without fuel;
“At that time you taught how ten billion jinas Of the past who had passed into nirvāṇa
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, great bodhisattva beings who abide in other meditative stabilities will also swiftly attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed and genuinely perfect enlightenment.
What are those eight great qualities?
Reciting this mantra, one should throw the buds, one by one, into the stream.
by decimating with the lightning bolt of wisdom the mountain of belief in the transient aggregates with its twenty tall peaks.
It is having the direct perception of birthlessness. It is engagement in activity.
said these words to Brother Śāriputra:
“Are you Kolita?”
understand it, preserve it, recite it to others, promote it, proclaim it, chant it, and make it widely known to others.
“Within that pore the ground is made of diamonds.
He went to his mother, who asked,
“Venerable Lord, if, therefore, physical forms do not exist and they are not apprehensible,
Do not lie, speak words of slander, Indulge in idle talk, or speak harsh words. {64}
and individual enlightenment are attained,
When bodhisattvas see a donor or a benefactor they will not make any indication by saying, ‘I need clothing,’ ‘I have no begging bowl,’ or ‘I need medicine.’
As nothing impedes their mind, they will engage in authentic conduct.
“Seeing those who are in distress, I teach thousands of millions of sūtras;
and saw each other as parents and children.
“For those who are stuck in their attachment to the stain of laziness, having present diligence toward realization is attachment.
“Happy is the solitude of the contented one Who has heard the Dharma and can see.
Similarly, those great bodhisattva beings who wish to comprehend physical forms,
After eight or nine months,
“The thus-gone ones feel great compassion for sentient beings since all phenomena are devoid of mental constructs and yet sentient beings are fond of mental constructs.
and mind-consciousness.
That person will complete the six perfections each day.
explaining their meaning and etymologies.
Destroying a village, a district, or a town constitutes the second root transgression.
As seen in the past, the future, And as in the present. {39}
Similarly, bodhisattvas absorb the great rain of Dharma as it falls from the great clouds of Dharma, accommodating and absorbing it.
They explain to them the supreme path Of constant peace, happiness, and emancipation.
one should cast a clod of earth incanted with this mantra seven times into the four directions:
“Bhagavat, it happened, as the Bhagavat knows.”
They will be reborn in the buddha realms in the ten directions and in lifetime after lifetime will hear this sūtra.
Su­bhūti, it is for these reasons, too, that the attributes of the tathāgatas, which the tathāgatas possess, are inconceivable, equal to the unequaled, and so forth.
“Those who maintain this sūtra During the cruel age of destruction
“At first in youth, when one has a fine body, One is liked and desired and acts like a child.
The nose cannot be found and nor can the tongue;
He teaches Dharma well.
This occurs due to their comprehension of the absence of self, which ensures that they have no experience of being harmed.
By being in service to the virtue of the vase initiation, One is in the service of virtue, a permanent lay-vow holder.
Some suggested, “The city of Vaiśālī is wealthy, prosperous, and happy.
“O people, why be so amazed? Do you know what’s amazing?
that these sentient beings with a childish disposition perceive that which does not exist as a sentient being, and
He did not lapse from continually giving rise to the state of omniscience.
It entails absorption in the three [modes of meditative stability], having realized that all things are naturally in equipoise.
Therefore I must first actualize these experiences myself. In that way I can demonstrate that his worldly absorptions, which are limited to concentration and which only support states of equilibrium, do not carry a result.
The entire domain of the king of Alakavatī Became empty, with no yakṣa remaining there.
Monks, such was the awesome strength of the newborn Bodhisattva’s first seven steps.
Similarly, if the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of both external and internal phenomena,
Virtuous Hero! Remember your previous actions And your vow to help others.
“When through austerities, you sought awakening and wisdom of many qualities,
Prabhāvyūha replied,
“Please, Blessed One, have compassion for me.
So I will silently remain in the forest.
(14) emptiness of all things,
Because the time has come when there are many bhikṣus and bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas and upāsikās who are extremely arrogant and have rejected the good Dharma.
“Bhikṣus, in the future times when I have passed into nirvāṇa,
So it is, Su­bhūti, that great bodhisattva beings should be skilled in dedicating the transcendent perfection of wisdom.”
Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, in that way I obtained this Dharma teaching directly from the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas of the past, and read it and taught it.
“When you dream that your pearl necklace is torn And that you are naked and your body is mutilated,
They train in the six transcendent perfections,
“Son of noble family, due to this root transgression, they will forfeit the entirety of their previously generated roots of virtue.
without mental placement, free from mental placement,
It then occurred to him, “Contact happens when the six sense fields are present.
unattached and unimpeded wisdom vision of the past; unattached and unimpeded wisdom vision of the future; unattached and unimpeded wisdom vision of the present;
You have reduced to rubble the massive mountain of pride;
Su­bhūti, it is because the emptiness of names is empty of the emptiness of names, and in the same vein, the emptiness of [those other terms], up to and including designations, is empty of the emptiness of designated phenomena, and so forth.
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, such are the bodhisattvas within that pore.
“There are monks and priests in the past,
By nature it is like a magical display,
“Consider, noble son, how the place where a lotus grows is clean and how it attracts brahmins, royalty, townspeople, and country dwellers alike.
All phenomena are at an end simply because they are at an end by their very nature;
When I die I will be reborn in a terrible hell, And I have no one who can save me from that. {103}
and esteem, and was revered, honored, and praised by Indra and the gods who attend him.
In this world or beyond there is nothing— Not even a precious gem in the higher realms— That equals the Thus-Gone One, the god of gods, The supreme among humans.
owing to the emptiness of essential nature,
their bodies straight, establishing themselves in focused mindfulness, dwelling in the mountains.
They always move and circle back and forth between this world and the next. Their spinning around knows no end and resembles a firebrand’s circle.
Remember it, and teach it widely and correctly to others!
“I, through that cause and that basis,
who desires liberation should abstain from all evil;
This assembly included venerable Śāriputra, venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana, venerable Mahākāśyapa, venerable Gayākāśyapa, venerable Nadīkāśyapa, venerable Ājñāta­kauṇḍinya, venerable Nandika, venerable Mahākātyāyana, venerable Bakkula, venerable Vāṣpa, venerable Koṣṭhila, venerable Vāgīśa, venerable Aśvajit, venerable Subhūti, venerable Suvāhu, venerable Aniruddha, venerable Uruvilvā­kāśyapa, venerable Revata, and venerable Ānanda, among others.
Like a moon in a pool of water, they are unproduced.
they will attain the complete features of a superior being.
to the realms of the great trichiliocosm.
It does not tremble from any pain that comes from contact with the likes of meat flies, bees, the wind, the sun, or snakes.
becomes the individual endowment of each one of them, and that thus throughout all universes, as far as the realm of phenomena extends, all beings have become Śakras in possession of that sort of merit.
In the presence of the Lord of the World I will pronounce their punishment:
they do not transgress the real nature of all things, and apart from that, they do not consider anything at all to be virtuous or non-virtuous, specified or unspecified, contaminated or uncontaminated, mundane or supramundane, and conditioned or unconditioned.
“He has reached the perfection of all good qualities. He has eyes of kindness and compassion for all beings.
The Tathāgata’s śrāvakas will also wish to see them.
“Young man, what is the samādhi called the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena?
Ānanda, it is so! It is as you have said.
“Therefore, Bhagavān, explain the meaning of this well, so that we will not have any kind of doubt in this Dharma, and so that in the future time, when noble men and noble women who are on the Bodhisattva­yāna hear it, they will not doubt it.”
Who are always terrified of the three realms And act without attachment to the world. {7}
A garland of light shines forth from this, Causing all sentient beings To dissolve into the vajra essence.
By giving up all negative verbal acts.
circumambulated the Bhagavān many hundreds of thousands of times, and
and with his blazing intelligence he could illuminate his own assertions and vanquish those of others.
“ ‘Self’ and ‘selflessness’ are dualistic.
who are the charnel ground dwellers,
proper understanding that ‘passing beyond suffering is peace.’
They will live happily with their parents, children, spouses, and families,
Whatever sentences and syllables of this Dharma teaching that are taught
will be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon by her!
“Venerable Lord! Wouldn’t those great bodhisattva beings encourage sentient beings to acquire attributes that are non-existent, and
In the realms of the gods, it shows itself with divine adornments, for the adornments of Iśvara also exemplify merit.
“Hearing so, they all are filled with joy, Thinking, ‘We will become buddhas, supreme among beings.’
Thus, noble son, bodhisattvas who possess these ten qualities are like the sun.
Brother, it will not be good if they kill you. “ ‘Brother, you are very handsome, attractive, and good looking,
fetters will occur and fetters will not disappear;
On the other hand, Nārāyaṇa, say some people made a gift of the seven precious substances filling that entire great billionfold universe.
“They constantly train in wisdom And beat loudly the drum of the Dharma.
It is indeed to bodhisattvas who realize such a teaching that the blessed buddhas prophesy awakening to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood.”
Ultimately, it is not about generating anger; nor is it about bringing anger to an end.
He was clear like a lake, immaculate and lucid.
For them all things are nonexistent, always empty, And they have eliminated every single conceptual identification. {10}
Your Majesty, if I were to get just enough of the marrow from your body to satisfy me,
whose emotions had been cooled as if treated by a balm of sandalwood,
He is the one to whom the lord of the nāgas bows.
(17) all the activities of their speech are preceded by pristine cognition and followed by pristine cognition; and
“ ‘Those who know insubstantiality, emptiness, The absence of a self, and the absence of attributes
What is the nature of the mountain?”
the samādhi named Supreme Lotus,
It is rejoiced in by a hundred billion Brahmās. Is the Jina teaching this samādhi? {107}
Similarly, the four applications of mindfulness will emerge in the world,
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities are like the king of medicinal trees.
the sky is stainless;
“With respect to the superior, average, and inferior hearth,
They do not consider whether tastes are connected with tangibles.
“Similarly whoever wishes to pass beyond the desire realm And reside in the realm of Brahmā,
The maṇḍala of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa Should be adorned with wish-fulfilling trees, and so on.
Such are the consequences of offering food.
not future,
Some were completely filled with a variety of flowers:
This universe of a thousand million worlds shook in six ways.
we thought that they were for our use.
would anything be explained, heard, or cognized by anyone?”
When they are exhaling a short breath, they are fully aware that they are exhaling a short breath.
“These bodhisattvas are innumerable. They are countless and beyond measure.
“The great leaders through many transformations Manifest miraculous manifestations of the body.
“I can at once swallow the sun and the moon And the wind blowing through the sky.
Thus they remain in the application of mindfulness with respect to the body.
One should make her clasp her arms Firmly around one’s shoulders.
Later, when the young brahmin Koṣṭhila was debating Śārikā, Śārikā vanquished him
Bhagavat, what are these omens of?
Similarly, the essential nature of magical displays, and the essential nature of mirages, echoes, optical aberrations, and phantom emanations of the tathāgatas will not attain emancipation from the three world systems, and
and for that alone I would exclude from this Dharma and Vinaya those persons who are converts to a tīrthika order.”
One should join them together and
For that long, even if it takes many eons, We shall act for the welfare of beings.
“Friends, there is a bodhisattva, a great being, who has excellently and diligently practiced purification, generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, concentration, knowledge, methods, studies, conduct, ascetic practices, and austerities for countless trillions of eons.
“It would not be appropriate for me to take these alms with my hands. What vessel did the previous perfect and complete awakened ones use to accept alms?” Right then the answer dawned on him.
Yet, they do not make assumptions on account of such miraculous abilities, nor do they make assumptions about those miraculous abilities, and they do not even apprehend them, because anything on account of which they might make assumptions, anything about which they might make assumptions, and the assumptions which they might make are all essentially empty, essentially void, and essentially non-apprehensible.
You who have ascended the throne of the sublime victorious ones,
The oceans can be compared to the oceans of absorption
The Buddha, who was the color of gold, Placed his hand upon Candraprabha’s head. The Tathāgata, who had a gentle voice, The Teacher, then said to him, {38}
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, Such people will be those who always have a retinue. They will not cause division, but will always keep harmonious unity And practice the supreme, highest, peaceful bodhisattva conduct. {173}
If you ask why, it is because the transcendent perfection of generosity is not a transcendent perfection.
Immutable like the central mountain, He practiced the all-pervasive concentration.
They will be under the power of ignorance and be ignorant fools, And they will not delight in the Dharma of emptiness and peace. {74}
or the fruit of entering the stream, and so on, up to and including genuinely perfect enlightenment.
“They performed bodhisattva conduct for the benefit of beings. They were powerful sons of the Sugata.
“Young man, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who know correctly that teaching on the nature of all the qualities are,
These yakṣas open the entrances To cities and homes.
When not harboring anger toward anyone, they are free from evil.
who reveals the beneficial lasso; who has hundreds of mantras; who terrifies Vajrapāṇi;
“No, there are none.” “Why is that?”
I must approach him and ask, ‘Monk, who is your teacher?
the bodhisattva Ratnapāṇi, the bodhisattva Bhaiṣajyarāja,
Megharāja, Dundubhisvara, Ratnapāṇi, Ratnākara, Ratnaketu,
teaching the Dharma in hundreds of thousands of quintillions of buddha realms as numerous as the grains of sand in ten million Ganges Rivers, arrived.
Māra now saw himself overcome by old age.
it cannot be shown
become śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas
If living beings who have not conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment eat this food, it will be digested when they conceive the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
“According to their strength and location, The fallen rain, which has a single taste, Germinates each and every thing That is dwelling within its seed.
They do not give with the arrogance and haughtiness of the learned.
Emptiness is not something other than aging and death. Nor are aging and death something other than emptiness.
Their face is moonlike.
"སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད་རབ་ཏུ་དགྲོལ་བར་<tThey maintain discipline out of the wish to liberate all beings. 
“The number of such heroes as these, These protectors and their followers,
It was so delightful to watch, and thus one could never get enough.
Consider the analogy of the moon which, for the sake of beings to be converted, manifests skillfully to them according to the roots of virtue that constitute their dispositions. It makes itself invisible,
Having shone there, they came to the Jetavana Monastery, where they became adornments for the monastery:
The realm is illuminated by light, And millions of devas send down a rain of flowers. {24}
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds reach out to ripen sentient beings.
When someone speaks unpleasantly to me, Toward him I feel a great love.’ {66}
“At that moment, as a consequence of the flowers, as the parents share a bed and have sexual contact, the consciousness dissolves into the flowers
Due to their excellent personal associations, their conduct is perfect and elegant and, as their conduct is very peaceful, they possess conduct that is uncontrived.
(7) contemplation of a dismembered corpse,
So it is that they correctly perceive the sensory elements.
A maternal aunt, a niece,
the eighteen aspects of emptiness,
some goddesses were holding vessels of powdered uragasāra sandalwood;
What are those five qualities? That such a monk has been ordained for ten years or more,
Again, by the method previously described, One should start the union.
those who are to be tamed by beatings, threats, killing, or bondage will be shown just that.
it becomes a support for all beings to perfect their insight.
In one voice they cried out, “Well said, reverend Saṅgharakṣita, well said!”
When the king had heard that samādhi He renounced his kingdom and entered homelessness. {161}
You, Kuntī, and your followers should protect them!
Similarly, Blessed One, since all phenomena are of the nature of the element of space, they are not subject to birth or cessation.
“Once he conquers Māra’s army, He will surely attain sacred awakening, just as the victorious ones did in the past.
“Noble sir, where did you die to reincarnate here?”
“Alas, my man of limitless renown, You have emerged from hundreds of virtues and have stainless merit!
We see them, Lord!
I said to her, ‘The people of Jambudvīpa and my homeland are so pleasant.’
If great bodhisattva beings are endowed with that cognition,
When the Bodhisattva saw that they were settled,
“Heroic Sage, to some you showed the taming of Māra and his armies,
Seventy-seven times ten million samyaksaṃbuddhas gathered there,
if he were to exhibit himself as a great bodhisattva being, as one who had first began to set the mind on enlightenment,
How do they resemble lions?
They will not fall away from being extolled by all the buddhas, solitary buddhas, śrāvakas, and bodhisattvas.
He is liberated from the skandhas. He is separated from the dhātus.
Ask those lords of the world about their previous practice, And those bodhisattvas dwell in supreme roots of merit. {1}
Who aim for the highest, supreme enlightenment And carry out for me the work that has to be done,
do you think that they would generate many merits on this basis?
then from what phenomena have great bodhisattva beings turned away when they are revealed to be irreversible?”
Thereupon, Senior Su­bhūti asked the Blessed One, “Venerable Lord! What is the sameness of great bodhisattva beings—the sameness in which great bodhisattva beings should train?
has proceeded from time immemorial, without interruption, like the flow of a river.
Fifty full years passed by after that, And since I saw him another twenty.
Ānanda, there are some monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen who do not feel inspired when they hear sūtras like this one. Instead they do not trust these sūtras and they reject them.
The man knew what his children thought. He understood that they would wish for many different kinds of amusements, and
In the same vein, why are [all attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, non-existent, being inconceivable, [unappraisable, innumerable,] and equal to the unequaled?
And so, monks, King Śuddhodana satisfied the sage Asita and his nephew Naradatta appropriately with a banquet, offered them fine garments, and circumambulated them.
they caused all men, women, and children in the city of Kapilavastu to fall asleep.
Moreover, Venerable Lord, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom should not abide in the transcendent perfection of generosity.
“The one who has attachment on hearing this Dharma, And animosity on hearing that which is not Dharma,
who apply themselves diligently to attain what they have understood,
Mañjuśrī, it is due to the power of the Tathāgata that sentient beings see him.
“Great King, these eighty marks that Prince Sarvārthasiddha bears mean that Prince Sarvārthasiddha will not remain in his home,
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
It is not easy to know it.
nor is it an object to be cultivated.
He would also explain nirvāṇa As being the result of the cessation of the five aggregates.
Swans, parrots, myna birds, kokila cuckoos, peacocks, wild geese, jīvañjīva pheasants, and flocks of other birds all melodiously warbled.
Bhagavān, be at ease and be content.”
The Blessed One, the tathāgata, arhat, perfectly awakened, omniscient, all-seeing Buddha
They are superior to Śakra, Brahmā, and the world guardians within the three worlds, as well as to all the hearers and solitary buddhas. They are above all wandering beings
“Why is it the comprehension of the entire three realms? Because it is the realization that they are like dreams and illusions.
Male and female kinnaras, male and female mahoragas, male and female yakṣas, and male and female piśācas will wish to come to them so as to see them, pay homage to them, honor them, and listen to the Dharma.
have appeared in countless, innumerable worlds in the ten directions
He is unequaled in body. He is unstained by the desire realm.
Then they dedicate that root of what is wholesome toward obtaining a tathāgata’s awareness.
If he answers “No, do not cut it,” then tell him to go.
and reprimand and rebuke them with harsh words, or strike them with clods of earth, clubs, weapons, or tools, these great bodhisattva beings, seeking to perfect the transcendent perfection of tolerance, would not have even the slightest thought imbued with anger or malice,
“Forcing someone to give up the Dharma,
Developed the aspiration to enlightenment And scattered flowers on the Buddha. {46}
Aging and death, along with sorrow, lamentation, suffering, discomfort, and agitation are pure, owing to the purity of birth.
a person guarded, shielded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon
not to abandon emptiness;
In many thousands of ways Whatever renunciants would enjoy. {10}
If they engage with the ten powers of the tathāgatas,
“Children of noble family, who has led you?”
Likewise, so long will the gods of [all the other realms], up to and including Akaniṣṭha, emerge in the world.
“Bhikṣus, the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Mahābhijñā­jñānābhi­bhū knew the aspiration of those mendicants and,
he has throughout ten million eons Trained in generosity, self-control, and restraint, and thus attained awakening.
This king of mantras will be mastered if one recites it 100,000 times for each syllable according to the procedure of the preliminary practice.
do sentient beings abide in space?
“Those who have a gross perception Of names-and-form,
It is excellent that you ask the Thus-Gone One about this matter!
‘Great King,’ said the Bhagavān, ‘these two boys have made offerings to as many tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas as there are grains of sand in sixty-five Ganges Rivers.
He was never sad.
Enlightenment is realization of reality.
Inside that upper chamber was a throne with a sitting area that was likewise scaled to fit a six-month-old fetus.
One will be able to retain whatever one has learned.
“Your Majesty, when we officers of the King of Aṅga were collecting tributes and taxes,
Whatever divine regents there are among the gods in the desire realm—Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Virūḍhaka, Virūpākṣa, Vaiśravaṇa, Śakra, Suyāma, Santuṣita, Sunirmāṇarati, Vaśavartin, and so forth—Māra, the evil one, saw all of them eagerly listening to the Bodhisattva with their faces turned toward him.
because he intends to teach the Dharma that is not in accord with the entire world.
Nor is there any real death of a buddha.
and completely fills it with sesame seeds. There isn’t even a needle-sized hole in this building.
If you ask why, it is because they do not consider [the nature of these sensory elements], up to and including the sensory element of gustatory consciousness.
Always be kind and take care Of those who are to be guided.
They do not attach importance to ethical discipline.
Then all the gods inhabiting the world system of desire and all the gods inhabiting the world system of form scattered divine sandalwood powders, incense, palm leaf powders, divine blue lotuses, night lotuses, and white lotuses toward the Lord Buddha.
At this, Kolita’s relatives went to him and said,
“You have mastered the art of knowing the destinies of beings in all directions;
Through disenchantment with joy, he remained impartial, maintained mindfulness and introspection, and experienced physical pleasure.
or actualize,
Bhagavān, teach well this Dharma teaching to us.”
Similarly, they teach the sacred doctrine that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness have the modality of space.
I had displeased nine hundred And fifty billion buddhas. {113}
The family of the king of Vatsa is base, violent, and lacking in nobility.
‘This person has vast beliefs
If, when it rains, One does not do this The nāgas will be displeased
“As another option, the blessed lady should be painted on the canvas alone in the center, between the five Acalas.
those bodhisattvas will be revealed as tathāgatas, who have mastered all phenomena.
“I declare to you, the saṅgha of bhikṣus,
Any practice of any buddha constitutes bodhisattva practice.
Because of the cessation of ignorance there is the cessation of formation, and
They continue in saṃsāra For millions of eons. {23}
owing to their former acts of offering made to this [book of] the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
were all gazing upon the Bhagavān with wonder, amazement, and joy.
Should be learned from a master’s oral instructions.
Yet here there is no tathatā and no Tathāgata,
and they should don the armor of the [other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
To those for whom you discovered vast awakening and defeated Māra,
I seek merit, so please stay here and let me provide you all the provisions you need.’“
How much merit has such a noble man or noble woman created?”
It became divided eightfold like a checkerboard by golden cords.
I will describe the incantation, the secret mantra, In conjunction with medicinal substances.
the more will those great bodhisattva beings assume physical, verbal, and mental purity.
because they are entirely flawless, I would then call them ‘perfect.’ ”
Akṣobhya is the father,
then, monks, his going forth should be allowed and he should be ordained.
Sickness arises from total involvement in the process of misunderstanding from beginningless time.
pear, pomegranate, bael,
These two bulls had no fear of being waylaid, and thus they could be employed where no other bullocks would pass.
Saying, ‘They will become buddhas.’ But we will endure it all.
“In the past, for billions of eons, You preserved unbroken, uncorrupted discipline.
‘Know this, lord: the breeze is blowing toward Siṃhala Island.’
And to the exalted Dharma, And the Saṅgha, the supreme assembly!
“I see his face, But the crown of his head is invisible.
and similarly the transcendent perfection of perseverance,
in doing so they do become capable of actualizing the noble wisdom vision that is superior to human teaching.
“The pilot answered,
The bodhisattva Kṣitigarbha then exclaimed to the Blessed One
Once, when not occupied with their studies,
and innumerable bodhisattvas living as householders.
The ones who possess this vast sūtra Will have bodies that are completely purified,
Similarly, the emptiness of the truth of the origin of suffering is not [the truth of] the origin of suffering.
Bhagavān, yes, I did.
When he made such a proclamation and they threw clods and and sticks at him,
“Their hearing is purified to become Inconceivable divine hearing.
Previously no student, master, solitary buddha, or bodhisattva who had taken up such conduct had ever entered this absorption.
That which is the impermanence of physical forms is not emptiness, and that which is emptiness is not the impermanence of physical forms.
I will give it away without any sense of resentment or regret, nor any hope for reward.
this union should be fully known.
What are those ten? They are to gather sentient beings through giving what is beneficial, giving happiness, giving without end, speaking in beneficial ways, saying what is meaningful, speaking the Dharma, speaking with reason, acting in meaningful ways, creating harmony through material things, and creating harmony by means of their wealth.
Above, the devas are beating their great drums And sending down a rain of coral tree flowers.
it is because [the first] meditative concentration is empty of its essential nature,
In the same way, they reveal to sentient beings the sacred doctrine that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness neither arise nor cease, and that they are neither defiled nor purified.
It is in this way, Su­bhūti, that great bodhisattva beings become a sanctuary for the worlds.
If you wish to attain buddhahood quickly, Listen to me and then practice this. {72}
and the five aggregates of appropriation.
“They teach through knowing the conduct of all beings And similarly their thoughts and past practice,
carefully surveyed them, looking to see if there was anyone similar to himself in terms of virtuous conduct, discipline, meditative absorption, or knowledge.
When the Blessed One, the Exalted Lord, had spoken,
“Su­bhūti, it is like when an ocean-going ship that has not been well constructed sets out to cross the ocean, filled with merchandise.
Whoever desires beauty, luxuries, and power, And wishes for fame, courage, and good qualities, And would like to speak agreeably with words that are heeded,
Conceptions of permanence and impermanence,
What is seen is not to be seen again, ultimately.
“Noble son, the thus-gone ones are endowed with a limitless ability to answer questions.
“Such a wheel is the wheel of Dharma That has now been turned.
Do not be hostile to beings;
“Furthermore, Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess two qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
you should see that the transcendent perfection of wisdom is void.
That flavors are not tasted is the lack of reference point.
their designation as empty or not empty, their designation as with signs or signless
and that I may go on to abandon all disturbing emotions and actualize arhatship.
They constantly awaken with the sound of the Dharma Those beings who are asleep, who are fast asleep,
“Attachment and anger, born from delusion,
Also everything about the practice of winds
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, it is because the non-arising [of these statements], the act of inspiration, the statements that are expressed, and the things that do not arise are all neither conjoined nor disjoined, and
“When the king had heard the words of his sons He furiously ordered his serving executioner,
There is no greater evil than the absence of passion,
Through mind one attains freedom.
They have no analysis or examination of those phenomena.
and give rise to the mind of unexcelled and complete awakening.”
may that being thereby make irreversible progress toward unexcelled and complete awakening!’
With the following verses to the buddhas One should request empowerment:
Venerable Lord, it is because the essential nature of anything through which pleasant or unpleasant things could be cognized is non-apprehensible.
There is not even a single chair in this house.
the inconceivably numerous words concerning clarification in regard to the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous words of clarification in regard to purification. Those are the four.
“Similarly, in the emptiness of internal phenomena, the maturation of sentient beings is non-apprehensible due to its utter purity, and [in to the other aspects of emptiness], up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, the maturation of sentient beings is non-apprehensible.
“Listen, young man, and I will explain That which is the highest practice.
having bowed down at his feet, make the following inquiry of him:
and Green Acala should be painted embraced by Envy Vajrī.
together with a great saṅgha of twenty thousand worthy monks and
“Venerable Lord! This transcendent perfection of great bodhisattva beings is great.
“Previously you were a virtuous, quick-darting parrot that lived in a tree;
And as it lies with its head to the right side of my womb, it is sure to be a boy, so pray be happy!
This is the way that bodhisattvas apply the remedy for desire and give up the conditions for desire to arise.
However many immature, ordinary beings there may be, not one of them understands the field of experience, practice, or liberation of a stream-enterer.
any notion of conditioned phenomena, and any notion of unconditioned phenomena is,
and went to a place where many hundreds of thousands of different kinds of insects lived within a cesspit in the great city of Vārāṇasī.
When he said the letter pha, out came the statement: ‘The actualization of the attainment of the fruition (phala­prāpti­sākṣātkriyā).’
Yet when the seed of consciousness grows, planted in the field of karma, moistened by the water of craving, and strewn with the manure of ignorance, the sprout of name and form manifests within whichever mother’s womb one will take rebirth through.
“When a tree rots,
When a bodhisattva perceives all beings as worthy recipients of gifts, such a bodhisattva is endowed with skillful means.
“What is being skilled concerning past lifetimes? It is remembering lifetimes and having received many teachings.
All phenomena, like illusions or dreams,
they comprise (1) the sense field of the eyes, (2) the sense field of the ears, (3) the sense field of the nose, (4) the sense field of the tongue, (5) the sense field of the body, and (6) the sense field of the mental faculty.
Well executed though the painting may be, it does not involve any phenomenon at all being transferred from the artist’s hand or mind to the physical form depicted; and yet we designate that form as a result of those conditions.
These airborne palaces of the Brahmās have become very beautiful, bright, radiant, glorious, and majestic. Who is this a sign of?
Candrabhūti is foolish;
They revealed different world systems, had donned the great armor, and had no doubts concerning the qualities of the buddhas.
The applications of mindfulness are empty of the applications of mindfulness,
and swiftly attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed and genuinely perfect enlightenment.”
“Please attend the master and I will seek medicine.”
“If one were to describe the entirety of their benefits, Even if one spoke with eloquence
Ānanda, when the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya was formerly engaged in the conduct of a bodhisattva he did not let go of his arms, legs, or marrow.
The Son of the Śākyas has realized the essential truth That all phenomena arise in dependence and lack reality.
“There is no Māra here, no army, no being, and also no self;
I am blind;
to demonstrate the accumulation of merit,
“With teeth so even and pure,
Ānanda, it is because such individuals defame the sacred doctrine.
Now tell me, Padmaśrīgarbha, would that man’s merit increase greatly on this basis?
Likewise, depending on mantras, mudrās, and so forth The accomplishments are gained.
“I am from the East,”
In the same way it is not easy to create pictures in the minds Of those who remain in this stainless samādhi of peace. {180}
“if my brahmin wife has had such a dream?”
Quick, go to the supreme tree and attain the state of immortality.
Attempting to mature them, bodhisattvas think,
‘He will pursue his aim without diversion.’
“Divine son, there is.
and likewise, the five psycho-physical aggregates,
Considering this as something they must know, bodhisattvas abide in equilibrium.
Then those five hundred arhats, on hearing the prophecy of their attainment of the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
“There is no misfortune or obstacle for your son, Sarvārthasiddha;
and following that contemplation they contemplate the essence of nirvāṇa.
“Blessed One,” he asked, “by whose power is it that this excellent light emerges, which is so bright, immaculate, delightful, and utterly gratifying for the body and mind?”
Oṁ, flow into the kāśa grass, flow into the kuśa grass, flow into an empty house! Flow for me as you flow for the possessor of the vajra! Svāhā!
Steadily, applying forethought,
He asked King Śuddhodana three times, until finally the king told the Bodhisattva what was wrong.
They correctly perceive the real nature of physical forms—that physical forms neither arise from anywhere, nor do they cease anywhere.
Delightful and teeming with people,
As was their wont, when one among the group of six heard the slightest news they all gathered in the afternoon to discuss it.
This heart mantra of the venerable, noble Tārā accomplishes all actions.
I myself shall awaken first to the supreme state of immortality.”
Such is the bodhisattvas’ expertise in terms of unmistaken insight.
“This joy gives rise to two signs in the dying person’s body: the teeth appear as white as evening jasmine and night lotus flowers,
If the ordinand responds “I have gone forth,” the inquirer asks him: “Have you properly lived the holy life?”
“Great persons teach the Dharma through their actions and not their words.
is its sole protector, its lone champion, one of a kind;
‘In the world, it is the buddhas who have the divine eye.
and his retinue of bodhisattvas numbered twelve million billion.
“There are many who say, ‘I am in a state of enlightenment,
When Dharmeśvara taught the Dharma, you applauded him.
they cultivate wisdom for the sake of all sentient beings.
"སངས་<t‘In accordance with the aspirations praised by the buddhas, through this offering of vehicles may I gather every form of happiness and the bases of miraculous power for all beings!’
Even the tathāgatas do not know it, let alone the bodhisattvas.
They will also work for the sake of sentient beings and refine the buddhafields.
and determine downfalls,
The nature of non-arising is indeed consciousness.
“Those bhikṣus rose up and took up weapons, As they did not approve of emptiness and peace.
If we fail to accomplish, properly and one-pointedly, the activities that are our accomplishments,
Who would not have diligence for the Dharma?
and so [with the other conditioned feelings], up to and including feelings conditioned by sensory contact that is mentally compounded, which are empty of feelings conditioned by sensory contact that is mentally compounded.
all becomes the nature of the Buddha.
If you want to assuage your own afflictions, Feed this cultivated body and mind!”
They are also afflictive, and they should not be acquired.
“For so long he has given up all faults of speech.
Today as well, O Sage, since you have dispelled attachment,
Along with every other stain, Were consumed by the fire of your wisdom.
Venerable Lord! If all things indeed accord with the transcendence of all things, then,
because he fully embraced skillful means,
It is eyes for those who wish for the view.
“In the past, when I was practicing bodhisattva activity,
I must find some way around it.”
It is not discontinuous because the aggregates at birth do not arise from the final aggregates at death either when they have already ceased, or when they have not yet ceased. Like the beam of a scale tilting from up to down, the aggregates at birth arise precisely when the final aggregates at death have ceased.
One should combine the practice of kumbhaka and so forth With the four gazes:
“Divine son, whoever knows, without knowing, that ultimately all phenomena are utterly unborn, utterly unarisen, and utterly unreal, is unmistaken in terms of the ultimate.
they upheld the true doctrine,
The nāga king Mucilinda also bowed his head to the feet of the Thus-Gone One, circumambulated him three times, and then set out for his domain.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Nārāyaṇa to beings who are to be taught by Nārāyaṇa.
the one who has discovered higher knowledge through concentration,
the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas concluded their miracle,
“They are greatly learned and hold what they have learned; They are holders of the Dharma of the buddhas.
He saw his abode being filled with darkness.
Mañjuśrī, in what way are all beings a single being?”
“Śāradvatī­putra, the ‘eighty excellent minor marks’ are merely conceptualized.
Since he does not dwell in discursive thought, We do not see him as a sentient being.”
‘I shall kill these two dharmabhāṇakas. I must not leave them alone, for that would be harmful.’ {16}
merit by refining the excellent marks and the adornments of the buddha realms,
removed his robe from one shoulder, and, kneeling on his right knee,
without dwelling, and imperceptible,
I request you to fulfill the aspirations of all beings!
Thus commanded by the Buddha, they took their thrones.
While meditating with the movement of breath controlled, it blazes in an instant
Su­bhūti, do you think that there is anything in which those great bodhisattva beings who would attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, having trained their minds, should not train?
“Do you think that one is liberated by perceiving feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness as entities and non-entities?”
They will therefore regard the realms of sentient beings in accordance with reality.
Visualizing him as fallen to one’s feet, one should recite the mantra. Then the enthrallment will take place.
venerated a myriad buddhas
“If this grass can help you attain the supreme state of immortality
or the attributes of individual enlightenment,
And they can do the same with as many universes as there are grains of sand in two such rivers, or three, or four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, or an inexpressible number of inexpressibly many such rivers.
“Ānanda! This is because the transcendent perfection of wisdom has precedence over the five [other] transcendent perfections;
When the monk Stainless Light heard this of the nature of phenomena, he felt satisfied, and rejoiced.
Prostrations to noble Aniruddha, foremost in possessing the miracle eye;
They will smell the scents of the bodies of many different kinds of creatures reborn as animals.
Still, it is not distinguished,
As she awoke, Queen Māyā first adorned herself with ornaments and flowing garments.
but attends to all with equanimity and thinks of what he can do to free these sentient beings from their illnesses,
At that moment he spoke the following verses:
The result of your practice of patience Is that gods and humans develop loving minds.
“In that respect, whether causes of affliction or of purification, all dharmas are by nature empty,
Thus, bodhisattvas remain in the application of mindfulness with respect to wealth, honor, fame, praise, and glory.
We will go to the Middle Country.”
And that is how, I thought, this whole huge mass of suffering comes to be.
‘There is a massive fire burning the house!
nor with [any of the other levels], up to and including the level of the pratyekabuddhas.
“What is disillusionment with saṃsāra? It is reflecting upon the harm of saṃsāra.
“The cultivation of the transcendent perfection of wisdom is the non-cultivation of the sensory element of the eyes.
They are peaceful, tamed, tranquil, have the power of wisdom, And are established in superior wisdom.
I also saw and paid homage to the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Śākyamuni.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of immeasurability. What are the four kinds of words of immeasurability?
Let them guard the quarters where the swans call out melodiously; Let them guard the queen with loving care so that she is not afraid.
Summon and the rest with jaḥ hūṃ vaṃ hoḥ.
Falling down to one’s knees. One should consume the semen and the blood That are in the lotus using one’s tongue.
The jinas whose faces are like stainless moons, Have never smiled without a reason. {94}
The mere seeing of the colored powder Quickly brings about the attainment of buddhahood,
One should tie the root of black nightshade to one’s hair.
They will practice the path of the bodhisattvas,
Likewise, Śāriputra, this applies
it is because it goes beyond the mundane, it is superior to the mundane, and transcends the mundane.
Black Acala is embraced by Hatred Vajrī;
[great bodhisattva beings, too,] do not transgress this modality.
Then, the Buddha said to the venerable Śāriputra,
and disappeared into the sky as a blazing mass of fire.
up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas?”
When they see them they will be terrified.
Similarly, they do not apprehend the notion that [the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path, are empty, or the notion that they are not empty.
and as resplendent as a golden tree.
Similarly, the minds of bodhisattvas bloom as they open the flowers of insight and the factors of awakening.
The touch of their hands is soft and very gentle in various ways.
it entails that they should do exactly what they say they will do, and that they should be kept in mind by the lord buddhas.
yet, although he thinks of him, he says nothing of this to anyone else, but sorrows privately.
how then will the path of enlightenment be attained, and if it is not attained, how will omniscience be acquired?
A monk is then assigned to shave the postulant’s head and face.
should also honor, venerate, respect, and make offerings to this transcendent perfection of wisdom with flowers, incense, perfume, garlands, unguents, powders, robes, parasols, victory banners, and ribbons.
manifesting the great compassion,
What are those ten? They are to remain immutably upon the seat of awakening though threatened by demons, as well as to remain immutably in supramundane concentration, supramundane insight, supramundane wisdom, emptiness, and the genuine realization of the qualities of the Buddha, the path, the limit of reality, suchness, and the seat of omniscience.
divine son, is called one with authentic engagement on the ultimate level. However, it is not like the way it is expressed.”
The emptiness of internal phenomena is empty of the emptiness of internal phenomena,
“You are the lamp for the blind of this world;
and with an encircling vanguard of a great assembly of eight million quintillion bodhisattvas, their cupped hands filled with divine coral tree flowers.
Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with these ten qualities have a fluent eloquence.
Yet, without the seed, neither color nor sprout could emerge.
Today I have become freed from sorrow.”
Śāradvatī­putra, just as the eyes of an illusory person are without foundation
The might and prosperity of King Śuddhodana will become renowned.
If you will not be upset, displeased, or envious, I should quickly go to that pleasure grove.
How can those without activity have a field of conduct? Those who are immaculate have no birth. {3}
an unsurpassable guide who tamed beings, a teacher of devas and humans, a buddha, and a bhagavān.
Bālāha, the king of horses, eats the herb named sarvaśetāna,
Oh! Oh! arise quickly and give them The medicine of the Dharma. {xx}
“Saṅgharakṣita, when those beings you saw who were shaped like walls were monks,
“ ‘In this there is no usage of letters. It is a vast mode, a vast mode of meaning.
So many sentient beings will I lead to final nirvāṇa in the expanse of non-residual nirvāṇa, and so many sentient beings will I not lead to final nirvāṇa;
Will defeat the armies of Māra And realize enlightenment at the foot of the Bodhi tree. {ii}
Thereby all realms of the world Are seen to be thoroughly purified
When he saw, approaching off in the distance, a retired devotee with a head as white as an āgati flower and drooping eyebrows,
“At that time, the gods might call out to all the men, women, boys, and girls of Jambūdvīpa,
(3) emptiness of both external and internal phenomena,
One should rub the nipples with one’s hand, Then suck and bite them.
that physical forms are without the nature of physical forms
May you not incur evil!
to be heard, to be seen, to be realized, and to be manifested.”
The man was rich, wealthy, and had many treasuries.
Once the person has developed genuine trust, he or she will be delighted with the bodhisattva, feel inspired, and have appreciation.
and leave this mixture in a house. A quarrel will ensue.
the eight aspects of liberation have the defining characteristic of non-captivation, the ten powers of the tathāgatas have the defining characteristic of invincibility,
nor does the expanse of reality consider [those other sensory elements up to and including] the sensory element of the mental faculty.
Tell of the straight path, free of brambles, By which nectar is attained when meditating upon it!
and approached the Thus-Gone One.
They will shine with light and travel the earth, Dispelling darkness for many millions of beings.
“The mind, Mañjuśrī, is empty of a self and what belongs to a self;
Five thousand gods remained without grasping, their minds freed from defilements.
His name will be Jāmbūnadābhāsa,
An intelligent person, knowing what is described here, should treat it with respect.
It is for these reasons, Su­bhūti, that this transcendent perfection of wisdom gives rise to the tathāgatas, and instructs the worlds [of sentient beings].”
“Then, Ajita, the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Candra­sūrya­pradīpa
“There is nothing there to be understood, And that lion’s roar arises.
At that point, the Blessed One explained the following chapter called “Taming the Nāgas.”
What use has it for blossoms and boughs?
They should obtain it, preserve it, understand it,
“For nine hundred and fifty billion years He kept the poṣadha vows.
They maintain discipline out of the wish for divine superknowledge, out of the wish for absorption, out of the wish for insight, out of the wish for liberation, and out of the wish to perceive the wisdom of liberation.
If you ask what these two entail,
“Blessed One, what are the riches of Bhadrapāla?”
“He may follow the ways of desire, yet he stays free of attachment to the enjoyments of desire.
will defend and uphold this attainment of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment by the Tathāgata during innumerable hundreds of thousands of millions of billions of eons!
It should be applied to the emptiness of internal phenomena, and also [to the other aspects of emptiness], up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities.
Present in the assembly was a god, called Lord of Peace and Calm.
I will never again fall under the power of anger.
he was instructed in the ways of brahmins:
The one who today emitted a single light ray And revealed many thousands of realms! {49}
That is not realized by any among the outsiders,
they went to where the Thus-Gone One was seated, bowed down their heads to his feet, circumambulated him three times, and stood to one side.
And he spoke these verses With infinite confidence: {11}
I consecrated my oldest son to be king and dedicated myself to searching in the four directions for the highest Dharma.
One will then become a vidyādhara of the sword.
The two are like Mount Meru and a mustard seed,
and do not concentrate on the profound Dharma.
Then the Bhagavān said to the bodhisattva Bhaiṣajyarāja and eighty thousand other bodhisattvas,
These constitute the supramundane doctrines of great bodhisattva beings,
‘Come here, men and women!
In the same vein, they should not abide in fundamental ignorance, and they should not abide in the other links of dependent origination], up to and including aging and death.
The fire at the Brahma confluence is concealed in fire.
Blessed One, how do bodhisattvas attain the intrinsic nature of the thus-gone ones’ body?
“They were beautified by lotus flower ponds That were adorned by a hundred thousand lotuses.
Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, you should know that this Dharma teaching is like this:
Others may have already given rise to the awakened mind, yet they are lazy, have little diligence, and are content with discipline alone.
he might say, ‘O child of enlightened heritage!
The mendicant then asked, “Venerable Gautama, where will you go now?” The Thus-Gone One replied:
On the very same day that Prince Bimbisāra was born,
and thereafter, they attract sentient beings through the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Not being attached to phenomena, They understand the conceptualization of phenomena. {43}
“An adept among beings, a lotus on the lake of wisdom, has appeared.
Then they become very sad, wail and weep, thinking, ‘Our only father, protector, progenitor, who had compassion for us has died, and so now we have no protector!’
Venerable Lord! There is nothing at all that attains manifestly perfect buddhahood.
This is because it is non-apprehensible as an agent,
neither worldly nor unworldly,
Now is the right time for you to leave!”
and together with the great assembly of people saw the bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta’s hand on fire and burning brightly.
Prostrations to the tathāgata, buddha of the south, Ratnasaṃbhava;
Just as the blossoming coral trees Beautify the ten directions. {47}
Su­bhūti, it is because the essential nature of the applications of mindfulness is empty of the essential nature of the applications of mindfulness.
“Noble son, bodhisattvas speak gently.
They will become creatures of great length, Measuring five hundred yojanas,
“ ‘It is having a pure livelihood and dwelling in solitary places. It is maintaining the disciplines of mendicancy with no loss of mindfulness.
that the nature of the ten powers of the tathāgatas is emptiness, and that emptiness is indeed the ten powers of the tathāgatas.
The four-featured seat of the central deity Is given as a seat to each member of the retinue, Since they each are an aspect of the central deity.
What burns turns to ash. The bones turn a pigeon-like grey.
After agreeing to a short window for repayment, he released the debtor, who thought,
then the evil Māra, knowing that the minds of those bodhisattvas are not discouraged,
One should place Passion Vajrī at the eastern gate, Standing on a seat fashioned from Indra.
Sixty-four, grouped in eights, Is concealed in the amount of eight.
Siddhas, vidyādharas, gandharvas, yakṣas, kiṃpuruṣas, sages, and kiṃnaras dwelt there.
The thirty-seven factors of enlightenment
the love that is liberative art because it shows the way everywhere;
The councilor went before King Śuddhodana and told him what had happened:
“One should draw the door the size of One-eighth of the whole maṇḍala,
Amazing, thus spoke the vajra possessor.
To confirm his commitments, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
“The eloquence of bodhisattvas is free of inadequacies.
the non-specific five sense organs,
“He has attained the perfection of miraculous power; He is skilled in vast wisdom and methods.
and see a woman and a man making love. Driven by the karma created in his previous lives, he will perceive the couple making love in a form that corresponds to his future form of existence.
“Venerable Lord, when great bodhisattva beings train accordingly, do they train in the transcendent perfection of wisdom?”
Whoever hears the name Avalokiteśvara, Their merit will be inexhaustible.”
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this samādhi,
Right view is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
and Śakra is the māra of the divine son.
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is tolerance.”
inviting the buddhas to teach the Dharma, rejoicing in them, and applauding them, thereby obtaining the melodious voice of a buddha;
the enlightenment of the lord buddhas revealed in this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom is incompatible with all mundane [phenomena].
or to those who offer eight hundred handfuls of water. One who recites this early in the morning, before crows start to caw, while standing in water,
“I will endure The false talk of fools And, Guide, I will undergo Their abuse and threats. {36}
They are realized in such a way that not even an atom is made even or uneven.
and similarly, they will not become fixated on [any other attainments], up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities.
There are also many with one, two, three legs, Even some with a thousand legs.
the brahmin is white,
He is called the one who is exceedingly gentle through discipline, and the one who can easily predict the future awakening of a bodhisattva.
They should not dwell on the notion that ‘I, being an arhat whose contaminants have ceased,
Doing this will bring rain.
The Blessed One’s śrāvaka who takes up, holds, teaches, recites, and masters this sūtra, Destroyer of the Great Trichiliocosm, benefits and cares for all creatures.
However, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata neither arises nor ceases.
the treasure of memorization by remembering everything that one hears,
He teaches the Dharma in the form of an arhat to beings who are to be taught by an arhat.
When the ultimate is known There is nothing to be taught. {15}
Apart from a bodhisattva in his final existence, who has completed all the bodhisattva stages,
Would you give us a little something to eat?’“
and so that these bhikṣus will have their worries dispelled,
Their mental faculty will become like that Through possessing and reading this sūtra.
These are conquered by the power of the best among mantra-adepts.
This brahmin would go to the hells
it is because they are without any essential nature which might transcend.”
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that one is liberated by perceiving sights as entities and non-entities?”
“Those beings in the land of Magadha were amazed, and they all sat down together.
The Blessed One has also stated, ‘The definition of the true meaning is perpetual cessation.’
Their radiant countenance gives joy to sentient beings.
Such were the thirty-two omens that occurred.
raw silks,
“Similarly, it is far removed from the emptiness of internal phenomena, and it is far removed from the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities.
“Day and night such teachings of the sacred doctrine will emerge,
“Today the best of beings have come here from the ten directions, So many in number that they cannot be counted.
‘I shall emerge as a buddha, a supreme leader of all the world with its gods, demons, and Brahmā, and of all gatherings of sages, brahmins, gods, humans, and demigods, and I shall make the lion’s roar of a buddha be heard’;
If practicing with the sword and so on,
As stable as Vaiśravaṇa, You are the source of all jewels.
He is skilled in articulating all sounds and echoes, and therefore
The Bodhisattva was seated upon a lion throne that was utterly resplendent as a result of the ripening of his merit. The base of the throne was bedecked with various precious jewels,
He replied, “This is owing to the non-existence of all afflicted mental states!”
“Remedies defeat However many kleśas they have.
Similarly, is this mind [of the bodhisattvas] unattached to sights?
but they also would move no farther, even though they were goaded with bunches of lotuses and garlands of jasmine. So
“If all the beings that are in this world Were to speak badly to the bodhisattvas,
“This is the sword empowerment:
see that all things are empty of inherent existence, and
Oṁ, Red Acala, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
Monks, at that point I thought to myself,
In this way they were playing instruments, singing songs, and making music in abundance.
you have overcome the demon horde at the Bodhi tree!
they heard these words that came from the air:
Śāradvatī­putra! The purity of phenomena is illuminating due to the absolute purity of [the other transcendent perfections], down to the transcendent perfection of generosity.
that which is termed ‘omniscience’ is to be counted as imperishable.”
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of birth concerning the composite,
never stop receiving the teachings on the factors of awakening;
He had a son, a wife, and female attendants, yet always maintained continence.
Those who engage in recitation, by means of their power of speech, Render speechless even the experts who posses the majestic power of spells.
Through the method of worship in accordance with the Dharma, One will attain dharmatā And oneself will become the dharmadhātu
“What is having a compassionate mind? It is consideration of the future suffering of beings.
if they do not retain, hold, and master it;
“Bhikṣus, they still remain on the level of the śrāvakas but
I beseech the Bhagavān to teach them well.
Made offerings to the Buddha With hundreds of compositions of The beautiful, melodious music of the yakṣas. {58}
neither free from concepts, nor not free from concepts.
In the four directions, starting with the east, she is surrounded by four goddesses.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that one is liberated by perceiving sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena as entities and non-entities?”
will be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon!
“Thus is the causal relation in inner dependent arising to be seen.
As a king, for billions of years you have practiced generosity gladly.
Therefore I have such eloquence.
Illuminating every direction, So why bother with a parasol?
All the people in this Jambudvīpa Gave up all sensory pleasures and entered homelessness too. {34}
through skill in means they turn sentient beings away from grasping at that which does not exist,
Only the illusion of a woman is praised.
Our pleasures and pains are predestined. It is impossible to extend or reduce them.
Through the noose incantation Billions of yakṣas were summoned
Similarly, they apprehend the ten powers of the tathāgatas, and develop a view of them in an apprehending manner,
Hear about this truth, they develop confidence in it. “No Dharma at all exists here;
The Tathāgata Bhaiṣajyarāja, knowing the high resolve of Candracchattra, prophesied to him that he would be, at a later time, in the future, the protector, guardian, and defender of the city of the holy Dharma.
By the power of this mudrā Brahma, Indra, Upendra, Rudra and so forth, Together with their spouses, Are summoned and arrive enthralled.
And at that time they would say to the guide,
Thereupon, those thousands of divine princes accepted that phenomena are non-arising.
“In a quarter in the east there is a memorial called Cāpāla, Inhabited and known by victorious ones, protector worthy ones.
It neither bestows nor withholds the attributes of the genuinely perfect buddhas.
The offender must serve the saṅgha while undergoing his full demotion or probation.
[other meditative experiences], up to and including the gateways of meditative stability, are indications.
Having served the ancient buddhas, he had generated the roots of virtue by honoring them and making offerings to them.
may I fully understand it without mistake, meditate upon it, teach it to others without mistake, and guide them.
His thighs are well-rounded.
but have not yet heard, accepted, maintained, and comprehended this transcendent perfection of wisdom, should always listen to, accept, maintain, and comprehend this transcendent perfection of wisdom, attending to it in the correct manner, and
This concludes the chapter on the retention of semen and related issues, the nineteenth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called “The Sole Hero.”
it alleviates all negativity.
“Ānanda, for all these reasons, retain this Dharma discourse with the name ‘Purification of Karmic Obscurations.’
and I heard Tathāgata Vipaśyin describe the qualities of Avalokiteśvara.”
Moreover, householders and brahmins Will all be present as their followers.
You have the countless qualities of speech That benefit and bring liberation to many beings. {27}
To whom humans and devas make offerings, how should one practice In order to attain the unfathomable, supreme, highest yāna?
reads it aloud, masters it, teaches it extensively
it is without a limited or limitless focus of the mind;
No matter what a person individually experiences, it all comes from causes sown in the past.
“The Buddha has taught This engagement with discernment.
“They will never be in ignorance. They will teach the essence of phenomena.
On hearing this verse, the seers thought,
He put down his bowl and rope and entered the water to refresh himself.
ornamented with different kinds of vines the color of newly-refined gold. At the sight of this, he becomes overjoyed.
"Because they have stūpas, Drawings, and images made <tei:milestone xml:id=""UT22084-061-006-60""/>“And they honor and worship him,"
Venerable Lord! Why is the purity of omniscience due to the purity of the self?
’“As Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara was leaving, the yakṣas and rākṣasas followed him.
“Whatever you command, that I will do.”
Then, the Buddha said to the crown prince, Mañjuśrī,
“How is it not discontinuous?
they would not even eat; if they thought of them in the afternoon, they would vomit up what they had eaten.
Thus their bodies are in isolation And they attain happiness free of desires. {23}
They always know the way of phenomena, Which is composed of the essence of phenomena. {20}
giving, and receiving. He mastered and became learned in the Vedas and all branches of Vedic knowledge,
At that time, the gods all long to be born in the world of the great Brahmā, and they dedicate their roots of what is wholesome toward taking birth in the world of the great Brahmā.
When the Bodhisattva looked at the entire retinue of women,
Your drink is samādhi and your food is supreme dhyāna. I pay homage to you who reside in the solitude of emptiness. {iii}
Saṅgharakṣita continued, “So, you shall go forth. But will you go forth before the Blessed One or before me?”
This is called the end of suffering!
Yes, they would, Venerable Lord! Yes, they would, Venerable Su­gata!
None of these followers Are looking at the king. {17}
“Lord, that is how it is. Bliss-Gone One, that is how it is. Rudraka, the son of Rāma, died just one week ago.”
and they will also perceive the arrays of the enlightened attributes of the buddhafields.
Senior Su­bhūti, why are all things unborn and unemancipated?
To the second he said, “You shall memorize the Madhyamāgama.”
“Those who smell that aroma That they delightfully emanate
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words concerning behavior. What are the four kinds of words concerning behavior?
and said,
will grant instruction in this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom to those bodhisattvas,
Su­bhūti, it is because the essential nature of the expanse of reality is empty of the essential nature of the expanse of reality.
“Those who delight in this sūtra Will easily become human,
“There will be the manifestation Of golden, illusory flowers,
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existence concerning the composite,
A village, etc., can be protected from being handed over to another owner by simply reciting the mantra.
All of them were arhats who had attained the cessation of contaminants and were without afflicted mental states,
Rare are the noble sons or daughters who worship
And drink wine, in a state of mental equilibrium.
“Your Highness, that person is what we call a ‘monk.’
She should be without deceit, jealousy, or guile, and not stray from uprightness.
every day the great and unsurpassed Brahmā, who controls ten trichiliocosms, looks upon all the classes of gods, as far as the class of the gods of the Four Great Kings.
The leaders of gods, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and rākṣasas, Brahmā, Indra, and the gods in the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations And the Heaven of Joy all
the bodhisattva mahāsattva Sarva­sattva­priya­darśana made that kind of offering to the Tathāgata and to the Dharma.
“They will not think of food and drink, Eating and drinking, clothes, bed and seat, Dharma robes, or medicine when ill,
As the supreme god is born, so are these other beings. How excellent for the kingdom!
merely actualize the finality of existence and become śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas,
It does not accord with the world.
All the more so for one who writes down this Dharma teaching or makes others write it
Oh, you, come here!
“Bhikṣus, śrāvakas aspired to the teaching given by the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Mahābhijñā­jñānābhi­bhū, and the sixteen mendicants and many hundred thousands of quintillions attained freedom from doubt.
whose knowledge had rent open the shell. They attained knowledge, clairvoyance, and discerning wisdom.
The strength of ten blue oxen is the same as the strength of one ordinary elephant.
These, Śāriputra, are the thoughts of evil men.
“Similarly, with a joyful mind they give The gifts of palanquins adorned with jewels,
“They should recite this mantra many times and then go to sleep.
‘You bhikṣus, do not think that this is nirvāṇa!
There were beautiful, exquisite lotus ponds Adorned by the fragrance of the most delightful scents. {10}
So Ānanda began to make the two novices study.
The venerable Ānanda asked
Similarly, when the sun-like bodhisattvas rise they dispel all the darkness of ignorance.
“He is called the one who has perfected all supreme powers of the mind,
Oh! Oh! Look upon the saṅgha of bhikṣus With your stainless eyes of wisdom and compassion.
His buddha realm will be named Ratnasaṃbhava.
When asked, they reveal that their diligence is disengaged in just the same way as all those things are, by their nature, disengaged.
When he said the letter tha, out came the statement: ‘Strength, power, force, and self-confidence (thāma­bala­vegavaiśāradya).’
When sleeping, they lie on their right side, with one leg on top of the other, and the body wrapped in the Dharma robes.
He went to the Bamboo Grove, where he approached a monk and said,
“One should emanate Delusion Vajrī in the southeast, Of the color of autumnal white lotus.
the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Prabhūtaratna,
The medicines that come together resemble the faculties that come together.
Success comes with seven repetitions of the mantra.
nor that they hide that they are Dharma teachers, nor that they do not respect others, nor that they turn their backs on sentient beings.
Friends, all co-producing factors are empty!
In the beautiful form of young men, They shine and make the sounds of carriages.
Some have completely perfect conduct And through conduct are established in the highest enlightenment. {32}
They resound with the tinkling of tiny bejeweled bells on latticed draperies.
And hopes to roar like a lion through the ten powers,
They have only little in the way of insight, faith, and virtuous roots,
wherever they are, through my miraculous power I will cause them to be attracted to it, have conviction in it, follow it, and I will completely ripen them.’“
Conclusion of the thirty-second chapter, “The Teaching on the Nature of All Phenomena.”
Space is purity;
rejoiced and praised the Bhagavān’s teachings.
because they are non-entities, this supreme Great Vehicle does overpower and attain emancipation from the world with its gods, humans, and antigods.
While remaining in the emptiness of phenomena They are fearlessly visible in their body. {54}
“Noble one, there are world realms where the bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara teaches the Dharma to beings in the form of buddhas.
Su­bhūti, it is because great bodhisattva beings do not consider any sign of sentience in things that are empty of intrinsic defining characteristics,
Walk here on this path traversed by those with the ten powers!
Owing to the non-existence of transmigration from one world to another at the time of death,
who had the power to exhaust all the obscurations of whoever merely heard his name.
attain emancipation in omniscience.
As quick as a flash of lightning, they thereby become very strong and determined in the practice of the six perfections.
And by arresting the prāṇa, “The mind will become arrested,
His jaw is like that of a lion.
what would he think? Would that person, while he was still burning, encounter, be provided with, delight in, enjoy, and indulge in the five sensory pleasures?”
“It is dualistic to detest the world and to rejoice in liberation, and neither detesting the world nor rejoicing in liberation is nonduality.
He ripened them for the highest, complete enlightenment.
“Although they recognize the deeds of māras, They can get along even with these māras;
“Those many thousands of beings would become exhausted
a male offspring of the buddhas,
there are the kings of mountains Mount Cakravāla and Mount Mahācakravāla, the kings of mountains Mount Mucilinda and Mount Mahāmucilinda, the kings of mountains Mount Kāla and Mount Mahākāla, the kings of mountains Mount Saṃsṛṣṭa and Mount Mahāsaṃsṛṣṭa, the king of mountains Mount Pralambodara, the king of mountains Mount Anādarśaka, the king of mountains Mount Kṛtsrāgata, the king of mountains Mount Jālinīmukha, the king of mountains Mount Śataśṛṅga, the king of mountains Mount Bhavana, the king of mountains Mount Mahāmaṇiratna, the king of mountains Mount Sudarśana, and the king of mountains Mount Akāladarśana.
Thus is established the greatness of the Buddha Śākyamuni!
the inconceivably numerous sūtras concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous sūtras concerning purification. Those are the four.
Mañjuśrī, in brief, whether they are viewed as totally afflicted or fully cleansed, you should regard them all as obscurations.”
Immeasurable great compassion for all beings, the immeasurable buddhafields, immeasurable awakened wisdom, and immeasurable engagement with all beings’ mental activity.
Thus, when he supplicates, I will turn the wheel of Dharma.
“Guide, in future times We will protect These bhikṣus who Stood up today.” {42}
Likewise, sisters, a single bodhisattva
“Your Majesty, please come, the queen would like to see you.”
“The merchants asked me, ‘What can we do?
medicinal torches, in villages graced with sixty thousand courtyards, crossroads, parapets, and street corners.
“Senior Śāradvatī­putra, if great bodhisattva beings, when they practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom, do not accept that are practicing, do not accept that they are not practicing,
as being with form, a vast form, a hundred thousand arms, a trillion eyes, and eleven heads;
“Homeless, he meditated on this samādhi, And he recited it and taught it.
Moreover, it is conscious of all the activities of the body.
is reckoned to be shade, and apart from that, no other details or distinctions are apprehensible, in the same way,
Their luminosity radiates as they walk.
“Since the bodhisattvas are learned, they are free from the dangers of grasping at self.
It was a terrifying army, so brave in battle that it would make anyone’s hair stand on end.
There will be bountiful harvests, and it will be filled with gods and humans.
“ ‘All the bhikṣus will be stricken by suffering, Will be dismayed and similarly grief-stricken
Those statements too are non-arising,
They will not become bodhisattvas who turn away from the welfare of sentient beings, taking birth in completely pure fields.
Reverend Śāriputra, if a magician were to incarnate a woman by magic, would you ask her, “What prevents you from transforming yourself out of your female state?”
The saṅgha reply: “If that is indeed the case, he is utterly free of all impediments to his going forth being allowed.”
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that one is liberated by perceiving the eyes as an entity and a non-entity?”
“Lastly, fruit is produced precisely according to the type of seed planted. Therefore, it involves a continuity of similar type.
Venerable Lord, when great bodhisattva beings teach the sacred doctrine to sentient beings in order that they might abandon all sorts of views,
if they perfect the emptiness of external phenomena exclusively by way of signlessness,
dugūla cloth, jute cloth, Aparāntin cloth, or were to receive any other appropriate cloth from the saṅgha or a person,
“They who have great miraculous powers, From where did they come, and how?
Do not kill those two wise dharmabhāṇakas Because of what bad associates have said. {18}
“Why should Brahmā praise it? Because it is a practice that brings the attainment of all liberations.
And gazing at the supreme human. Great sage, give us your elucidation. {27}
It is so because of the absence of self, and because of the emptiness of the unlimited, and the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end.
Return again to the pure abodes, And so the emanation body emerges.
The cause is not a cause without conditions, Like a forest fire without wind.
and was translated, edited, and established by the monk Chönyi Tsultrim.
Then he came inside and was placed on a precious seat.
“And if many thousands of people Were to enter into that jungle,
With the kleśas completely eradicated They are one lifetime from becoming a jina. {273}
I pray that you teach me the way of phenomena That a bodhisattva directly perceives. {11}
The syllable la, because of its indicating pleasure, Expresses the union of wisdom and means.
“ ‘Reverend Upāli, the minds of all living beings have that very nature.
And guided an endless number of beings.
starting from the eastern one, Ananta and the others—the eight nāgas—using candied sugar and bdellium
and each of those bodhisattvas has that many followers, too.
Similarly, how should they train in the applications of mindfulness?
To make perfectly delicious Human blood and flesh? {7}
“The royal palace manifested To the north of me Is beautiful Aḍakavatī; Thus I am its lord.
“All of them will have the same manifestation Of miraculous powers and a buddha realm.
If desiring accomplishment through the vajra holder,
If the milk of an entirely black bitch, Having been churned, yielding fresh butter, Is applied to shoes made of camel hide Then wearing those will make one walk on water.
Similarly, by focusing on the nose,
seven Nirgrantha realms, seven demi-god realms, seven demonic realms,
Alas! These sentient beings are endowed with misconduct of body, endowed with misconduct of speech, endowed with misconduct of mind.
Moreover, Ānanda, if, on the one hand, some sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage
Therefore omniscience [and so forth] are non-existent, while being inconceivable, equal to the unequaled, and so forth.
Similarly, although these bodhisattvas are beyond all mundane beings, hearers, and solitary buddhas, they still have not attained the ground of the ultimate mind of awakening.
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities stay clear of weariness.
and they will also attain the five hundred gateways of mnemonic incantation, the five hundred gateways of meditative stability, and the four unhindered discernments.
Here the belief in ‘I’ and ‘mine’ And its tangle of faults, With roots that extend far, knotted tight with obscurations,
They do not put their trust in women. That is not the path to enlightenment. {64}
the divine princes of the Nirmāṇa­rata realm, and
gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans thronged it;
“Then Tathāgata Krakucchanda said to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra,
May they bring the suffering of sentient beings to an end.
On the way they had the following conversation.
How should they train in all the gateways of mnemonic incantation?
death, which is the cessation of mind and its contents.
they would not induce others to engage with distinction, and to become established therein.
It is the comfort of the greatly famed ones
The sage saw him put down his bundle of wood before sitting down to rest.
“My sons, do I say I am the one and only philosopher on this earth, that there are no other philosophers?
Aniruddha, supreme among those with the divine eye;
Once the formless element of consciousness has abandoned this body,
With a disciplined mind, he approached the shade of the rose apple tree,
Ultimately, however, all experiences are nonexistent.
It is for this reason that they endeavor and strive, muster diligence, and undertake hundreds of ordeals.
then great bodhisattva beings, numerous as the sands of the River Ganges, who don the armor, would not regress from unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
King Virūḍhaka then arose, And with palms joined said:
Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata does not form mental constructs or concepts.
“They are lords of the world, sovereigns of speech, And they defeat their adversaries in debate.
There is nothing higher to be found.
This completes the thirty-first chapter from “The Transcendent Perfection of Wisdom in Ten Thousand Lines,” entitled “Irreversibility.”
May the Protector observe this and dispense Timely words to these celestial girls— The mantra of Kurukullā that enthralls wandering beings— And the practice of painting in combination with this mantra.
Sukuṇḍala invited the brahmin into his divine palace. The brahmin entered, and
“Noble son, in the west, beyond as many worlds as there are grains of sand in the river Gaṅgā, there is a world known as Endurance.
And no concept of number and no concept of numberlessness. {72}
Friends, who among us will have the courage to serve the Bodhisattva constantly and ceaselessly as he travels to the womb of his mother?
(12) emptiness of inherent existence,
lustrate him with a bowl full of grilled fish, rice, wine, and so forth.
Whatever is unestablished in the ultimate sense should not be called true
And in their doorways and windows.
Mañjuśrī, this word appears among gods and men: Tathāgata.
Likewise: “Accomplished since the beginning, The buddhas engage in the act of accepting birth, To provide for sentient beings, When a universal monarch has gone beyond. “
Are you not a captive? Are you not a pledge? Are you not a pawn?
one’s mind will be completely liberated from desire, anger, and ignorance.
‘May I grant the gift of the sacred doctrine
With seats adorned by flowers and banners, With flags of victory made of precious materials. {17}
clouds that rained down divine powders,
As well as compassion, joy, and equanimity.
They should actualize the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.
The translation was completed by the Kashmiri scholar Celu and the Tibetan translator Phakpa Sherab.
We are your capable servants, with loving intentions.
those who have sought a reliable instructor will have to seek another yet again.’
This can be undone by fumigating with bdellium.
All those buddha realms were created as if they were one buddha realm, as if they were one land,
No longer gleaming and luminous, they ceased to shine.
These countless buddhas are now seated At the foot of trees like a multitude of lotuses.
and all places of deep darkness throughout the world were bathed in that golden light,
One will be devoid of craving and feel buoyant.
He is a parasol for those burned and pained by the sun.
“Śāradvatī­putra, it is in this manner that great bodhisattva beings perceive all things distinctly, but do not become fixated on those phenomena.
As soon as Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta said those words,
Those who remember his name And live for the sake of awakening Will all attain liberation.
Various birds flew through the air, singing out their beautiful melodies. Among them were parrots, śārikas, cuckoos, geese, peacocks, ducks, pheasants, snipe, partridge, and many others.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ excellent wisdom of spontaneous accomplishment.
“Great King, may you be victorious! May you be victorious!
“Noble son, did you find what you sought?”
A­mogha­darśin,
They know that all the Dharmas that teach Of beings, individuals, and persons are provisional truth. {5}
“When some skillful people analyze this and wonder,
namely, Purāṇa Kāśyapa, Māskārin Gośāli­putra, Saṃjāyin Vairaṭi­putra, Kakuda Kātyāyana, Ajita Keśakambala, and Nirgrantha Jñāti­putra, and follow the ways they prescribe.
The strength of ten gray elephants is the same as the strength of one white water-lily elephant.
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess these four qualities,
There is a divine king of horses named Bālāha who has compassion for the desolate and destitute.
Su­bhūti, the passage commencing with the words, ‘the illusionist or the skilled student of an illusionist,’ is similarly applicable here, just as has been indicated above.
The name of the eon will be Ratiprapūrṇa.
“What you say is very true, and I agree;
As not permanent, as not discontinuous, as not involving transmigration, as the production of a large result from a small cause, and as a continuity of similar type.
The Blessed One said, “Padmaśrīgarbha, consider this analogy.
There was not a place to be found Not walked upon by the millions of gods, who said:
However, Blessed One, someone who had his head cut off would be unable to survive.
“Divine princes! Can you not understand the transcendent perfection of wisdom?”
Because your own failings and others’ failings act as a spur to disenchantment,
The blind found their sight. The deaf found their hearing.
They are called those who long for the Śrāvakayāna and they escape from the three realms.
The reverend Upāli, who was proclaimed by the Lord as the foremost of the upholders of the discipline, is not his equal.’
To be translucent like a pure crystal.
Seeking the right opportunity, he would never miss it, just like the great ocean, which is always timely.
[4] they purify buddha realms; [5] they reach the Bodhimaṇḍa; [6] they give away material things; [7] they overcome the kleśas;
[bodhisattvas] should think, ‘Who is scolding or reprimanding me with harsh words? Who is beating me with clubs, striking me with weapons, and whipping me?
When suffering is exhausted, one is freed from suffering.”
“That which is accomplished by the word buddha Is also accomplished by the words correct conduct.
then, provided there is a majority within the saṅgha, he should be suspended for refusing to acknowledge the transgression.
if, in that same place, he were then to exhibit a diversity of mats or clothing,
The yogins who meditate on this Tārā Will first experience some suffering.
Some princes may wish to be promoted to a higher rank.
“Bhikṣus, in the northwestern direction there is the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha named Tamāla­patra­candana­gandhābhijña and
Some sang.
The deva Sukuṇḍala then asked him,
“In the past, for billions of eons, You cultivated patience as the basis for attaining awakening.
The five kinds of gems symbolize the five buddha bodies.
and at that time he perfectly adorned the entire road in between Vulture Peak Mountain and the great city of Rājagṛha.
In order that these sentient beings who, over a long period of time, have fallen under the sway of evil associates
This path is incapable of eradicating the continuation of birth, old age, and death in the future.
Having shown such a miracle, Vimalakīrti said,
Those that streamed downwards proceeded to the hell realms of Sañjīva,
That which resembles a butter lamp Is taught to be the sign of haṁ, for death.
“They will depend upon their perception. They will dwell in craving and desire.
When that night had passed and King Jñānabala awoke from his sleep he entered his harem and he described the dream to his harem, saying,
Bodhisattvas, aware of beings who are wild and can hardly be trained, will never grow tired of them
Similarly, they make assumptions that ethical discipline, tolerance, perseverance, meditative concentration, and wisdom are theirs.
The Pāṇḍavas and Kauravas took away the maidens.
no knowing them, and no making them known.
“Those who inhale that person’s breath, whether in love or in anger, will become irreversible bodhisattvas.
No tathāgata can see the body of his true nature, let alone Samantabhadra or other bodhisattvas.
the nāgas thrice felt fiery sand fall from the heavens upon them,
With birth comes old age, and an aged person will die.
Moreover, Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings who practice the six transcendent perfections see sentient beings debased and lacking the five extrasensory powers
The buddhas, Vajrasattva and so forth,
Similarly, those who cultivate the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration,
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designation of sights as empty or not empty constitutes a bodhisattva?”
Divine son, understanding this state where phenomena are utterly beyond formation is awakening.
This was the seventh omen.
The master will become the slave of a woman And kings will turn into servants.
and he then ceases to fire the subsequent arrows far into the sky,
Knowing, too, the deeds of Māra that have arisen and occurred,
It is the illumination of causes. It is the non-dissipation of the results of karma.
In many millions of eons you are difficult to find.
conch,
It will be adorned by many flowers;
Reifying what does not exist, they think, ‘I am attached,’ ‘I am averse,’ ‘I am perplexed.’
“Moreover, Ānanda, the stock of merit of those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who commit this transcendent perfection of wisdom to writing, or have it committed to writing, and then honor, venerate, respect, and make offerings to this scripture with flowers, ribbons, and so forth, as well as with diverse musical sounds, is equal to that of those who honor, venerate, respect, and make offerings with flowers, ribbons, and so forth, as well as with diverse musical sounds, to the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas of the world systems of the ten directions and four times, numerous as the sands of the River Ganges.
you have not accomplished what needs to be accomplished!
“Having entered homelessness he possessed, Read, and understood this samādhi.
From these formations arises consciousness, which is sixfold:
Follow their example and remain in the forest. You, who have perfect discipline, do not leave. {10}
“Kauśika, in this regard, what, one might ask, is this transcendent perfection of wisdom?
imprisoning them or taking their lives:
They were free of pride, vanity, haughtiness, aggression, arrogance, miserliness, selfishness, possessiveness, fixation, attachment, grasping, oblivion, craving, and longing.
My eyeballs appeared like stars in a sunken well.
“Ānanda,” said the Blessed One,
and are never separated from the mind that knows all things, will possess the immeasurable aggregate of ethical discipline.
good in the middle, and good in the end, that has a good meaning, that has good words,
It contains vast jewels and light rays And therefore it is called vast. {2}
They will not degenerate from the transcendent perfection of wisdom, omniscience, and so forth.
“Your Majesty, master of the earth, good lord, I pray that you hear me!
They discern that physical forms are pure, and do not focus on them.
The non-perception of dharmas is to have no abode.
They practice the transcendent perfection of generosity and they also encourage others to assume the transcendent perfection of generosity.
They gathered like clouds from the four directions, Roaring and raining down bolts of lightning, iron balls, Swords, spears, sharp axes, and poisoned arrows.
‘Having prepared the ship of insight, I shall deliver sentient beings beyond the ocean of cyclic existence’;
He may follow the ways of the weak, the ugly, and the wretched, yet he is beautiful to look upon, and his body is like that of Nārāyaṇa.
and purification will occur and defilement will disappear.
“You previously accumulated virtuous actions;
Undiscovered by any other exponent,
They discern that physical forms are without aspirations, and do not focus on them.
It has no striving or giving up;
blazing with energy to conquer the host of demons;
“ ‘Those with foolish minds will reject my Dharma, And having rejected it, they will go to the lower realms.
pacify all craving for ignoble qualities, and so forth.
Having thus accepted it, he then spoke in verse to the great king Dhṛtarāṣṭra:
He greeted me, and I then addressed him:
this is feeling,
“Ānanda, in order to truly accomplish the highest, complete enlightenment,
to engender wholesome qualities that have not yet come about;
where he gave instruction to five hundred young brahmins in the reciting of mantras.
“Senior Su­bhūti, is it then the case that those things are indeed non-arising, that the act of inspiration is also non-arising, that those statements are also non-arising, and that those comments of yours, commencing therefrom, are also non-arising?”
Śāriputra, the man was very strong and had very strong arms.
Indeed, all the world systems of the ten directions are similar to the eastern direction!
They do not maintain discipline out of fear of, and to seek a refuge from, the world of the Lord of Death.
it is owing to the emptiness of internal phenomena, and to the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, that [the other causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, are non-existent. However,
and the highest vision of wisdom.
I pledged to awaken to buddhahood so that I could lead others to buddhahood as well.
“Great King, a great being like this does not sleep long.
The more those eminently powerful gods endowed with great occult power
And having heard it remembers that renowned name, They will quickly attain this samādhi.” {28}
the sound-base,
In the same vein, it does not measure [all those other attributes], up to and including buddhahood; nor does it not measure them.”
[the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, do not apprehend the limit of past time.
She will recollect her past lives and attain unimpeded eloquence and retention.”
The venerable Ānanda then said to the Blessed One,
“The buddha who has entered nirvāṇa, The muni Prabhūtaratna, also
It is by means of this illumination that great bodhisattva beings don the armor of the transcendent perfection of generosity, and of the [other attributes], up to and including the buddha body.
They are learned in singing and playing musical instruments And in artistic skills.
And still, Mañjuśrī, according to whether sentient beings are low, middling, or high,
Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva practices within the conduct of a bodhisattva.
Some a hand-span tall, some a cubit, And some two cubits, wandering around.
whenever they do not engage with the notions that physical forms are pure or that they are impure.
And at that inconceivable summit They will know no doubt. {139}
He stretched out his hand, like a lightning bolt striking from the sky,
Ornament the gates of this excellent city.
May you be protected by all deities, And may you return with great profit!
He ripened innumerable, countless beings for the highest, complete enlightenment.
Does a phenomenon engage in afflicted acts with respect to another phenomenon?
The Blessed One replied,
Mahauṣadhi, let us compare consciousness to the formless and invisible wind element. The wind element stays on mountain tops, but
son of noble family, in accordance with their merit, he will stand before those sentient beings as an ordinary person,
Su­bhūti! There is no possibility and no chance for that to happen.
Children of noble family, none of the dharmas are dharmas.
Homage to the Bhagavān Mañjuśrīkumārabhūta!
He had a stride that destroys all lower realms and all miserable existences, a stride that brings happiness to all beings,
The Bhagavān then recited these verses:
seven hundred lakes, seven great dreams, seven hundred dreams,
nor do they ripen on the inner elements of water, fire, or wind.’
and the utterly unborn.
“Monk, quick, get up and do as I tell you, Or I will cut you right away like a bamboo twig or dūrvā grass.”
Therefore, consciousness [and the other aggregates] are non-existent, while being inconceivable, equal to the unequaled, and so forth.
Even with everyone making great effort, the carts would move no farther.
“Young man, therefore, if bodhisattva mahāsattvas
Their high resolve as hard as diamond, unbreakable in their faith in the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha,
“Another, young man, is that bodhisattva mahāsattvas are frightened of the three realms.
“Reverend Saṅgharakṣita, shall we travel under our own miraculous powers or under your miraculous powers?”
Padmaśrīgarbha, these two holy beings have attained the illusory absorption.
Youthful Mañjuśrī ripened them and this Dharma teaching on the indivisible nature of the realm of phenomena has ripened them.
He had the body of a thus-gone one, bedecked like the king of sal trees.
its hundreds of thousands of bodhisattvas;
‘When I saw a certain monk, I gave rise to longing desire.
“In each of their realms
it is because they have acquired the mnemonic incantations [that enhance retention].”
and many jewels adorn her body.
“Noble son, you may wonder about the character of the bodhisattvas’ expertise with respect to unequaled insight.
I will definitely practice generosity by offering my feet!’
all those rākṣasīs came to where the Bhagavān was,
On arriving, he wished King Bimbisāra success and long life,
the intrinsic defining characteristic of formative predispositions which is conditioning;
They give freedom from fear to those who are afraid. They constantly bring relief to those who are fearful.
So much benefit for living beings could not be accomplished in the universe Sarva­gandha­sugandhā even in one hundred thousand eons.
“Your Majesty, the young prince is not in the ladies’ apartments.”
You displayed such discipline many times.
Ajita, if someone who hears, enters, follows, and comprehends this Dharma teaching that teaches the lifespan of the Tathāgata will generate a supremely incalculable accumulation of merit that leads to the wisdom of buddhahood,
The four miraculous gods are now giving me These four well-formed alms bowls.
They should then make an image of Vajradhara in the color of a reed. It should be adorned with every ornament,
“Bhagavat, I pray that you give me a prophecy.”
whenever they do not engage with the notions that physical forms are imbued with happiness or that they are imbued with suffering.
They will not degenerate from emptiness, signlessness, and aspirationlessness—the gateways to liberation.
I shall cause them to sit at the seat of awakening so that they can fully awaken to unexcelled and complete buddhahood.’
“It may be possible to count the inhalations and exhalations Of all the beings that are in this buddha realm,
Like the head of a viper, they are dangerous to touch.
Hundreds of thousands of censers made from precious materials and containing priceless incense moved around by themselves.
So it is that the purity of conditioned phenomena and the purity of unconditioned phenomena are indivisible:
“ ‘Maitreya, the Buddha has prophesied that only one more birth stands between you and unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
(2) They achieve and maintain the second meditative concentration where there is an intense inner clarity, free from both ideation and scrutiny, the absence of ideation and scrutiny being due to one-pointed mental focus, while the joy and bliss that arise from meditative stability are present.
attributes that are virtuous and non-virtuous, specified and non-specified, contaminated and uncontaminated, mundane and supramundane, and conditioned and unconditioned.
If the Blessed One was about to foretell rebirth as a human, the rays of light would fade into his knee.
They remain in the family of the buddhas And are not captured by form. {30}
So it is, Su­bhūti, that the tathāgatas honor, venerate, respect, and make offerings to this very sacred doctrine of the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Thus arises this mass of nothing but suffering.
That is why they do not turn back.”
How should he who wishes to eliminate afflictions apply himself?
Like the moon in a cloudless sky Studded with stars, You are adorned with sublime characteristics In the midst of a śrāvaka assembly.
This being the case, Venerable Lord, how would great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom teach the sacred doctrine to sentient beings?
and in the same vein, the transcendence of [all other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path,
When they saw the Rishi, the rishis were overjoyed And they bowed down to the feet of the king of sages.
If you ask in what way they do not become fixated, Śāradvatī­putra,
Bhikṣus, you should train in this way.
It is a happy life that results in the sweet nectar of immortality.”
She prepared it, adding various excellent flavors.
At that time, the Tathā­gata, Arhat, Genuinely Perfect Buddha Dīpaṃkara foreordained
Investigating the absence of self is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“Noble son, giving what is beneficial is generosity with the Dharma;
being inclined toward the Dharma,
That is why filth emerges from it, and it is therefore disagreeable.
The virtuous and non-virtuous actions performed and accumulated
On which day of the month and at which hour?
Su­bhūti, those great bodhisattva beings who formerly worked toward unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, who have maintained purity of conduct in the presence of the genuinely perfect buddhas of the past,
in that case, they would undervalue the transcendent perfection of wisdom and keep far away from it.
This concludes the chapter on mantras, the fifth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called “The Sole Hero.” Chapter 6. Completion Stage.
Similarly, the emptiness of [the other sensory attributes], up to and including feelings due to sensory contact that is mentally compounded, will not attain emancipation from the three world systems, and
Divine son, ultimately, all phenomena are without disturbing emotions, unborn and unceasing.
Again, Su­bhūti, there are great bodhisattva beings who can indeed see with their eyes of flesh across an entire chiliocosm.
the inconceivable pure places where bodhisattvas take birth as wandering beings.
The guides have always praised patience; Attaining enlightenment is not difficult for those who practice patience. {141}
similarly, I must not establish that many in [all those fruits], up to and including individual enlightenment.
Wholly engaged in the Mantrayāna,
Once they examine things in this way,
“I will eat with the saṅgha.”
he witnessed the two holy beings prostrating before all those blessed buddhas.
five hundred laypeople,
Ignite a blazing fire, Scatter the water of the burnt offering “Above, below, and throughout the four directions,
He may follow the ways of those of lowly birth, yet, through his accumulation of the stores of merit and wisdom, he is born in the family of the tathāgatas.
that they are not a self, that they are empty, that they are signless, that they are without aspirations, that they are calm, that they are void, that they are purified, that they are non-arising, that they are unceasing, and that they are non-entities,
Finally five thousand celestial maidens singing and playing divine instruments came before the Bodhisattva’s mother and asked how the birth was and whether she was weary.
these are specified, those are non-specified, these are contaminated, those are uncontaminated, these are mundane, those are supramundane, these are conditioned phenomena, those are unconditioned phenomena,
Just as when, during a famine, Someone who finds good food
Ānanda, you only need to act as a mere circumstance.”
Just in the same way, reverend Śāriputra, the bodhisattva reincarnates voluntarily in the impure buddhafields in order to purify the living beings, in order to make the light of wisdom shine, and in order to clear away the darkness.
Non-arising, non-abiding, non-disintegration, and non-transformation with respect to all things,
‘These will be reborn among the gods and humans in the world systems of the happy, exalted realms.’
Through the transcendent perfection of meditative stability, they will transcend the level of the śrāvakas and the level of the pratyekabuddhas.”
should all be known, Bhaiṣajyarāja, to be close to the highest, complete enlightenment.
The minds of sixty great bodhisattva beings were also liberated from contaminants, without further grasping [that would lead to subsequent rebirth].
and whether they go to a temple, a house, a forest, a street, a town, or the countryside,
And why, monks, did the Bodhisattva examine the country of his birth?
They respectfully scattered a multitude of various Flower petals upon the supreme individual. {61}
“Make offerings, praises, and requests.
Has been proclaimed as Hatred Vajrī.
With the thumb and ring finger,
Su­bhūti, there is nothing at all that would, apart from the real nature, abide in the real nature; that would, abiding in the real nature, attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment; and that would, abiding in the real nature, teach the sacred doctrine to sentient beings.
This occurred even as far down as the great Avīci hell.
This Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta has also previously seen this kind of sign from past tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas,
“From the places where the bhikṣu’s head, ears, feet, hands, and eyes had been cut, many quintillions of light rays shone forth,
Your palaces are like the palace of Vaijayanta, wherein one finds the peace of true Dharma, and all one’s worries are gone.
Within the perfect peace of great bliss They abide in a form that is in all ways delightful.
the brahmā Śikhin, the brahmā Jyotiṣprabha,
They offer them gardens, temples, and parks, as well as, in a timely manner, wealth, grains, treasuries, and storehouses.
They are being steadfast in the mind of awakening, having cleansed the mind of awakening, being in control of the senses, having entered the path, having the courage to carry the great load, never tiring in the pursuit of others’ welfare, pure livelihood, avoiding wealth acquired through pretense or flattery, being free from deceit, and being more honest than the honest. Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess these ten qualities have trained well.
may I dry up the entire ocean of thirst associated with the afflictions of all beings,
and in the same vein, they apprehend [the other sense objects], up to and including mental phenomena, and develop a view of them in an apprehending manner.
“Monks, therefore abandon wholly negative and mixed actions and seek wholly positive actions.
Some attack with weapons; Others manifest as disembodied.
When seized by Skanda, A child moves by hopping (skanda).
even and well proportioned, and of excellent design.
“The characteristic of phenomena Is the same as that of space and sky,
Some palaces were made of pearls, others of diamonds,
They are the inconceivably numerous accumulations of sūtras concerning the composite,
“Śāradvatī­putra! In the same vein, do you think that anything other than the real nature of [the other links of dependent origination], up to and including aging and death, constitutes a bodhisattva?”
Similarly, all things are neither fettered nor liberated because all things are void, because they are non-arising, because they are unceasing, because they are not fettered, and because they are not bound.
‘How can I attain the enlightenment of buddhahood?
the bodhisattvas and the great hearers, looked toward this Sahā world and saw the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni surrounded by the gathering of bodhisattvas and attended upon by the saṅgha of hearers.
“King, please pay heed.
These are good physical actions.
Therefore, Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom
He whom the King of Aṅga left to defend the city of Campā
is reaping the roots of virtue.”
She can live wherever she wishes on the strength of her vow to develop living beings.
“With many kinds of excellent songs and dance, With amusements and performances made with a pure mind,
Then the precious stūpa also said:
Just as Dīpaṃkara granted a prophecy to you, Grant me likewise a direct prophecy in this world. {xxvi}
When one puts her two feet Firmly on one’s shoulders
This was the first chapter in the “Great Sovereign Tantra of Siddhaikavīra.”
Su­bhūti, it is so! It is just as you have said.
At that moment, however, eighty thousand beings stood up, fell at the feet of the Blessed One, and said,
Liberative art not integrated with wisdom is bondage, but liberative art integrated with wisdom is liberation.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ perfect giving of material things.
Similarly, it should be applied to all the meditative stabilities
to which they applied themselves with diligence, effort, and exertion,
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva Liberator from Fear then hovered in space at the height of a palm tree, and asked the monk,
and if there is no mirror, no reflection occurs, either.
Abandon all illusions and arise, And teach the Dharma in the city of Ratnāvatī. {vii}
and, in order to eliminate the sicknesses of the passions of all living beings, you should conceive the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
Expertise concerning the aggregates is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads to thorough understanding of suffering.
‘Do not entertain the notion that he is a mere householder!
I have already discarded a beautiful kingdom
This noble man is going to turn the wheel of the Dharma. He is going to beat the drum of the Dharma.
The strength of ten yellow elephants is the same as the strength of one red elephant.
Similarly, one who wishes to attain emancipation in things without defining characteristics merely wishes to attain emancipation in magical displays, mirages, echoes, optical aberrations, and in phantom emanations of the tathāgatas.
“ ‘If it is true that this phenomenon That is called “hand” does not exist,
He would dedicate his awakening to all beings.
Seven mustard seeds is one barley grain.
At that time, I heard Tathāgata Viśvabhū describe the qualities of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
says, ‘It is excellent! Excellent!’ the scent of the blue lotus will come from their mouth,
And afterward, start the rites.
Venerable Lord! As I understand the meaning of the words spoken by the Lord,
The youth Candraprabha was overjoyed, And in the presence of the Buddha he said these words:
His mind was filled with thoughts about the nature of impermanence, suffering, and repulsiveness. He was trained in the applications of mindfulness, the thorough relinquishments, the bases of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, the branches of awakening, the path, the four truths of the noble ones, and all the principles conducive to awakening.
Similarly, consciousness [and so forth] are themselves the expanse of reality and
And gradually to him will come The attainment of bhūmis and so forth.
“This is the enlightenment of the tathāgatas. Young man, have faith in my words.
the going forth, ordination, and monkhood in the well-proclaimed Dharma and Vinaya.
and if, though you are in the presence of all things, you are free of any notion of “all things.”
The Bhagavān was accompanied on his right-hand side by Brahmā,
to the one who is like a wish-fulfilling jewel; to the one who protects the treasure of the Dharma;
As soon as they see me they will attain samādhi.
In like manner, why do you say that the designation of fundamental ignorance as permanent or impermanent does not constitute a bodhisattva
It must be due to my many evil deeds in the past!
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is without striving or giving anything up.
Nārāyaṇa, wherever bodhisattvas live—whether in towns or in monasteries—if they abide by these four, they can be aptly described as dwelling in the abodes.
the bodhisattva great being Mahāmati, the bodhisattva great being Ananta­prati­bhāna
Enjoin him to dwell in tranquility:
Out of deep devotion, the householder had a monastery erected for the monk,
Now Māra asked his sons,
they say: ‘Oh, a great cloud is pouring down water,
“Śāradvatī­putra! The purity of phenomena is illuminating due to absolute purity.”
“In what way, you may wonder, are bodhisattvas free of trembling?
He attained decisive wisdom in order to sustain the foolish.
The soldiers were able to transform their faces in a trillion ways.
and this world system will then be called ‘Endowed with Infinite Discourses.’
There will be no women belonging to Māra’s faction
Son of noble family, through these nine instructions will one attain the absorption that encapsulates all merit.
At that time the Guide of the World teaches nothing Other than the ārya’s truth of suffering.
Finally, if that merit were multiplied by inexpressibly many hexillions of inexpressibly many times, then that would bring forth the voice of a thus-gone buddha, endowed with sixty thousand aspects.
She moved through the sky above. An assembly of great men prostrated to her.
They will never be blind, hunchbacked, crippled, or mutilated. They will not have impaired vision.
The Bodhisattva himself, however, caused all the displays that ornamented all the seats of awakening of the past,
will decide to come there to guard, protect, and offer sanctuary to those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage.
“Children of the lords of men were revealed Who were residing and practicing in the mountains,
And they have no doubt in any of the Dharma, And continuously remain in endless wisdom. {35}
“This beautiful light glows brilliantly, bringing physical bliss.
Then the Tathāgata teaches them the Dharma,
‘Bhikṣus, do not be afraid of my nirvāṇa. There will come a buddha after me. {82}
It will come to rest therein, and it will do so owing to non-duality.
and that I may go on to abandon all disturbing emotions and actualize arhatship.
he told me that he did not have money to pay the fare.
In his buddhafield, the eight unfree states will not exist.
and they should also be attentive to [the other notions], up to and including the notion that these are extremely calamitous.
“In that case, Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that there is affliction or purification with respect to that illusion?”
Vimalatejā saw the great power with which the Buddha taught the Dharma. In his magnificent beauty the Buddha seemed like the lofty king of mountains in the midst of the ocean, and Vimalatejā could not stop looking at him.
“The bhikṣu was not afraid when he saw their weapons.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that these five psycho-physical aggregates can train in the transcendent perfection of wisdom and attain emancipation in omniscience?”
Similarly, you should not misconstrue this unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment as the applications of mindfulness, the correct exertions, the supports for miraculous ability, the faculties, the powers, the branches of enlightenment, and the paths!
O Royal Sage, you were the moon-like hero Satyavardhana, The king Subhāṣita­gaveṣin, and the gentle Sumati.
Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who is skilled in this Dharma discourse subjugates and outshines in virtue all opponents.
and will develop the aspiration for the highest, complete enlightenment.
Seeing this, some bodhisattvas asked each other, “Who created such displays?”
Why? Because among the beings of that realm desire, anger, and dullness are rife.
Myriad kinds of lotus anther seats emerged in front and around it. On the lotus, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha appeared, sitting cross-legged.
He will be adopted by many millions of buddhas And he will make supreme offerings to those guides. {5}
And all those parks were adorned With fresh flowers and fruit, like massed clouds. {4}
Monk, as all phenomena are undisturbed by discursive thought, they are unelaborated.
Since a tathāgata is hard to find, and it is difficult to encounter the excellent Dharma,
and that is the nature of all phenomena.
The inquirer asks: “Are your parents still living?” If the ordinand says his parents are still living,
Day and night they do not follow the discipline, And they do not abhor the path of bad actions. {56}
You have been the king of Kāśi, Pradānasūra, Ratnacūḍa, and Śāntaga.
There is the meditative stability named Taintless Modality Devoid of Impurities.
“Indeed, all phenomena are non-arising, unceasing, empty, unmoving, vacuous, without a self, non-originated, uncreated, unconditioned, and without creator or actor.
Venerable Lord, how is this transcendent perfection of wisdom instructive because physical forms are unseen?
As an analogy, consider someone who puts on new clothes.
“Noble son, bodhisattvas are free of the stinginess that serves as the cause, condition, and basis for taking birth as a starving spirit, and so they are free from the unbearably savage pain of a starving spirit.
“One should invite the disciple, crowned with the seal of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa,
Senior Su­bhūti then replied to Śakra, mighty lord of the gods,
(3) the branch of enlightenment that entails correct perseverance,
From within their chariots they saw the bhikṣu, Whose body had the shining splendor of Mount Meru. {86}
Ask me when we are among the saṅgha and that will prove the time to answer your question.”
“Also, Su­bhūti, you asked who will attain emancipation by means of this vehicle.
The relics of the Jina are beautified By the clear sound of bells, The beauty of silken streamers, And bells shaken by the breeze.
The Jina, with this single light ray from his visage, Has made this world and its devas blossom. {48}
Fearing the future,
Why is that?
This shows that the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha possesses inconceivable qualities.
Gambhī­raghoṣa­svaranā­dita
I ask that the venerable saṅgha grant me ordination.
there is a world named Ratnaviśuddhā.
One who is in accordance with the virtue of the secret initiation Is in harmony with virtue, a novice.
Some proclaim the garlands of qualities of the son of the Bliss-Gone Ones;
Where do sensation, notions, formative factors and consciousness come from?
“I then pondered what was needed for name and form to occur and what conditions contribute to the occurrence of name and form.
Abiding in the transcendent perfection of perseverance, great bodhisattva beings will perfect all the attributes of the buddhas and attain omniscience.
Similarly, emptiness is not something other than the ears, the nose, the tongue, the body, and the mental faculty; nor are the mental faculty and the [aforementioned sense organs] something other than emptiness.
This sūtra, Destroyer of the Great Trichiliocosm, should then be uttered:
"ཇི་ལྟར་ཐོས་པའི་ཆོས་ལ་ནན་ཏན་དུ་བསྒྲུབ་པའི་ཕྱིར་ཆོས་ཐོས་པ་ལས་<tThey will not fall away from hearing the Dharma, as they put the teachings into practice assiduously just as they have learned them.
“They never experience anguish. They reach the state of higher bliss.
They are never apart from pronouncements of emptiness, signlessness, wishlessness, the unconditioned, non-occurrence, non-origination, and non-substantiality.
When they engage in the conditioning of physical forms, and so on, up to the conditioning of consciousness, I say they will not be released from subsequent rebirths, they will be agitated by aging, and so on, and they will not be released from suffering, and so forth.”
“Listen, venerable. It is time for you to be truthful. It is time to come forth.
That is to say, they do not eat out of yearning, craving, or attachment.
May I always be well!’
The moon and the sun may fall to the earth, But the Jina’s speech will never change. {91}
The lords of jinas were not seen And the ten directions were blind.
In the same vein, why do you say that the [remaining] designations made with respect to fundamental ignorance, up to and including its designation as entity or non-entity, do not constitute a bodhisattva
“Noble son,” the Blessed One continued,
These childish beings fall, like a blind person tumbling into a deep abyss.
This is the perfection of knowledge.
It is preserving the teaching.
then the evil Māra, knowing that they are rejoicing, might say,
Calumny Vajrī vajra yoginī,
Bhikṣus, the Mahābrahmā named Adhi­mātra­kāruṇika spoke these verses to the great assembly of Brahmās:
As he was free of pride, vanity, haughtiness, strife, hostility, envy, miserliness, selfishness, possessiveness, attachment, suffering, unhappiness, and ignorance, he was endowed with merit.
any notion of the world system of form, any notion of the world system of formlessness,
This is a fitting place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived.
why should I go?
“In what way, you may wonder, are bodhisattvas indifferent to harm and assistance?
places that are free from attacks by beasts of prey;
This transcendent perfection of wisdom does not attain and does not apprehend even omniscience.”
They turned the irreversible wheel of the Dharma.
“Bhikṣus, in that way the buddha realm of that bhagavān will have inconceivable qualities.”
Venerable Lord! How wonderful it is that this profound sacred doctrine is neither diminished even when it is not explained, nor is it enhanced even when it is explained!
Similarly, owing to their utter purity, they do consider the non-arising of the applications of mindfulness.
Venerable Lord, is this cultivation of the transcendent perfection of wisdom the non-cultivation of all things;
Behind, one should visualize Candraprabha, astride a moon disk and holding a blue lotus.
They are skilled in the knowledge of the detailed categories of letters and words.
who possesses the strength of the ten strengths; whose good name has spread in the ten directions;
‘I practice the spiritual life,’
“Wonderful! The Blessed One has taught these ten Dharma ways that are supreme and satisfy the profusion of sentient beings.
Will you commit yourself to subsisting on such resources?” The newly ordained monk responds: “I will so commit myself.”
“What is the elimination of this sickness?
“Noble Saṅgharakṣita, though the Blessed One’s sūtras
It occurred to me then,
which fills the treasury of the Dharma;
These bodhisattvas stand alongside and will stand alongside the lord buddhas, but those do not and will not.
Through their abundant contemplation of emptiness, they investigate the nature of whatever their minds pursue and have faith in, realizing it all to be empty.
He appeared to be surrounded by servants, yet lived in solitude.
Thus, he is called the most precious gem.
At that time the Buddha taught this topic in detail by reciting these verses:
Therefore, Mother, it is now appropriate for you to let us go.
Then he looked back into the Avīci hell
the real nature of physical forms and the real nature of omniscience are one and the same real nature.
This concludes the twenty-second chapter, on perfect and complete awakening.
How does the bodhisattva follow the wrong way?
“Ultimately, the Dharma is not about generating attachment; nor is it about bringing attachment to an end.
Similarly, although the light rays entered the Blessed One’s mouth, his mouth could not be seen to be either open or closed.
“Young man, the marvelous things that I have done, And the hardships I have undergone for many hundreds of eons,
Oh, whatever kind of utensil
who have entered upon unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment,
where before long he would become the Buddha, attaining perfect, complete, and unexcelled awakening.
Bodhisattvas should be as immovable as the central mountain.
Similarly, [the other attributes], up to and including the ten powers of the tathāgatas, are not one thing and emptiness another.
It is bridled,
‘Mother, is the thus-gone Arisen from Flowers still alive?’
“Desire results in a great deal of suffering; it is the root of suffering.
Such a life is beneficial for oneself and it also helps others;
‘Multitudes of devas and humans, listen to me!
“Enjoin them to perform activity and give an oblation.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of words concerning behavior in regard to the kleśas,
‘I will give this very body of mine away to all beings, and if I can give this away, what need to mention external, material things?’
They attain those four discernments.
The Jina cannot be made known By means of the rūpakāya. {22}
The nondual nature is the vajra possessor; It fully pervades the vajra sky.
Outshining even the light of the sun and moon, the light then returned, circled around the Bhagavān three times, and vanished into the crown of the Bhagavān’s head.
Therefore he was not a liar.
Instead, he gathered all four divisions of his great and powerful army.
I, too, find covetousness unpleasant; I do not wish for it, do not like it, and do not enjoy it. Therefore,
Śāradvatī­putra! If great bodhisattva beings flourish accordingly through the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
One should eat the gunk licked off her teeth,
superiority above the entire world,
For a long time he was tormented by his illness, And in order to be cured he went in search of a physician. {43}
When practicing generosity by giving away their spouses, sons, and daughters,
When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara comes, a profusion of wish-granting trees appears,
washed their feet, and went, hurting and upset, to see the Blessed One.
and on each of those mountains live eighty thousand rishis.
The Bodhisattva explained, “A league contains 100 billion nonillions, 30 quintillions, 60 billion, 320 million, 512 thousand smallest particles.
They will frown and then reject this yāna. Listen to what is the dreadful ripening of their karma.
“What are the six senses? They consist of the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind.
Bhagavān, I have come before the bhagavān tathāgata Śākyamuni in order to listen to this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma in this Sahā world realm.
However, he did not see such a girl.
Then the gods inhabiting the world system of desire and those inhabiting the world system of form said to the Blessed One,
“With his following of twenty thousand monks, he lived and stayed in the Deer Park of Ṛṣipatana near Vārāṇasī.
and, having turned them away, encourage them toward the six attributes [of the transcendent perfections],
“They are my sister’s boys.”
They have been born as humans. They are good humans. They are supreme humans.
“Yet when faced with such efforts to make them lose faith and to ridicule them, bodhisattvas will think,
When not associated with misguided knowledge, they are irreproachable.
There are many hundreds of thousands of bathing pools.
“Approach the lord of trees and sit there without fear!
those living in the realm of the lord of death,
When you left my bed, where did you go?
He knows the body is like an illusion and chaff, As are the ears, eyes, nose, and tongue. {66}
Birth provides the causal condition for old age and death, lamentation, pain, despair, and torment. Such is how this massive heap of pure anguish comes into being.”
excellent loving kindness,
Mahauṣadhi then asked the Blessed One,
“When my son was born, the world was lit by a brilliant light, so I shall name this prince Pradyota (Brilliant Light).”
They practice to attain enlightenmentBut their practice cannot be found. {47}
The world is continually disturbed and is like a tangled mass of cords.
"རིགས་ཀྱི་བུ་དག་དེ་<t“Just so, children of noble family!
but the ripened fruits of wholly positive actions are wholly positive.
Likewise, non-virtuous physical forms are neither fettered nor liberated, and similarly, non-virtuous feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are neither fettered nor liberated.
Having transformed them into one with his miraculous powers, The teacher took into his hand Ambrosia-like medicines With that supreme divine vessel.
Endowed with such subtle intellect, they understand the meaning of what the buddhas and bodhisattvas teach, simply by hearing it.
the purity of [all other attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, are indivisible:
If they think, ‘I am a bodhisattva. This is a bodhisattva,’
and a flowing mane of the complete perfection of the thirty-seven branches of awakening, along with awareness and wisdom,
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who train accordingly will manifestly attain the transcendent perfection of all trainings.
“When King Śūradatta heard the words of the devas in the sky,
Su­bhūti, it is because they well realize the defining characteristic of the sacred doctrine to be that the fruit of non-virtuous actions is unpleasant, and
It must be fearless,
they made offerings to the stūpa, which contained the relics of the Tathāgata.
“In this way they engage in abundant contemplation and are diligent in their training.
They are fixated on desire, hatred, and delusion.
where he lay down on his bed.
“Living beings are afflicted by the passions of thought,
“What is the level? It is the tenfold level of the absence of aspiration.
It teaches the indivisible nature of phenomena and is a gateway to the limit of reality of all phenomena.
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti thought to himself,
Vi­śeṣa­mati
and in the same vein, they themselves should cultivate [all the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path.
why are many different designations applied to all things, such as,
Only now do I teach it in truth,
The outflows have dried up and flow no longer;
have known the thoughts that are the various aspirations, natures, and intentions of beings.
This samādhi will not be difficult to attain For those who do not dispute but have peaceful minds. {8}
Since they have the marks of one hundred merits, they possess great merit as well.
Will experience no joy When they hear this sūtra. {26}
Eating a dish of buffalo curds and rice porridge
“Those emanations accomplish buddha activities. They go naturally, just as is their nature.
Noble son, go to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Padmottama. He knows this six-syllable mahāvidyā.’
Similarly, they neither associate the sensory element of the ears, the sensory element of sounds, and the sensory element of auditory consciousness with omniscience, nor do they disassociate them therefrom.
“Blessed One, how did this young head merchant, Bhadrapāla, amass his roots of virtue?”
Emptiness is indeed the noble eightfold path.
Then some people arrive there, circling around the corpse, and
except as liberation.
“My birth mother.”
Venerable Lord! How do great bodhisattva beings, after abiding in the transcendent perfection of perseverance, acquire the transcendent perfection of wisdom?
Even a hundred axes may fail.”
He remained in the nature of the Dharma And was unaffected by good or bad qualities.
They will go from one pore to another,
Consider, noble son, how a small spark cannot be ignored because of its ability to burn.
Blessed One, we will cause despair in anyone who hears this Dharma teaching but does not revere it, and who fails to worship those who teach it.”
Venerable Lord! Those who would not rejoice in sentient beings who set their mind on enlightenment are on the side of demonic forces.
and see with their divine eye,
and I will provide recompense from my own stores and treasury.”
After he passes into nirvāṇa, that bodhisattva will uphold his sacred Dharma and propagate it, so that the sacred Dharma may remain for long.
That magnificence caused this earth to shake, And the beings in this supreme city were overjoyed. {1}
They offered the Bliss-Gone One manifold and vast offerings and praised his qualities. Then they made this request to his compassionate being:
Noble ones, I declare to you, I proclaim to you,
You will become possessed of perfect happiness of mind.
But still, my Lord, you alone are the supreme witness in the worlds of gods and humans and the supreme authority.
They do not forget anything that they have obtained, and teach the Dharma to beings, knowing what will be beneficial for any one person.
Thus is the causal relation in outer dependent arising to be seen.
The six remembrances are a cause of purification.
It is born from sciences and superknowledges.
With intelligence and mindfulness restored, they returned to their homes.
Likewise, the great medicinal plants of the Dharma that pacify all the diseases of the afflictions are within the bodhisattvas and emerge from them.
“The many bhikṣus, who were desirous and greedy, Yearned for acquisitions, held the view of objective reality,
they heal sentient beings through their generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, concentration, and insight. Moreover, sentient beings are also healed by seeing and hearing bodhisattvas, by getting a taste of their qualities, and by venerating them.
Became irreversible in their progress in all their lifetimes And were never reborn into the lower existences. {44}
and the quality of being devoid of examination. Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.
Prince, in the past you were a perfect sage.
played the divine drums of paradise and played them throughout the entire ten intermediate eons.
When the Guide entered the supreme city The wonders that appeared were uncountable,
Moreover, Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of tolerance
The calls of these five hundred men could be heard half a league away.
They do not apprehend the sensory elements.
“Therefore, the wise and the realized Are always aspiring to this samādhi.
Venerable Lord! So it is that the transcendent perfection of wisdom is absolutely void, and
the fruition of stream-enterer, the fruition of once-returner,
I had also prepared offerings of a thousand tawny cows with silver hooves, golden horns, and covered with nets of pearls.
“Different characteristics are characteristic of the nature of phenomena. Their essence is empty and their nature is pure.
for it leads to unimpaired wisdom.
This king of mantras accomplishes all the previously mentioned acts even if it is not fully mastered.
“ ‘Sages constantly live in harmony Within such a delightful forest.
Moreover, Śākyas, If he can calculate in the duration of a single utterance of the sound huṃ, All the dust particles, blades of grass, forests, Medicinal herbs, and drops of water in a trichiliocosm,
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness as calm or not calm constitute a bodhisattva?”
“ ‘To benefit all the worlds,
I shall allow his going forth.’“The sage called out, ‘Son, who are you?’“
Just as this applies to the inner sense fields, so it is with the outer sense fields.
Noble son, whereas afflicted eloquence is distracted, that is not so when it is free of afflictions.
We thought, ‘There is the attainment of buddhahood through the wisdom of the tathāgatas, but we are satisfied with a limited wisdom.’
But when the inner earth element is not deficient, and likewise the elements of water, fire, wind, space, and consciousness are not deficient, then from the coming together of all these factors, the body forms.
Also, those bodhisattvas will swiftly awaken truly and completely into unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment.
Who opened the gate for him, who led him away?
“When they observe transcendent awareness they disdain others. I say that they have no knowledge,
making crushing noises. Some were playing kimpalas, nakalus, and sampas whose resonance boxes had been removed.
boiling with affliction, their bodies become engorged with semen.
you will not be able to create any obstacles for a bodhisattva who has set out with superior intent, who is endowed with skillful means, and who has departed by means of the perfection of insight.
and all others too were bathed in a vast light more luminous than the glow of the gods of the Thirty-Three.
“Then the bhikṣu, not knowing, unaware, and unsuspecting, ate that food.
And why will the prince not return? Because of his enthusiasm, discipline, and steadfastness.
“Venerable Lord, if great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom think, ‘I am practicing the transcendent perfection of wisdom. I should cultivate it,’ then they are merely engaging with mental images.
With your stainless concentration and higher knowledge, you shine brightly. You illumine the ten directions,
But the bhikṣus dwelling in emptiness cannot be shaken. {32}
If, from today on, We should feel any desire,
Śarita with her army, And the yakṣiṇī Giridāri With her army, “The majestic, terrific form Known as Hārītī, And Caṇḍā Caṇḍālikā Surrounded by her five hundred sons, “Ākoṭā, Karkaṭī, Kālī, Padumā, Padumāvatī, Puṣpadantī, Viśālā, And the rākṣasī Kharakarṇa, “Candana, Viṣṇula, Haripiṅgalapiṅgala, Kuñjara, Nāgadanta, Girimitra, and Agradaṃṣṭraka, “The rākṣasī Bhadradantā, Brahmilā, Viṣṇulā, The yakṣa Hālāhala, And the rākṣasa Vituṇḍaka—
Then the Bhagavān said to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Mahā­sthāma­prāpta,
at that time said these words to the Bhagavān:
“Bhagavān, you are the Instructor, the Guide, The Teacher of the world and its devas.
Then, by the supernatural power of the Buddha Bhaiṣajyarāja, the gods spoke to him from the heavens:
A wise person would always depend upon them And quickly become one who has attained the samādhi. {3}
Under the most excellent lord of trees, he will vanquish this friend of darkness And peacefully attain unexcelled awakening.”
This is what I have heard and all of it is true. It is reality. In this there is no deception.’
Therefore, if the saṅgha grants consent for the preceptor [preceptor’s name] to grant ordination to ordinand [ordinand’s name],
The strength of ten celestial gods is the same as the strength of one god who dwells in the immeasurable palace.
Return to the place from where they were sent, If they are thinking of Avalokiteśvara.
Bodhisattvas pursue all the aspects of their training,
Some were being sliced apart by saws,
To the third he said, “You shall memorize the Dīrghāgama.
the emptiness of all intrinsic defining characteristics,
to tame Māra,
But some of the disciples had already had the thought:
“On hearing those words, sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage should reflect,
The bodhisattva Pratyakṣadarśa declared,
“We see parasols, flowers, earrings, and garlands, Wreaths of campaka flowers, Necklaces, moons, and crescent moons.
Farther ahead walked five thousand maidens carrying beautiful cushions, and five thousand priests carrying bells and ringing out sounds of auspiciousness.
“If they enter the Mahāyāna, again they will think,
These four are the bodhisattvas’ fearlessnesses.
What are those ten? They are the excellent wisdom regarding the absence of self in a person, the excellent wisdom regarding the absence of self in phenomena, the excellent wisdom that is not temporary, the excellent wisdom of the sphere of absorption, the excellent wisdom of blessings, the excellent inalienable wisdom, the excellent wisdom that observes the activities of all sentient beings, the excellent wisdom of spontaneous accomplishment, the excellent wisdom concerning the characteristics of all phenomena, and the excellent wisdom that transcends the world.
Homage to Tathāgata Nirmita­megha­garjanayaśaḥ­śrī.
This same transcendent perfection of wisdom has primacy for those great bodhisattva beings who practice tolerance.
In that way the man removes the entire element of earth into the eastern direction.
They know the past.
and if [all the causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including enlightenment, were distinct things, and the emptiness of inherent existence something else,
In connection with the secret initiation,
Later, however, excited by desire for sensual pleasures, she will forget all that suffering,
In terms of worldly experience, however, they train in the thorough relinquishments.
Ignoring what he said, they gave Śārikā to the brahmin Tiṣya as a wife.
Then, the fifteen grahas, Perpetual drinkers of blood, Paid homage to the Lord of the World, And with palms joined said:
along with the most eminent gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, came to meet the Bodhisattva and to offer him their respect and veneration, and also to listen to the Dharma.
Yet when a ruler pierced you with his poisonous arrows,
First by means of the vase with the arrow, And secondly, the one with the bow.
the element of consciousness, after leaving the body,
the inconceivably numerous vajra words concerning the kleśas,
The husband who is of yellow color— He is said to be Yellow Acala.
Likewise, so long will the royal class, like a tall sāl tree; the priestly class, like a tall sāl tree; and the householder class, like a tall sāl tree, emerge in the world.
"ལོངས་སྤྱོད་ཀྱི་ཕྱིར་མ་ཡིན། དབང་ཕྱུག་གི་ཕྱིར་མ་ཡིན། ཁ་དོག་གི་ཕྱིར་མ་ཡིན། གྲགས་པའི་ཕྱིར་མ་ཡིན། སྙན་པ་དང་སྒྲ་དང་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་པའི་<tnot for wealth, not for power, not for caste, not for fame, not for renown, acclaim, or to be eulogized;
It is the abode of great sages, the abode of the elements, the abode of the eyes, the abode of causes, the abode of spatial extension, and the abode of the teachings.
“Evil one, today you will be deprived of livelihood by the Bodhisattva, Like a weary traveler without provisions in a wilderness.
The Thus-Gone Amitābha said to the two holy beings, “Sons of noble family, what you say is true.
At that moment no one experienced dying, moving to the next life, and taking birth.
Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, this house is never empty of the sounds of the Dharma, the discourse on the six transcendences, and the discourses of the irreversible wheel of the Dharma.
and confessed their wrong behavior. In the Thus-Gone One’s presence, they developed their recognition of him as their teacher, as well as their love, devotion, and respect for him.
“I also cannot see it right now.
Then one will live for five hundred years.
he desired to become perfectly and completely awakened, to attain supreme, genuine, and complete awakening.
That, indeed, must be the path to awakening, which can eradicate the arising of the sufferings of birth, old age, sickness, and death.
When it was cold he has used hot water in the sun, and when it was hot he has used cool water in the shade, offering them comforts depending on the season of the year.
whenever they do not engage with the notions that physical forms are a self or that they are not a self.
“Your Majesty! There is an old, elderly, and decrepit sage at the gate, who says that he wishes to see the king.”
neither is it obstructed, nor is it unobstructed;
“Millions of buddhas will recite their praises Continuously for many millions of eons.
The novice ward replied, ‘I have not inquired.’“
You have discovered the absolute awakening, most sublime! Homage to you, who has reached the culmination of all melodious tunes! “You are protection, an island, the highest goal!
Monks, at that point the son of Māra, the evil one, who was named Sārthavāha, addressed his father in these verses:
When he said the letter ma, out came the statement: ‘The cessation of arrogance and pride (mada­mānopaśamana).’
they indeed actualize the formative predispositions of mistaken, non-virtuous actions through their body, speech, and mind,
such as the youthful Mañjuśrī, the Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ajita,
Then they will have become equipoised in the cessation of perceptions and feelings.
attempted to steal the golden bowl from the nāga king Sāgara. When Indra was unable to do so, he changed into his own form and requested it politely.
Having developed the diligence praised by the noble beings,
“If the ten directions were to be filled
continuing in the same vein as far as [the designation of] the sensory element of mental consciousness, as calm or not calm, constitute a bodhisattva?
and who would apprehend that transcendent perfection of wisdom,
Moreover, Ānanda, if any sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage were to establish all the sentient beings of Jambu­dvīpa, as many as they are, on the irreversible level
When he was old enough, he was introduced to letters,
When this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom is explained and demonstrated,
the purity of his doctrine reflects the purity of his transcendental practice;
Su­bhūti, this precious transcendent perfection is unsullied by anything whatsoever.
Some had animal bodies like lions, tigers, wild boars, bears, monkeys, elephants, cats, goats, sheep, snakes, mongooses, fish, crocodiles, alligators, tortoises, ravens, vultures, owls, and garuḍas.
so that they know correctly, according to the karma of beings,
and with the great wealth and power of a king.
Then with palms joined, they praised the Thus-Gone One with these fitting verses:
Who are carried away by the swift current! “Your great insight exalts you! You are without peer throughout the worlds!
“That which is called ‘physical restraint’ is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas attain the eighty secondary signs of a great being.
Traveled through the four continents, And perceived all as being their children,
their view of individuals, or their views of humankind, human beings,
they must understand the nature of the great elements to be arising and perishing.
You should not have conviction in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
while those who supported Māra took a stand on his left side.
as well as the beings in the sixteen hell realms.
Su­bhūti, it is because physical forms are neither fettered nor liberated.
“By relying on you, one of utter purity,
long for the Dharma, possess the Dharma, engage in the Dharma in a way that accords with the Dharma,
“Those divine flowers Filled up this world. A quintillion apsarases Engaged in performing songs. {29}
You are youthful, praised and honored by gods and humans.
Its intrinsic nature is the turning of the wheel of Dharma.
And there was emanated a precious, vast parasol, with a handle made of a great, precious jewel of stainless beryl.
They illuminate the world and show the way,
They train in the four applications of mindfulness and [in the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path.
Like the deva lord Sunirmita, And like deva Suyāma in the desire realm. {21}
To remedy others, gods and humans lacking fear and careless in their ways, Once you show them the unbearably afflicted realms, The states to which they could go as hell beings, animals, and pretas,
This is the perfection of diligence.
The bodhisattva great beings were amazed.
That will be a very difficult task.
They said to the Bhagavān,
“If you ask what constitutes common phenomena, they include the following:
and paid homage with palms joined toward the Blessed One. He then said to the Blessed One
In the center of a maṇḍala of four cubits, “There is a triangle of one cubit; It should be dug to a depth of half a cubit.
“Venerable Lord! This purity of phenomena is not subject to affliction.”
and I too have been crowned and anointed a kṣatriya king, so return!
The Bhagavān looked upon two thousand śrāvakas, both those in training and those who had passed beyond training,
This being the case, it is for these reasons that those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who follow the vehicle of the bodhisattvas will undoubtedly attain unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
Please do not hinder me and don’t be distraught.
Were touched by the light of the Lord, And, for their good, gave rise to a loving mind.
Because he is an expert in the entire commentarial literature, he has been able to restrain beings in their desire to argue and instead has promoted his own Dharma-precepts in a tactful way.
O Senior Śāradvatī­putra, that these great bodhisattva beings, skilled in means, who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom are without all conceptual notions [such as],
They are called those who long for the Pratyeka­buddha­yāna and they escape from the three realms.
Thirty-two, grouped according to cardinal and intermediate directions, Is concealed in the amount of eight.
Then, as the cover is removed, the maṇḍala is to be revealed.
neither does it dwell in the hide
Bhagavān, in the same way we are like the Tathāgata’s sons
All beings come to him Like they do to a market town.
one should place a dried spider into sesame oil.
So shall we, too, produce a perfect realm.
And scatter aromatic Flowers upon the guides. {25}
(3) The Blessed One has palms and soles that are tender and soft.
has been commended by many buddhas, has been explained by many buddhas, and has been praised by many buddhas.
As an analogy, consider a pregnant woman.
pacified from within they are utterly pacified.
When the sulphur has melted slightly Sky-leaf is infused and smelted,
Just as noble arhats renounced and swore off killing for as long as they lived,
those who have killed an arhat;
Thereby using them on the born-blind man.
Touched by this radiance, the misery of those who suffer disappears.
“Monks, if a person who has been suspended for refusing to acknowledge a transgression returns
I will attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment,
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have these four qualities
That is so, Su­bhūti! That is so! It is just as you have spoken.
The Lord of the World sent
f they engage with the notion that physical forms are calm, or that these are not calm, then they are merely engaging with mental images.
In the center, one should draw Black Acala,
“Someone with knowledge will never rejoice In gaining a kingdom that has vast wealth,
“Young man, as it has been said, ‘Be careful,’ you, young man, should consequently train in that way. Why is that?
the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas do overpower and outshine the world, with its gods, humans, and antigods, with their magnificence and glory.
Knowing this teaching on birth They always remember their previous lives. {20}
Some are to be converted by great supernatural powers.
“From Suvarṇadvīpa,” he replied.
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, all things have a modality that is permanent and impermanent.
The head of whoever transgresses this incantation— The sūtra manifested by Brahmā, Which brings benefit to young people Up to twelve years of age—
“Noble son, a woman who has those four qualities will obtain this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma in her hands.”
The bodhisattvas asked:
learn it, understand it, keep it, recite it to others,
Gopā had also fallen off her bed and onto the ground;
he cannot banish the thoughts of that inexpiable crime by any means whatsoever, and
They should also encourage others to acquire the understanding through which the fruit of entering the stream is actualized.
Do not fall under the power of pride, And attain the thirty-two signs of a great being. {92}
“They have no longing for generosity and no longing for conduct, They have no longing for patience and no longing for diligence,
Ānanda, it is because beings would otherwise have been discouraged,
Through the practice of which a person will have sharp wisdom,
or degeneration of lifespan, then,
“Mañjuśrī, you have protected us!
People now began calling him “the beautiful monk” and “the great monk.”
all the roots of virtue they dedicate toward the attainment of unexcelled and complete awakening.
This therefore is called the acceptance that phenomena are non-arising.”
We shall accomplish all that the Tathāgata has instructed us to do.
Will swiftly attain success, there is no doubt.
He may follow the ways of wickedness and anger, yet he remains utterly free of malice and lives by love.
As soon as they said this,
they will similarly be unskilled with respect to the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, and the transcendent perfection of generosity
They have become trained, too, when they maintain discipline, practice patience, foster diligence, apply concentration, cultivate insight, and dedicate these toward awakening, yet do not apprehend that insight or the other.
If they are thinking of Avalokiteśvara They will quickly cease in that instant.
“They are not proud of being pure through giving away all their possessions. They have immaculate correct conduct but have no attachment to conduct.
Otherwise this noble being might escape.
Kauśika! Since all things are empty, who is there who would succumb to doubt and be deluded?”
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is the emptiness of the unlimited.
whether the tathāgatas have appeared or whether the tathāgatas have not appeared, the abiding nature of all things, the expanse of reality, the maturity with respect to all things, the real nature, the incontrovertible real nature, the inalienable real nature, and the finality of existence—all of these continue to abide.
They acquire all the roots of virtue, which are the provisions.
“I rejoice in those who have faith in the Buddha, Faith in the Dharma, and also the Saṅgha.
Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings who have cultivated the mind endowed with omniscience
The mother of the Bodhisattva never desired any man whomsoever, and neither did any man feel lust in the presence of the mother of the Bodhisattva.
They bow to the center of the world and scatter flowers.
kings of regions, cakravartins, and cakravartins of the four continents, together with their retinues who were gathered in that assembly,
This is to be carried out by a knowledge holder who is a performer of rites.
“Precisely, Nārāyaṇa.
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, thinking that these great bodhisattva beings will soon attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment,
I will teach the application of mindfulness that carefully considers the mind in this way: ‘Regard the mind as having the quality of arising and the quality of ceasing.’
while monks named Su­bhūti exclusively requested this transcendent perfection of wisdom,
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi;
“What is never abandoning the training? It is conviction in the ripening of karma, and having veneration for the buddhas.
All the riches of the teachings increase in them, and in their methods they are inexhaustible treasuries.
With the precious teachings on correct training They shine the light of the Dharma. {62}
In the round shape of a circle.
Being so skilled in methods, they suffuse every mind-state they have with four things.
such as the way to abandon disturbing emotions
Then the youth Candraprabha, knowing that the Bhagavān, the saṅgha of bodhisattvas, and the saṅgha of bhikṣus were seated,
“Father, I shall kill you.”
“He is also known as the one who has conquered in battle, the one who hoists the parasol, the victory flag, and the banner,
All these buddha realms, even though they were adorned in different ways, now appeared as one single buddha realm.
in all these cases, they teach the sacred doctrine without apprehending anything.
Prince Puṣpa was satisfied and delighted; he rejoiced, and then pleasure and happiness arose in him.
They should not abide in visual consciousness, and they should not abide in [the other aspects of consciousness], up to and including mental consciousness.
the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta caused a miracle by which the entire retinue could see all the limitless, uncountable blessed ones in the ten directions making prophecies for their unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
Instead, possessing a divine eye and ear,
In his last lifetime, this hero Will have a body with the thirty-two signs.
“ ‘Though I told the harem of this, Not even one woman said she would give.
They do not consider whether sights arise or cease, and the same goes for [the other sense objects], up to and including mental phenomena.
He may follow the ways of folly, yet he is ever conscious with the wisdom of firm understanding.
Interested in the Dharma, he has no interest in the realm of desire, the realm of pure matter, or the immaterial realm.
On the sixth ground, they accomplish the Dharma that is beyond analysis and hard to fathom. Hence they attain the body beyond analysis that is hard to fathom.
Similarly, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are non-arising.
Venerable Lord! How do great bodhisattva beings, after abiding in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, acquire the transcendent perfection of tolerance?
Because it brings the equality of all phenomena and nirvāṇa.
“Without an intention to cause harm They do not increase their defilements.
“What sort of teacher is that?”
The millions of beings who heard that joyful sound All attained the patience that is concordant with the Dharma
On the relative level, equanimity is a gateway to being free from all faults.
Leading his retinue of a hundred thousand quintillion bodhisattvas, they returned together to their own buddha realm.
The Blessed One continued, “Su­bhūti, Do you consider [those attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, that the transcendent perfection of wisdom could appropriate or become fixated upon?” “No, Venerable Lord!”
I proclaim the names and the clans of those great bodhisattva beings who practice chastity, dependent on this very transcendent perfection of wisdom, in the buddhafield of the tathāgata, arhat, genuinely perfect buddha A­kṣobhya, while teaching the sacred doctrine and uttering aphorisms!
who have not been favored by the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
“Did your parents give their consent?”
not adopting a livelihood that renders one poor with respect to the Dharma;
Whose number will be beyond measure,
and one need not rely on others for instructions or further teachings on them.”
along with the gods of the Trayas­triṃśa realm;
and he also knew what the bodhisattva great beings were thinking.
Bhagavān, the householder who longed for his son
“That king and his sons offered to the Jina,
This being the case, Venerable Lord, great bodhisattva beings who would attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, through their higher aspiration
If that is indeed the case, and the ordinand is asked, ‘Which of these do you have?’ he will respond, ‘I have none at all.’ ”
At that time they rose from their seats, approached the Bhagavān,
If you possess this treasure of the Dharma You will quickly become a supreme human.” {28}
“A potter makes clay pots Equally from the same clay But they become pots For molasses, milk, ghee, or water.
Ultimately, in order to make it understood that all phenomena are unreal,
“Desire is your foremost army; Discontent comes next.
‘Through the truth of the emptiness of phenomena May these weapons become coral tree flowers!’ {57}
“Noble son, it is like this: those who possess the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās will attain one hundred and eight samādhis.”
Similarly, Su­bhūti, this vehicle is also neither virtuous nor non-virtuous, and it is neither determinate nor indeterminate.
“When bodhisattvas who do not possess superknowledge and who wish to remain unknown
this transcendent perfection of wisdom.”
All of them recommended some form of suicide; none could offer any means of expiation.
“In a single pore you can display limitless realms,
Now, Mañjuśrī, in order to illustrate the meaning of this, I will give you some examples.
Avalo­kiteś­vara
[10] they are never apart from kalyāṇamitras until they are seated at the Bodhimaṇḍa.
and viewing and resting in its utter abandonment, they are not taken in, even in the slightest, by the world.
They determine which teachings belong to the Vehicle of the Hearers and turn one into a hearer.
Thereafter, they do so through the transcendent perfection of perseverance.
Consciousness is not located in the eyes, nor is it visible as springing from the eyes.
“This son of noble family, the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha, shows all beings the way to rebirth in the higher realms and to liberation.
do not apprehend physical forms.
and in the same vein, are [the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path, free from contaminants and not included within the three world systems, owing to the emptiness of inherent existence?
Through merit you have fulfilled your aim!
“If someone traveled throughout this realm of beings, there would be found a few who know the six-syllable mahāvidyā.
Venerable Lord! How do great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom
Today, Lord, we who are śrāvakas Will proclaim the highest enlightenment.
attract sentient beings with the gift of the sacred doctrine?”
This was translated, edited and finalized by the Indian paṇḍitas Prajñāvarman and Surendrabodhi,
A great rain of flowers fell and they proclaimed,
His father has come to one of these other lands. The father has much property, grain, treasure, and storehouses.
they will establish them in the six transcendent perfections.
Their nose, forehead, teeth, lips, and face Will all be perfectly formed.
Their feelings will be unobscured. Their perceptions will be unobscured. Their formative predispositions will be unobscured. Their consciousness will be unobscured,
Like the flower of a fig tree.
And space has no characteristics.
“Śāradvatī­putra, ‘great compassion’ is merely conceptualized.
“Yes, there is,” he replied.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of parents to beings who are to be taught by their parents.
Now youthful Mañjuśrī withdrew his power,
“Like an elephant stepping on a fresh clay pot, Or a lion fighting a fox,
Go to every household and
You must make him stay, so captivate his mind with your games of pleasure.
are absorbed in the meditative stabilities of the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable aspirations, and the formless absorptions, and
With their children and wives, hands together in homage, They will constantly listen to the Dharma.
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existence concerning purification. Those are the four.
be heedful, or later, when you are burning in the hell realms, you will have regrets.”
Venerable Lord, how would the ripening of positive and negative past actions be established and how would they become discernible?
"སྡོམ་པ་གསུམ་ཡོངས་སུ་དག་པ་ལ་གནས་པས་མ་བསྟན་པའི་ཚུལ་<t[How can] they live by the purity of the three sets of vows, and thus attain the untaught discipline? 
The Dharma is ultimately without formulation and without verbalization.
In the same vein, Venerable Lord,
They are experts on the points of training that the thus-gone ones teach for senior, intermediate, and beginning students.
In which buddhafield did you see the best lion-thrones with the finest qualities?
in order that infinite enlightened attributes might be possessed.
with perfect faith, cut their hair, shave their beards, don the saffron robes, and go forth from home into homelessness.
Next the cord should be cut with a new knife and burned.
“What is not being fixated upon praise? It is not making known one’s good actions, and it is knowing gain and honor to be obstacles.
I gave away my marrow and my bones, my homes, my villages, my towns, my cities, my countries, and my royal palaces.
When practicing generosity by giving away their ears and noses,
Venerable Śāriputra then said to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya,
“Ordinary beings do not recognize The nature of all phenomena.
“ ‘All the princes, whose conduct was gentle, Wished to benefit themselves and bowed down to the bhikṣu.
the fruition of non-returner, the fruition of arhatship,
Similarly, non-entities are empty of non-entities.
The goddess said,
Moreover, Mañjuśrī, the round sun of the Tathāgata’s awareness does not think, ‘I will teach this person the vast Dharma,
Prostrations to the tathāgata, Buddha “King Who Is Extremely Exalted by the Precious Majesty Arising from All Aspirations”;
perceiving the Saṅgha is an obscuration,
‘If in the future I shall come to possess such a body,
Commencing with the highest, complete enlightenment, through all the teaching of the Dharma
He also caused all of the trees, grass, dry wood, and leaves, everything on the ground, to appear as if made of the seven precious materials.
It is the seat of effort, because it does not turn back.
There are some who have a ritual of bathing, and others who make a ritual out of never bathing.
“The Bhagavān has said of them,
They are diligent so that those who have not transcended suffering can go beyond it,
has revealed a miraculous omen of this kind, this illumination from a ray of light,
Have you worked to harm the king or enlisted others to do so? Are you not a known bandit or thief?
Indeed, Ānanda, even the other five transcendent perfections,
“Su­bhūti, if the doctrinal wheel of the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas were an entity and
Bodhisattvas persist in giving up the flaws in their own being, whereas they remain indifferent to the flaws of others, which are beyond their influence.
How could something that is not created be perfected?
Yet suppose that its state of being reflected in the mirror’s surface is left behind:
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of names concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of names concerning teaching the composite,
The Blessed One was staying in the Jeta Grove, Anāthapiṇḍada’s park in Śrāvastī.
Supreme Leader of men, please say why it was you smiled.
Is taught to be the dharma body.
Noble son, this is the discipline of the bodhisattvas.”
The eight pillars are the eight liberations.
and who worship with great offerings those who teach it, write it down, and memorize it,
The Thus-gone One knows that all phenomena are unestablished in the ultimate sense.
He is dedicated to holding the Dharma in many ways within my teaching.
When the scouts returned, they reported, “There is no threat whatsoever.”
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of the sensory element of the eyes, the sensory element of sights, and the sensory element of visual consciousness constitute a bodhisattva?”
“Noble son, you may wonder about the nature of the bodhisattvas’ discipline that is purified of the three spheres.
Bodhisattvas teach the Dharma for the accomplishment of the qualities of buddhahood, yet they observe neither the qualities of buddhahood nor any accomplishment.
Similarly, the understanding of all phenomena and the understanding of omniscience are uncreated, undestroyed, and unconditioned.
When they sweep and repair such sacred objects they dedicate their work so that sentient beings may be free from repulsive behavior and instead take up beautiful and excellent activities.
Just as the autumn season, which is white and bright, becomes of yellow hue, so too your senses, Lord Gautama, are bright, and your round face is perfectly pure.
They will not be patient in their own country yet impatient abroad, nor will they be patient abroad and yet not at home.
Similarly, all famines, conflicts, and civil wars will be interrupted, alleviated, and become non-existent.
Within the vast teaching of the one with ten strengths?
do not harbor doubt or hesitation with regard to the doctrine when the doctrine of the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas is being taught.
Quick, Lord of Men, dispense that nectar.
But the bhagavān tathāgata Śākyamuni said to the bodhisattva Prajñākūṭa,
the three gateways to liberation,
Upatiṣya and Kolita then went to Gośālīputra the wanderer and asked,
Monks, at the time of the Bodhisattva’s birth, a great show of generosity was instigated.
Saying, ‘Oh! Behold the beauty of that human woman!’
They will all pass into nirvāṇa at the same time.
‘Form itself is empty of the essence of form.
May I provide relief to those who have not found relief And guide them on the path to the transcendence of suffering!
When the Bodhisattva had finished distributing all the gifts, she went up to him and, with a smile on her face, said to him,
He made a request to those bodhisattva mahāsattvas that he might,
“Reverend, the noble monks’ allowing the going forth of invalid sons of noble families
This completes the twenty-fourth chapter from the Transcendent Perfection of Wisdom in Ten Thousand Lines, entitled “Initial Engagement.”
O gods, this is the profundity of all things, in which the habitual ideas of duality do not at all exist.
And likewise years and intermediate eons.
There were also many trees made of coral, many blossom-covered trees,
“The thirst of someone who pursues desires increases evermore, Just like one feels after drinking salty water.
This is what Māra said When addressing the Bodhisattva.
when the householder saw him and said,
Is some misfortune to befall the prince?”
knowing that the entirety of his emanations was assembled,
84,000 beings in the meditation of compassion,
a supreme human, a great sage
up to five hundred [attendants] of the Vajra family will always follow behind, without interruption, in order to guard and protect them.
These sentient beings pointed their fingers at the Bodhisattva and asked each other,
Translated and edited by the Indian scholar Surendrabodhi and the principal editor and translator Venerable Yeshe Dé.
How are their perfections of power?
To those who are the offspring of the sugatas,
Should exercise diligence, regardless of risks to their lives, And always follow, young man, my example.” {168}
“With a loving mind they give Their portion to all beings.
Upananda thought, “My! Why, I don’t recognize this retired devotee as one of our instructors,
for it leads one to realize that all words, sounds, language, and speech are like echoes.
When the drawing is complete, insert it in the heart center. Summon, usher, and so forth, then burn.
in the worlds of gods, demons, Brahmā, mendicants, priests, humans, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas
By offering a homa with flowers of the palāśa tree 100,000 times, using, as an option, firewood from the same tree,
All of the oceans in this buddha realm At that time all became land,
As indicated [above] in the context of the psycho-physical aggregates, the same refrain should be applied extensively to all [those other phenomenological categories].
“Noble son,” replied the Blessed One, “let me provide an analogy, so that you may understand this point.
Therefore, I will definitely practice generosity by offering beverages!’
and attracted a following with the Dharma,
It is being wise concerning the āyatanas. It is making one’s higher cognitions manifest to others.
“Young man, those are the qualities and benefits that bodhisattvas who know the nature of all phenomena will have.
“The extensive enjoyment of sensual desires does not make wise people arrogant.
"བདག་གིས་བྲན་དང་། བྲན་མོ་དང་། ལས་བྱེད་<tTherefore, I will definitely practice generosity by relinquishing male and female slaves, staff, and workers!’
Like the stainless moon free from clouds.
Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have completely pure conduct of the mind avoid all unfavorable conditions
He will have inconceivable miraculous powers
they do not become covetous,
“You are also weary from austerities and diligently contemplating the Dharma;
They will hear the voices of men and women, And also the voices of boys and girls.
Do not listen to them, do not read them, and do not teach them to others.
Things that are without defining characteristics cannot acquire things that are without defining characteristics.
(3) the total consummation of the fire element,
they acknowledge such individuals with respect and veneration in body and mind.
The lord buddhas will proclaim their names and clans, while teaching the sacred doctrine and uttering aphorisms.
They all could leave with joy, proclaiming songs of praise.
“Furthermore, Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess nine qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
When knowledge and no knowledge have been examined That is what is said to be ‘the knowledge of buddhahood.’ {90}
[9] they do not disparage the buddhas; and [10] they possess the Dharma.
“Similarly, the emptiness of feelings, the emptiness of perceptions, the emptiness of formative predispositions,
who grope in darkness because of extreme dullness,
And this is known By all the beings in the ten directions. {219}
The Bodhisattva then remarked: “Charioteer, how sad! Childish and ignorant beings do not see old age, Proud and crazed as they are in youth.
Deprived of food and drink, Other dreadful beings Search about for the best sense pleasures, And look everywhere throughout the four directions.
Senior Pūrṇa, that is the case! Physical forms are neither fettered nor liberated.
They encourage, secure, and establish [those beings] in the transcendent perfection of generosity,
The mendicant will receive donations.
Similarly, they will instantly smell The aroma of perfumed sesame oil And the various aromas of fruits and flowers, And know the particular places those aromas are.
He who has mastered those minds that are difficult to tame And whose own mind is free from the snares of Māra, For seeing him and hearing him is not without benefit.
not being possessive;
“Create beautiful images of the Buddha, Perfectly made of precious materials,
“Venerable Lord! Since all things are dreamlike non-entities, with the essential nature of non-entity and empty of intrinsic defining characteristics,
Those women who are pregnant And whether it is a boy or a girl Carried inside their weary bodies.
saw the entire great trichiliocosm. He saw all the cities, towns, estates, kingdoms, royal cities, and lands, as well as all gods and humans.
Nor find a seat In the company of the bhūta assemblies.
Meditate upon the first syllable which is the color of Indra.
He thought, ‘I have created so much bad karma Through my having Puṣpacandra killed! {96}
They lead to enlightenment Countless millions of māras. {69}
It is like a lamp for those in the obscuration of darkness.
“This is my last birth.”
They do not criticize in any way Another superior being who is without defilement. {52}
Su­bhūti, since all things are non-entities,
‘Reverend Pūrṇa, first concentrate yourself, regard the minds of these young bhikṣus, and then teach them the Dharma!
“No, Venerable Lord!”
Even as you brought your enemy to safety, you remained calm.
one young brahmin responded.
“Many bhikṣus with unrestrained senses, Who covet the wives of others,
To illustrate this, when a person sleeps, their breathing happens spontaneously.
It neither bestows nor withholds the transcendent perfection of generosity.
What concept did you produce toward them?
I cannot open the door for you.”
the sensory element of the ears, the sensory element of sounds,
The kings of horses and elephants raised their bodies; The lions, the kings of animals, roared. {10}
Thus, noble son, bodhisattvas are not intimidated.
If there is no seed, the sprout cannot arise and so on, until finally, without the flower, the fruit cannot arise.
Su­bhūti, this is the meditative stability known as the yawning lion.
Some to be converted strive for the roots of virtue that arise from offering lamps, incense, flowers, perfume, garlands, salves, jewel necklaces, and so forth.
“ ‘The words that describe the mode are not the mode of being. The nature of phenomena is a mode of subtle meaning.
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings will also attain omniscience.
Are protectors who lead all beings To enlightenment.
he saw a group of young monks and thought,
facing the fire, throw on seven double handfuls of water, having first incanted it with the mantra.
In the northwest corner Is Māmakī
“When the bodhisattvas attain These three unsurpassable patiences,
“Having seen children of the buddhas such as these, You too should be one who has banished doubt.
“Therefore, young man, in the future Remember past declines like that.
When he said the letter bha, out came the statement: ‘The destruction of existence (bhavavibhava).’
may I cause all beings to achieve sovereignty over the kingdom of the sacred Dharma!’
When asked, they reveal the indivisible nature of the realm of phenomena.
“This is the ripening of good qualities, Which is seen without mentation,
they are to regard all things as emptiness and not to abandon any sentient beings.
Śāriputra, what are the thoughts of evil men?
Then Yamarāja circumambulated him three times and departed.”
within each of them appeared bodhisattvas, seated in cross-legged posture.
and they perfect the transcendent perfection of meditative stability, maintaining the five acquisitive psycho-physical aggregates which are like a phantom, and so on.
Similarly, they have not conceptualized the ethical discipline which they have maintained,
and I am happy with what I wear.”
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities take birth free of any stain of the womb.
When the Licchavi Vimalakīrti and
“They will become cakravartin kings who rule the world, See stainless buddhas who have minds of perfect peace,
(2) perception of suffering,
Even the garuḍa Suparṇi could not dislodge them.”
On this topic, it was said: “Those who give the supreme gift,
similarly by practicing the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline,
“You know the activities of all beings. You have the knowledge of all phenomena.
and they will exclusively engage in conduct that is the cause of [obtaining] such [forms].
In this regard, ‘the tenderness and softness of his palms and soles’ means that they resemble the smooth surface of a kapok sheet or a cotton sheet,
the one who has perfected knowledge, and the one who has accomplished aspiration.
he should carry on his father’s tradition or
The maturation of that merit produced the fine celestial chariot.
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas will attain all these qualities,
Words spoken with ill intent cause them no disturbing emotions.
The Bhagavat gave his approval, saying, “Noble son, it is excellent that you have accomplished the task. Excellent.
How are they unskilled in the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
A lump of kanaka flowers One should certainly spin on the top and the bottom.
does not think, ‘I am acting according to a certain objective!’
and with great skillful means of primordial wisdom he will lead them to disclose their root transgressions.
Oṁ kurukulle svāhā
Venerable Lord! The transcendent perfection of wisdom is profound.
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess ten such qualities are tent dwellers.
were to conjure a tathāgata, arhat, genuinely perfect buddha,
Relinquishing affliction while not relinquishing sentient beings, it is both relinquishing and non-relinquishing.
“Through practicing generosity, discipline, and restraint For many tens of millions of eons, He attained perfect sublime awakening And therefore shines here today.
“Friends, the body of a tathāgata is the body of Dharma, born of gnosis.
as being imperceptible; and as being wise;
and that is why these omens appear.
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ expertise with respect to the vehicles of the hearers and solitary buddhas consist in?
When practicing generosity by offering ornaments,
He has attained the supreme, highest wisdom of skillful methods in bringing certainty in all the dharmas.
And led away all Sañjayin’s students Only when there was naught else to lead away.”
and not prone to idle or frivolous chatter
Saṅgharakṣita leads an entourage of one thousand to the Buddha. Along the way,
and they will not construe the notions that they are unceasing, that they are void, and so forth.
Just like a low forest fire Would burn a dry, hollow tree.”
this is explained as awareness.
“Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, the Dharma is without taint and free of defilement.
the flavor-base,
You have immediately forgotten Whatever happened in your mother’s womb.
A tathāgata is the true nature, and that true nature is the limit of reality.
“On wondering, ‘Whence have I come? Where have I been born? What actions led to this?’
I wondered whom I should honor, venerate, respect, make offerings to, and rely upon,
A woman, the sole mother of the three worlds, A gentle giver of true pleasure,
Having gone not very far, they departed through their miraculous powers and became invisible,
Great bodhisattva mahāsattvas in numbers as limitless as the sands of the River Ganges,
Bodhisattvas should be intent solely on what is wholly virtuous in order to safeguard those beings who come for refuge.
will never make bodhisattvas lose faith.
Cease their defilements and in that last life of theirs They all simultaneously attain arhathood.
How should one view this consciousness?
On hearing this verse, the lad thought,
In the same way that a lightning bolt illumines everything as it emerges from a mass of clouds,
Just as when the long, evenly balanced base of a basket is placed on level ground, the bottom of the base entirely touches the ground, in the same way, the Blessed One is endowed with feet that are well positioned.
Mañjuśrī answered,
[How can] they be as steadfast as a doorsill as they set their minds on omniscience itself and stay free of the wish to be a śrāvaka or solitary buddha?
They said, “This venerable applies himself diligently, always making an effort in his recitations.
“They perfect the first [bodhisattva] level, without any longing for it arising.
and bury it. That will stop the woman from losing her fetus.
This position is called variegated.
In the future times there will be no obstacle To his celibacy or to his life. {6}
Impurities have been extinguished.
Venerable Lord! How do great bodhisattva beings, after abiding in the transcendent perfection of generosity, acquire the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration?
Kaṇṭhaka, look at the path prepared for you in the sky! It is so bright and beautiful. Its bejeweled ledges are ornamented in various ways, And it is censed with divine incense based on supreme essences.
Then, Senior Śāradvatī­putra addressed Senior Su­bhūti as follows:
He is the one who does not forget, therefore
“Be even-minded toward all beings. Do not have likes or dislikes in your mind.
Alternatively one should create things mentally If they cannot be physically obtained.
"ཤཱ་རིའི་བུ་མ་ནིང་གང་ལ་ལ་ཞིག་སྐྱེས་བུ་ངན་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཀུན་ཏུ་རྟོག་པ་དེ་ལྟ་བུ་དག་<tŚāriputra, those paṇḍakas who thus entertain evil men’s conceptions have the experience, ‘I am touching that,’ and thus perceive the body with its nine orifices—this impure, leaking thing—as clean.
They themselves should be equipoised in the meditative absorption of the sense field of infinite space, in the meditative absorption of the sense field of infinite consciousness, in the meditative absorption of the sense field of nothing-at-all, and in the meditative absorption of the sense field of neither perception nor non-perception.
that the hour of midnight had come,
Right effort is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Śāradvatī­putra, it is in this way that great bodhisattva beings who are diligent, alert, and mindful, after eliminating worldly covetousness and sadness
Śāradvatī­putra, that is how great bodhisattva beings should train in the transcendent perfection of wisdom.”
The third Dharma gate that he manifested is called putting great compassion into practice. It is a disposition of never abandoning any sentient beings.
“When the time of passing away has arrived, One is always separated from one’s favorite possessions and loved ones.
“Noble son, tell me, how will this be for the person who is tormented by the heat of summer and suffering from thirst?
the sound of a great being,
The thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment, the three gateways to liberation,
When a fasting lady drinks this, She will gain a son with the characteristics of a king.
When the ritual of yadakabaka Is inscribed on a piece of lead
Through the cessation of actual birth, aging and death cease;
and so they will not be reborn in the world system of desire, in the world system of form, or the world system of formlessness through any of these meditative stabilities.
In the same way, they then achieve and maintain the mind that is endowed with compassion, empathetic joy, and equanimity, its volition permeating the entire universe.
Similarly, they become equipoised in the [formless absorptions], up to the sense field of infinite space, and up to the cessation of feelings and perceptions, and
They are free of all stains in the absence of all the stains of affliction.
they do not assert the supremacy of anything at all, and so they do not think,
They were stamped with the insignia of signlessness.
If you ask why, Su­bhūti, it is because when these great bodhisattva beings practice this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, they do not consider and do not apprehend anything at all. Since they do not apprehend, they do not develop thoughts with regard to anything.
Nor steal another’s property.
astride a sun disk and holding a blue lotus.
“It also sees celestial realms made of divine jewels, pleasure groves and gardens, flowery ear-ornaments, lotus flowers including red lotuses, celestial mansions, and dense groves surrounded by frolicking divine maidens.
at that time, young man, those bodhisattva mahāsattvas easily attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood
The world and its devas will pay homage to those who possess the names of these two high beings.”
Without self-nature or location,
Therefore, Śāriputra, I shall teach that meaning.”
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ extraordinary diligence consist in?
it will bring fulfillment to a multitude of beings, and bring benefit and happiness to humans and devas.”
That merit would be greatly surpassed
In its center one should, according to the enthrallment-procedure, write the name of the person to be enthralled, supported by a pair of hrīḥ syllables. One should draw this on birch bark, or on cotton with flowers, and make it into a charm that is to be worn on the upper arm.
To make blood flow,
He is without any complexity,
Should train in this restraint of the body. The strengths are not difficult to attain for one thus trained. {33}
I was entirely celibate, and only performed acts of generosity.
“Do not be proud of maintaining correct conduct. Do not become proud through listening to the Dharma.
As these do not subside,
However, Kauśika, when the five [lower] transcendent perfections, starting with the transcendent perfection of generosity, have been acquired through the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
What beauty he creates!’
“Young man, whoever has this practice of peace, This supreme samādhi, the ultimate truth of emptiness,
In the same vein, just as it has been stated here in relation to the transcendent perfection of generosity,
“If sons or daughters of noble family, kings, ministers, monks, nuns, male lay vow holders, or female lay vow holders keep in mind the various teachings of the Dharma with faith in the Tathāgata, worship them, copy them or commission their copying, and teach them correctly,
those who are free of deceit and free of dishonesty, to those who act without hypocrisy,
Similarly, the bodhisattvas’ accumulations of merit and wisdom are wide and infinite.
“They should teach in the middle of an assembly Millions of sūtras without impediment.
(3) There is the meditative stability named Lion’s Play. (4) There is the meditative stability named Beautiful Moon.
In all the world there shone an immeasurable radiance,
This concludes the twenty-seventh chapter, the epilogue.
But even though they can hear the voices of gods and humans, they do not make assumptions on account of their clairaudience,
In it there is nothing at all that accrues or disintegrates, nothing that is enhanced or diminished,
and the one who never abides and neither accepts nor rejects. “
Even the king is severely depressed and given to brooding;
and then he lunged at the Bodhisattva.
Similarly, when bodhisattvas are born they will be protected by the buddhas and bodhisattvas, as well as by Śakra, Brahmā, and the guardians of the world.
But, Ānanda, although King Candraprabha had plucked out his eye and given it to the man,
The coarse level is secretly destroyed by four.
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess ten such qualities renounce the household life.
In this way, Su­bhūti, do great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of generosity, acquire the transcendent perfection of perseverance.”
Mañjuśrī, not all sentient beings are like physicians.
When meeting wet grass, the fire retreats;
‘Giving away one’s flesh and blood represents the bodhisattvas’ extraction of substance from all that lacks substance. Therefore,
and was radiant, unsullied, and clear like a lake.
but no one can fathom the extent to which the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha is gifted in skillful means and wisdom, or the extent of his activities that ripen sentient beings through skillful means.
a white lotus seven hands in diameter, on top of it a moon disk,
“Consider, noble son, how the shining sun delights virtuous people but displeases the savage.
In this regard, the expression ‘marked with the motif of the wheel’ denotes the motif of a wheel with a thousand spokes, a hub, and a circumference, which appears on the soles of his two feet, entirely golden in color.
To burn the afflictions of these evil and degenerate times.
it shook, shook strongly, and shook intensely;
They will be reborn in the pure buddha realms, will not die a horrible death, and will not be reborn in the lower realms.
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, demonic forces will transform themselves into the guise of a fully ordained monk,
Venerable Lord, if the notion of physical forms as calm or not calm is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of physical forms as such become a bodhisattva?
Ānanda, if you wonder whether King Candraprabha was then, at that time , someone else, or you are of two minds about it, or doubtful, do not see him so.
when they establish, cognize, and become fixated on the notion that [the aggregates] from physical forms to consciousness are empty;
“Father, I wish to visit the village of Kāṣṭhavāṭa,
“If you see an error of theirs Do not mention that fault.
The sentient beings for whom great bodhisattva beings don the great armor are also uncreated, undestroyed, and unconditioned.
Kaṇṭhapāṇinī is in the form of a cock.
You should not have conviction in the applications of mindfulness, and you should not have conviction in [the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path.
is not the noble eightfold path [and the rest]. Emptiness is not other than the noble eightfold path
He completely pacified conflict, aggressors, and enemies from without as well as disturbances from within.
but I suffer.
It is enticing, has auspicious marks, and is well adorned.
“I am going, Tathāgata, to the king of mountains, Gṛdhrakūṭa, which is always the residence of the buddhas.
If one mixes false daisy root with one’s seminal fluid and applies it to the penis during the month of Puṣya, the same thing will happen.
and the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha named Śākyamuni.
Their minds partake of the pleasures of perfect kingdoms.
After that, the ordinand puts the Dharma robes on, along with the ceremonial robe if there is one,
It is the same when they practice the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, and the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration; and when they practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
“They have gratitude toward the buddhas, And have no doubt concerning the Dharma of the buddhas.
for it leads to the attainment of the absorption of an undisturbed mind.
It will free them from sickness and fever and make them happy.
he will have planted the roots of merit,
Here in this buddha realm they will be able to behold Sukhāvatī as well as the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha. Witnessing that,
not to go against the word of the thus-gone ones; and
If he were then, for some purpose, to escort his parents, brother, sister, wife, son, daughter, and daughter-in-law, entering a remote and hair-raising wilderness where childish persons are afraid,
“For so long he has never harmed nor hurt anyone. Instead he has nursed those stricken by disease and given medicine to the sick.
With limbs like a sea monster’s, Bellies like wooden pestles and hammers, Eyes cocked up, big noses, And bright red hair sticking straight up,
‘Give heed, give heed to me. Ākāśagarbha, you have achieved great compassion.
‘An entire eight thousand eons Has been devoid of a supreme human.
That which is termed sound is also empty.
“ ‘You are like a physician for all beings in the three existences; You purify all attachment, anger, and darkness.
by decimating with the lightning bolt of wisdom the mountain of belief in the transient aggregates with its twenty tall peaks.
let alone bodhisattva mahāsattvas with bodhisattva followers as numerous as the grains of sand in a quarter of a Ganges River, or in a sixth, or in an eighth, or in a twentieth, or in a fiftieth, or in a hundredth, or in a thousandth, or in a ten millionth, or in a billionth, or in a trillionth, or in a quintillionth,
“One may ask how many particles there are, But one can never find the end.
“Sir, please give this novice bread,” said the father.
“It is better if you ornament the prince and make these offerings to him, since I have commissioned the ornaments for the prince.”
One should place both knees flatly on the ground,
“Many flocks of birds have gathered, Cranes, geese, avadavats, and cuckoos.
Or he should cultivate only bliss, Savored while coupling with the yoginī.
Like a play or a dream, it is unstable and impermanent;
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existence concerning teaching the composite,
millions of beings gained the immaculate and stainless Dharma eye with regard to phenomena,
She should be free from the faults of womankind and be a devoted wife.
Blessed One, that person will certainly be eaten up by those varieties of creatures—nothing will be left uneaten.
“Therefore, Mahāpratibhāna, I shall gather here all my many emanations in the form of tathāgatas teaching the Dharma to beings in other buddha realms in thousands of other world realms.”
However, relatively, the vinaya of the bodhisattva great beings goes further in order to eliminate the disturbing emotions of all beings.
Rather, they wish, ‘May all beings attain whatever they need for their livelihood! May they attain all manner of happiness, both of the world and beyond it!’
They see the seven tathāgatas that are at the level of nirvāṇa.
Will become the equal of lord Kubera, And attain treasures that cannot be taken away by others.
Śāriputra, what are purification and pacification?
gods of crossroads,
and it was covered with many hundreds of thousands of nets made of precious jewels.
Likewise, it applies to the powers of the tathāgatas and, in the same vein, [to all the other fruitional attributes], up to and including omniscience.
nd go to the dreadful, terrible hells That cause suffering and endless fear.
We will proceed henceforth, adhering to truth! May all our actions bear fruit!
On the second ground, they attain the body of purity due to their pure discipline.
commission it to be written, and read it aloud.
Through analogies and reasons!
in a diligent way, in a forceful way,
Her eyes are as pure as the petals of a newly blossomed lotus flower.
“The one who in the later times Teaches this sūtra for just a moment,
By offering flower garlands, one will be revered by others.
In the fifth of the fourth, Place the syllable i.
and his military might is great.
‘Even the tiniest of insects, such as an ant, is fond of its life; it cherishes it, likes it, and enjoys it.
it seems that unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment is easy to manifest, and it is easy to attain manifestly perfect enlightenment.
Roar with thunder, and sway trees.
The ground will be beryl, divided eightfold like a checkerboard by golden cords,
With an evil intention, I have reduced to pieces Supuṣpacandra, who was faultless and blameless. {49}
in the past, eighty times a hundred thousand million devas and humans, who had previously generated the necessary karma, attained the patience of the birthlessness of phenomena,
and for this he became known as the wanderer Dīrghanakha (He who has Long Fingernails).
Within that space there are those whose time is ending. They hear the words, ‘You have not long to live.’ {9}
cultivate,
“Householder, I accept.”
all of whom had one rebirth remaining,
With this mantra, rhinoceros will flee:
It neither bestows nor withholds the transcendent perfection of tolerance.
and in the same vein, it has not been revealed so that [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, might be grasped or not grasped.
(4) contemplation of a putrefied corpse,
On the relative level, correct view is a gateway to all happiness.
through great joy, to take joy and great delight in the Dharma; and
stealing from a place of worship,
They are the inconceivably numerous elucidations concerning the composite,
similarly, that the [remaining] designations made with respect to the [other] sensory elements, up to and including the designation of the sensory element of mental consciousness, as entities or non-entities, do not constitute a bodhisattva?
With happiness and delight,
“In the very same way, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha is not past, future, or present.
latent formations were uprooted,
The right-upward glance signifies protecting the seven egg-of-Brahmā worlds.
it has not been revealed so that [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, might be grasped or not grasped.
“Ānanda, as an analogy, if there were a person who was on fire from his feet to the crown of his head,
“Is it impossible, O lord, because bliss does not arise?”
like a mirage,
That is how you should perfectly understand phenomena.
and, because he does not like any narrow-minded teachings, he does not destroy compounded things.
This eightfold path of the noble ones, combined with the attainment of its results and nirvāṇa, is what the Bhagavān has called the Dharma.
They do not escape this same reality.
“Ākāśagarbha teaches the Dharma in various places according to the specificities of various beings.
Should meditate on the patience praised by the jinas, And then supreme enlightenment will not be difficult to attain.” {38}
At that time he uttered these verses:
“ ‘They are devoid of “composite” or “noncomposite,” And the sages have no concepts concerning them;
“Moreover, Kauśika, if these sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage accept, maintain, recite, comprehend, and attend in the correct manner to this transcendent perfection of wisdom,
By drinking an herbal remedy incanted with this mantra,
“Similarly, Mahauṣadhi,” said the Blessed One, “the element of consciousness, once it has cast off the corpse, has no opportunity to occupy that same corpse again.
They are adorned with the accumulations of merit and wisdom.
Inner ambrosia is self-arisen.
we are supreme in this world.
It should similarly be applied to the ten powers of the tathāgatas, and also [to the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
Saying, ‘We who are śrāvakas Are far from the supreme, highest enlightenment.’
Bhagavān, if I again possess these bad qualities, I will not seek to come before the Bhagavān.’
not abandoning the means of unification;
they see Land, but not life, can be found again.”
“Reverend or venerable, heed me.
All who were struck with fear found release.
What nine qualities?
“I was a king named Bhīṣmottara,
The yakṣas who are agreeable to discipline Perceived the weapons in their hands to be flower garlands.
One should make the woman sit in the half-moon posture, And then, without pausing,
the defining characteristic of non-cessation, the defining characteristic of non-defilement,
When the moon is in the asterism of Puṣya, one should take some lampblack with a garland of white lotuses and cow’s ghee
Therefore, when all phenomena are known to be the expanse of reality,
He prostrated with his head to the Bhagavān’s feet, cast mandārava flowers toward the Bhagavān,
just as I want no one to express malicious words to me, order someone to express them, or rejoice in someone expressing them,
Come commune with the Sage, the Lion of the Śākyas. Sublime, supremely brilliant, and pure, The light of wisdom he radiates dispels darkness. Peaceful in form, his mind is virtuous and tranquil.
From various buddha realms in the four directions many thousands of bodhisattvas now arrived. Descending from the sky, they all gathered before the Blessed One, worshipping him by bowing their heads to his feet.
“O Blessed One, the city of Vārāṇasī has merely a limited population,
He then covered everyone who was present in the gathering, and in the end he covered completely the entire trichiliocosm.
The bodhisattva mahāsattvas who abide in the practice of the samādhi that is free of apprehending will abide in all aspirations.
“The Blessed One is amazing!” the bodhisattvas responded.
they abstain from killing living creatures, and oppose the killing of living creatures.
Nor indeed do the tathāgatas apprehend anything apart from engaging in omniscience.
Similarly, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are empty of consciousness [and the other aggregates].
If you don’t believe me, follow that road.
They should also encourage others to acquire the meditative stabilities of emptiness, signlessness, and aspirationlessness.
“So, too, are all the worlds in the ten directions With their Sumerus and their oceans,
do not see, are not aware of, or do not notice.
“For example, Su­bhūti, space is not the past, the future, or the present.
clouds that rained down divine standards,
With red light of different hues She illuminates the three worlds.
From the right side, Siddhārtha said:
“They continue in the performance of activities, Whether that of engagement or disengagement.
‘Noble one, I seek to go forth, so in your love I ask that you allow me.’“
“In the supreme chariot, only Māyādevī shall sit;
These are the adversities.
all of them are transformed into a single element, which is exclusively the fire element;
Kolita asked Upatiṣya,
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will always be gentle, will speak appropriate words,
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, you should know that this is like when a man or woman thinks of fetching water in a clay jar that has not been fired, that man or woman would be unskilled in nature.
The others remarked, “No, he’s not dying. This is simply how worthy ones abide in absorption.”
“Knowing the thoughts and aspirations of beings I teach the Dharma in many different forms.
“Why did you make the fruit of your loins go forth?” they asked.
without elaboration, free from elaboration;
“Venerable Lord! If great bodhisattva beings are endowed with many roots of virtue,
if they pay homage to him and even offer their lives to him,
“Furthermore, he should understand thoroughly the conception of himself as a thing by cultivating the following consideration:
“Young man, there are countless faults in those composite phenomena;
I will practice the six transcendent perfections by any means until even the name of the pride of those sentient beings is no longer heard.
Seeking the supreme, highest enlightenment,
This sacred doctrine is compatible with the transcendent perfection of tolerance.
you will be the holder of the Dharma of many hundred thousand quintillions of tathāgatas,
Announce the perfect fulfillment of his greatest desire:
His monk wards then built a sweat-chamber for him.
This private food is the best, Eaten by all the buddhas.”
Those who have ceased conceptualizing things Do not see the Lord of Jinas as a rūpakāya. {15}
The second root mantra:
The son of noble family did not appear in this way to those beings,
If one smears barley flour, cow’s urine, oleogum resin, and Indian licorice on the body together with clarified butter, the whole body will become healthy.
And bites his lower lip with his fangs.
hung with divine flower garlands,
This is a gift
“We have never before seen A single one of these offspring of yours. But today we have suddenly seen them. Muni, tell us of their activities.
Indeed, all things have an undifferentiated nature because they denote the expanse of reality and because they denote the finality of existence.”
Next, Nārāyaṇa, imagine that you then passed through as many world systems toward the east as there are mustard seeds.
He replied, “This is owing to the non-cessation and non-arising of all things!”
Similarly Yellow Acala in the south.
The venerable Ānanda then pressed his palms together and said to the Blessed One,
Thereupon, magically influenced by the Buddha, the venerable Śāriputra had this thought:
the phenomena of desire, the desire, or the desirer;
They will all of them attain enlightenment. {79}
Kāśyapa, it is like when a great cloud covers all the worlds in the all-containing realm of a billion worlds
kaṭapūtanas, and pāṃśukūla piśācas.
a modality that arises and a modality that is non-arising, a modality that ceases and a modality that is unceasing,
they were to think, ‘The worthy recipient of my generosity is the genuinely perfect Buddha, but not a living creature born in the animal realm,’ they would lack the attributes of a bodhisattva.
“They practice their conduct unobserved,
“And she should say: “ ‘Ah, whoever serves, According to procedure, this lotus of mine, Which is endowed with every pleasure,
and entered Rājagṛha to beg for alms.
Eighty thousand divine maidens sprinkled the path with flowers of divine scent.
“Upatiṣya is intelligent. I would have him attend the master while I go in search of medicine,” and said,
“Bhagavān, since things that are non-arising do not exist, it would be impossible for them to go to the lower realms.”
makes many kinds of offerings to it, such as flowers, incense, perfume, garlands, ointments, powders, cloth, parasols, banners, flags, music, clothing, the act of placing hands together in homage, lamps of ghee, lamps of sesame oil, lamps of perfumed sesame oil, lamps of magnolia oil, and lamps of royal jasmine, bignonia, gardenia, and shrubby jasmine oils—
Unless you must, do not open any door,
Encourage the supreme being to renounce his home.
Senior Su­bhūti! Do great bodhisattva beings, skilled in means, who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom have dualistic perception?
“Lord of the World, Buddha, Illuminator, bringer of benefit,
they are undistracted on the path of enlightenment.”
“Similarly, the ten powers of the tathāgatas are themselves omniscience,
nor will it be attained by means of that which is not the path.
Bhagavān, why have you taught such a profound Dharma discourse as this?
As he sat there off to one side, Dīrghanakha said to the Blessed One,
So long, subsequently, will the pristine cognitions of buddhahood emerge in the world.
They will hear the voices of the asuras, Those who dwell in the ocean, and others. Those dharmabhāṇakas, while staying where they are, Will hear all those sounds without being overwhelmed.
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, discern physical forms as resembling a mass of foam.
Others, who have vowed to adopt the behavior of a cow, always keep their heads down.
Like illusions, the same as lightning in the sky; Like the moon on water, the same as a mirage. {14}
“This householder is hard to please and I cannot guard my mind against his abuse.
Within the Jetavana Monastery, there appeared stairs made from diamonds and entrance chambers hung with pearls and silks.
you know our thoughts.’
And let us suppose that, these tathāgatas having entered ultimate liberation,
if a noble man or noble woman who has entered the Bodhisattva­yāna were to give this world realm of a billion worlds filled with the seven precious materials to all the buddhas, bodhisattvas, śrāvakas, and pratyeka­buddhas,
That is the first wonder of this house.
The same refrain should be extensively applied to feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness, just as it has been applied to physical forms.
Bodhisattvas speak the Dharma. Their beneficial words bring joy to sentient beings.
Mañjuśrī, where there is no emptiness, there is no awakening.
Bhaiṣajyarāja, have given, am giving, and will give many Dharma teachings,
Right then five extremist sages,
You are not on the irreversible level!
and the same family and same clan, which means there were twenty thousand tathāgatas of the Bharadvājasa family.
“Blessed One, any being who even hears the name of the Blessed One, the thus-gone Śākyamuni, reaches excellent attainments.
“Great King, the body of Prince Sarvārthasiddha is adorned with eighty minor marks.
They teach that physical forms are empty of notions of ‘I’ and ‘mine,’
These are the elements.
Then, he should recite the following queen of incantations, Destroyer of the Great Trichiliocosm:
Likewise the same goes for sights, and, in the same vein, [the other sense objects], up to and including mental phenomena.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designation of sights as permanent or impermanent constitutes a bodhisattva?”
Enlightenment is free from all vacillation, mentation, and agitation.
Similarly, if they have not misconstrued feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness, they will subsequently attain this omniscience.
I have no doubts.
the samādhi named Ocean Deep,
ye dharmā hetuprabhavā hetuṃ teṣāṃ tathāgato hy avadat teṣāṃ ca yo nirodha evaṃvādī mahā­śramaṇaḥ
They should not form concepts about merit being of a defiled or undefiled type.
I journeyed toward my home and eventually arrived there.
calm abiding through actualizing all meditative states and equilibriums,
this person will put an end to suffering and gradually, fully, and completely awaken to unsurpassable, truly perfect enlightenment.
As a comparison, in Jambudvīpa there are great rivers that flow day and night.
The eight pillars are the noble eightfold path.
“The bodhisattvas, joyous, with loving minds And unstained, will become buddhas.
(1) taking no interest in a spiritual friend, (2) not reflecting deeply, (3) harshness in words,
They had perfected the applications of mindfulness, the true exertions, the bases of miraculous power, the powers, the strengths, the factors of awakening, and other qualities of the path such as love, compassion, joy, equanimity, patience, and intention, as well as other wholesome propensities.
“Uttarā, go and fetch the priest.
The sense pleasures are not worthy of being looked upon.
Prostrations to the category of sūtras, the holy Dharma;
Early in the morning, one should make offerings to the goddess With fragrant flowers and so forth.
the four meditative concentrations,
Does it have a form,
For him there is no disease, nor old age;
How do they take birth free from any stain of the womb?
[33] It is taking care of companions. [34] It is guarding secret mantras.
while olfactory consciousness is inner form.
“Because of our veneration for the Lord of the World We will be resolved to do that which is so difficult.
owing to the emptiness of non-apprehension,
“To say that the four main elements are one thing and the etheric space-element another is dualistic.
their major marks permeate innumerable, countless, immeasurable world systems with luminosity;
First, I have seen how sentient beings suffer. So may I free and liberate those who are bound to the world and caught in the prison of cyclic existence.
they see that physical forms are utterly porous or utterly fallacious, just as a mass of foam is insubstantial.
They will achieve all possible qualities, up to the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha.
Those who make stūpas out of deodar cedar, Those who make them from a combination of woods, {80}
When the king had heard this Dharma from the Jina, Together with his entourage he took up the training. {38}
Then, during the fourth week, the Thus-Gone One took a walk, but not as far, this time traveling from the eastern ocean to the western ocean.
Then they spoke in verse:
Ānanda, it is because this transcendent perfection of wisdom dispels all negativity and eradicates all ailments.
die among animals only to be reborn among hell realm beings,
Bhagavān, today I have attained arhathood.
“The lifespan of the guide Śālendrarāja, That jina, irreproachable, Supreme among humans,
Similarly, they should not dwell on the notion that ‘I should attain the four assurances, the four unhindered discernments, great loving kindness, great compassion, and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.’
Similarly, after they have cultivated the first meditative concentration, and
Venerable Lord! In what circumstances do great bodhisattva beings enter into the maturity of the bodhisattvas,
Based on this path and these practices, the mendicant Gautama appears unable to actualize an exalted wisdom vision that is any higher than manmade teachings.
Having conquered all forms of conceit, it is free from conceit.
“Wherever this army is found, The cries of the jackal and the owl are heard.
“That guide of beings taught the good Dharma And guided countless millions of beings.
Monks, at that time the herd of cows belonging to the merchants Trapuṣa and Bhallika was grazing at a neighboring village.
and his superior intelligence was as wide as an ocean.
The prince is not skilled in the arts since he does not know the maneuvers of swordsmanship, archery, combat, or wrestling.
fully perfect the transcendent perfection of generosity,
Know that the details of the shape of the hearth Are in accordance with the previously explained activities.
should abide in the absence of attributes and be dedicated to making vast offerings to a present tathāgata or to the stūpa of a tathāgata who has passed into nirvāṇa.
After becoming attached, it produces the body of a hell-being.
target shooting through only hearing the target, striking hard, playing dice, poetry composition, prose composition, painting, drama, dramatic action,
Sometimes I assume a human form,
Venerable Lord, if physical forms are invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of physical forms become a bodhisattva?
who has a beautiful lotus in his hand, who has the splendor of lotuses,
“What is doing exactly what one has said one will do? It is having a completely virtuous motivation.
With the soles of his feet leaving patterns on the ground, The Buddha, came to the home of the youth Candraprabha. {37}
Through becoming overcome by sorrow, those whose perceptions are deluded gain undeluded perception.
Thoroughly understanding that the nose is empty,
‘All phenomena have been shown in all ways to be gateways to liberation and are thus gateways in all ways.
“If I were to teach them for an eon Their confusion would still be vast.
and it is the transcendent perfection of wisdom which implements them.
“The consciousness ceases and rearises. The practitioner observes this arising and ceasing of consciousness:
“Know that these are the mantras both for making offerings and giving an oblation to me and my retinue.
Distressed and weeping, he gave the horse to He Who Is an Ocean of Qualities, saying:
Therefore, their livelihood is entirely pure.
Prince Bimbisāra said to the five hundred sons of the ministers,
The aspect is explained as the stabilization of an unstable mind.
“As for grieving for your son, there is no need to worry; your hardship will pay off.
She is aptly named Māyādevī, ‘Magically Emanated Goddess.’
Bhagavat, how do you know that?
“Come, join me. As we have faith in only what is perfect, let us go forth from home into homelessness.”
They should not sit on any of the seats that are designated for the saṅgha.
All the gods presiding over the Pure Abodes, as many as there are throughout the world systems of the great trichiliocosm also congregated there, in that same assembly, along with the [lesser] gods of the Pure Abodes—ten million, one hundred billion, many hundred thousands in number.
If one is to die within six months,
Knowing phenomena to be like that They will not be reborn in a womb. {19}
Māra’s daughters insisted:
“Divine son, the acts with immediate consequence are those by which the bodhisattva great beings quickly,
and fear.
being the doctor for those stricken by the diseases of affliction,
The roar is never made for the sake of harming anyone.
What is the thorough understanding of the basis of that object-perception?
Then imagine that each of those beings has become endowed with the merit that is the possession of the universal emperors who rule in ten trichiliocosms.
In this manner the universal monarch comes to possess the precious elephant.
distinction above all hearers and solitary buddhas,
“King Śrīghoṣa extended both his hands,
four māṣaka, as well as five māṣaka are
but it does so without apprehending anything.
Ānanda, if bodhisattvas did not develop the mind set on unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment,
“Gentlemen, this King of Aṅga is belligerent,
On his left draw Ṣaḍakṣarī Mahāvidyā,
It is the seat of effort, because it releases energetic activities.
“All the splendor of Vaiśravaṇa and the thousand-eyed one,
when they practice the transcendent perfection of generosity,
these are mundane phenomena, these are supramundane phenomena,
Thus, bodhisattvas are there for all sentient beings equally.
Ābhāsvara, Parīttaśubha Apramāṇaśubha, Śubhakṛtsna,
the ox among men,
One will win the water trial.
“When speaking of the four dhyānas, The foolish claim they can experience dhyāna.
They should not dwell on the notion that ‘I am an individual on a par with those whose series of lives has ended, and whose afflicted mental states have ended.’
and they obtain this Dharma teaching on easily entering great compassion
All those jinas realize unstained, noncomposite enlightenment Through the practice of this samādhi.” {30}
Similarly, they do not think, ‘May I be reborn equal in fortune to the gods of the Trayas­triṃśa realm, to those of the Tuṣita realm, those of the Nirmāṇa­rata realm, and those of the Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin realm!’
In what way does the community not become divided? In what way does one gain endless eloquence? {2}
‘I too therefore shall teach this enlightenment Of buddhahood divided into three categories.’ {118}
Homage to you, wisdom’s might supreme!
Moreover, Su­bhūti, any thought without the four applications of mindfulness, and similarly, any thought without the four correct exertions,
However I attain this supreme samādhi I will then free millions of beings from suffering. {72}
How could bodhisattvas become anything other than the real nature of [those remaining phenomena], up to and including the link of aging and death!
Blessed Thus-Gone One, you speak the truth.
will always overcome all adversaries,
the samādhi named Meditation,
The outer form of the supreme human’s Dharma Will remain for another twenty intermediate eons.”
let alone bodhisattva mahāsattvas with bodhisattva followers as numerous as the grains of sand in fifty Ganges Rivers,
Bowing to the Blessed One with palms joined, he said to him,
and, as before, commit it to writing, retain, hold, and master it,
“Now, all the tathāgatas made the following prophecies concerning Śrī Mahādevī:
Wisdom not integrated with liberative art is bondage, but wisdom integrated with liberative art is liberation.
the transcendent perfection of perseverance,
Standing, walking, or running.
to say nothing of arhatship!
If you ask why, Su­bhūti, it is because dedication [in this context‌] denotes this dedication of the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
the inconceivably manifold experiences of beings,
“Senior Śāradvatī­putra, for these reasons great bodhisattva beings do not know through their meditative stability that all things are sameness, nor do they have any cognition.
owing, Venerable Lord, to the fact that the tathāgatas and their phantom emanations are without conceptual imagination,
Formations that possess the three characteristics.
“Space is taught to be ungraspable; There is nothing there to be grasped.
“Wishing to attain enlightenment, they will sit On a lion throne at the foot of a tree.
they liberated all beings from birth, old age, sickness, death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, unhappiness, and trouble.
With his pristine, divine vision, superior to that of humans, the Blessed One saw
Destroy all the fevers!
they eat and pierce the ears of women.
Later, the Heruka is generated.
“Nārāyaṇa, the gathered amount of merit produced through such a gift, as much as it may be, is still not even one hundredth of, and bears no comparison to, the amount of merit amassed by a bodhisattva great being who has first given rise to the mind of awakening and then, with a perfectly altruistic attitude free of hypocrisy or pretense, practices great love and compassion in pursuit of the liberation of all beings.
“While acting in conformity with the world,
for it is only proper that knowledgeable and prominent people like us visit our followers.”
It is having a sense of modesty and self-respect.
and will be victorious in disputes and quarrels.
This sūtra, Destroyer of the Great Trichiliocosm, Disclosed by the previous buddhas,
who had reached their goals; who had ended engagement with existence;
and similarly as one who actualizes the extrasensory powers and,
“The eloquence of bodhisattvas is not short of words.
“Similarly, it has not been revealed so that the applications of mindfulness might be grasped or not grasped,
They will never create a cause for doubt, saying, ‘You will not attain the highest wisdom.’
Similarly, they always maintain the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, and the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
gave a detailed teaching by chanting the following extensive verses to the youth Candraprabha.
One becomes master of the thirteen stages, There is no doubt.
Because a bodhisattva is not born into an inferior family, like a family of outcastes, flutemakers, cartwrights, or servants.
other merchants abandoned their goods and fled.
“In that same way, not having attained the samādhi, A bodhisattva is not esteemed By gods or humans,
“We are well trained in singing, playing instruments, and theatrical performance;
This is false wisdom and this is the fruit of false wisdom.
I should not linger here.
is the non-cultivation of the sensory element of the nose, the sensory element of odors, and the sensory element of olfactory consciousness.
They do not experience the sufferings of saṃsāra and are satisfied by perfect happiness.
Mañjuśrī, thus should a sick bodhisattva control his own mind in order to overcome old age, sickness, death, and birth.
“Kṣitigarbha, the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, has three bodies
They will not migrate to states of birth in families that have wrong views.
Bhikṣus, those people enter the miraculous city and believe they have arrived at their destination.
They themselves have degenerated from the pathways to the higher realms and to liberation [from cyclic existence],
Then at that time Brother Śāriputra recited this verse:
as well as different types of fragrant and delightful food and drink,
they became his followers in order to listen to the Dharma.
These are called the ten powers of the tathāgatas.
Moreover, all these points are comprehended through hearing, contemplating, and training in the teachings. They are not understood merely through words being spoken.
“My concentration will be one That even solitary buddhas cannot demonstrate.
confusion will arise and confusion will not disappear;
“Noble son, because they possess ten qualities bodhisattvas have a pure mind. What are those ten?
Because he is not sullied by any demonic activities and places, he is known as the one who has defeated the enemies of demons and disturbing emotions.
A peacock’s feather, fumigated with and wrapped in the placenta of a bitch, will remove vitiligo if rotated to the right.
That is the sixth strange and wonderful thing.
“The fire burning on the plains does not shy away from burning the grass;
“What, reverend, should the exemplar be accorded?”
Su­bhūti, it is because the natural expression of their present circumstances, though without entity, is still omniscience [and the rest].”
they abide, equipoised in the [other formless absorptions and meditative concentrations], down to and including the first meditative concentration.
a kṛtya,
possession of vast roots of virtue with no deficiency;
To them, however, in place of the wisdom empowerment, the skillful means empowerment should be given.
The Bhagavān having given him this opportunity, the young man Candraprabha asked,
As you behold all these beings without protection, wealth, or guidance, Noble Guide, please share the seven types of wealth and turn the wheel.
will not come to rest in omniscience.
and was revered, honored, and praised by Indra and the gods who attend him.
Nāga girls could be seen holding aloft various offerings, revealing the upper half of their bodies as they moved about in the sky.
The mind, young man, is taught to be without a nature of its own, to be without form.
the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline,
On this topic, it is said:
taught beings this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.
In this regard, ‘broad heels’ means that the bases of his two heels are broad, unlike those of other human beings.
“Su­bhūti, the finality of existence, the nature of the finality of existence, the real nature of the finality of existence, the essential nature of the finality of existence, and the defining characteristics of the essential nature of the finality of existence
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, the maturity of a great bodhisattva being also entails the seven branches of enlightenment.
“They should not even dwell on the notion ‘In this, my buddhafield, may the term “physical forms” not exist; and similarly may the terms “feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness” not exist.’
But another bodhisattva, pure in his inclinations and disciplined, whether householder or ordained,
Yet ordinary beings conceptualize the form aggregate. Consequently, some of these people Develop doubts about the Buddha’s teaching.
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings who are irreversible move about, they do so in accordance with the applications of mindfulness.
I am also fond of my wife; I, too, cherish her, like her, and enjoy being with her. Therefore,
and even for a single day rejoices in all these roots of virtuous actions, and then dedicates the merits toward unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, making common cause with all sentient beings, that one will generate many merits, greater than those.
Regarding this, there are also some concluding verses:
‘Oṁ, I am of the nature of vajra, which is the wisdom of emptiness.’
With dhyāna as food and samādhi for drink, They will attain the supreme, highest enlightenment. {21}
He saw with pure and unobscured eyesAnd had extremely great love and compassion. {63}
This is the time for cultivating the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four assurances, the four unhindered discernments, great loving kindness, great compassion, and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
The doors to the storehouses of cloths and gems appeared wide open.
“The bhikṣus who after my nirvāṇa Maintain my way of mendicancy Should teach this sūtra in the world And be free of any apprehension.
the Thus-Gone One looked upon this world with compassion and silently acquiesced to Great Top-Knotted Brahmā.
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of the devas concerning purification. Those are the four.
I have previously described The merit that person will have By maintaining that activity For ten thousand million eons.
Because the god was overcome with devotion to the Bodhisattva, he touched the garments to his head, holding them with both of his hands.
considering this objective, relinquish even their own lives for the sake of the sacred doctrine.
One should recite [this mantra] in a charnel ground in front of a painting of Yamāntaka.
there are destructive parasites known as the mighty exterminators .
She should be without pride, conceit, or hostility;
All these are the things on which great bodhisattva beings should not be fixated.
Maitreya, the Tathāgata always has time to answer such questions.
The Blessed One was residing at Vulture Peak near Rāja­gṛha with a large monastic gathering comprising many thousands of fully ordained monks.
They have given up thoughts of desire for other men.
Practiced continuously,
Emptiness is not other than the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, nor are the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas other than emptiness.
who desires to obtain all virtuous qualities should worship the Three Jewels.”
“No, Venerable Lord!
“Having dispensed that mundane gift,
“In billions of lives,
"ཆགས་པ་དང་། <tAttachment and stinginess.
The calls of crows, owls, vultures, wolves, and jackals ceased to be heard.
One should wrap this in a fisherman’s net and have it suspended in a doorway
the element of consciousness is completely purified;
Standing on the sun, which is on the moon, which is on the lotus. One should visualize Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa in front, Arisen from light rays of the seed syllable.
In this way, Su­bhūti, do great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of perseverance, acquire the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration.
or transmits it in some land or country, should be regarded as equal to the Thus-Gone One,
This indeed, Śāradvatī­putra, is the Great Vehicle of great bodhisattva beings, their great armor, and the maturity of the bodhisattvas.
They must have a great deal of gold, and many jewels, gems, pearls, lapis lazuli, conches, crystals, corals, fine gold, silver, and many other riches and belongings.
When they see followers of the Hearers’ Vehicle
They instantly returned to the divine realm.
“What other being is pure, has a good heart and all the qualities, and would not react against my presentation of the Dharma?” Monks, it then occurred to the Thus-Gone One,
In the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited is not discerned.
“Why does it provide relief for those who follow the Mahāyāna? Because it fulfills all the wishes for the Buddha’s Dharma.
He makes the crossing and bathes with thoughts aimed at liberating others.
“Kulaputra, a bodhisattva who has just generated the altruistic mind set on attaining awakening should train in these seven qualities.”
“Someone with such marks would become one of two things. There would be no third option,” they said.
Whether one is enthralling a man or a woman,
in the same vein, that the designations [of the other links of dependent origination], up to and including the link of aging and death, as permanent or impermanent, do not constitute a bodhisattva?
Being in saṃsāra, where there is no peace, is no good. That is why, said the Sugata, nirvāṇa is supreme.
Oṁ, Red Acala, hūṁ, phaṭ!
Likewise, from the existence of ignorance, formations occur and so on, until finally, from the existence of birth, comes aging and death.
What is a recitation instructor? He is one who recites even a single verse of four lines three times, which you then repeat.
The elements of water, fire, and wind are not the bodhisattva either, and therefore those elements also do not receive any prophecy.
On the evening in which the Bodhisattva entered the womb, a lotus appeared from below the waters,
“Su­bhūti, the purity of physical forms is identical to the purity of the fruit.
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Do not keep with any of the other numerous faults Of the mind that there may be, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {86}
“When someone has the conception ‘I must eliminate this conception,’
“Bhikṣus, who are those countless hundred thousands of quintillions of beings, who are as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges River, whom I caused to hear the Dharma of omniscience when I was a bodhisattva in the teaching of that bhagavān?
You attained the cloud masses of love and compassion.
hand gestures,
they do not partake of any physical sustenance, including butter, grain oils, honey, molasses, the sap of roots, the sap of tree trunks, or fruit juices.
"སངས་རྒྱས་བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་རྣམས་ཀྱི་མཚན་བཟུང་བ་དང་། རིང་བསྲེལ་གྱི་མཆོད་རྟེན་བྱེད་དུ་འཇུག་པ་དང་། རི་མོ་དང་སྐུ་གཟུགས་བྱེད་དུ་འཇུག་པ་དང་། མར་མེ་དང་། སྤོས་དང་། མེ་ཏོག་དང་། དྲི་དང་བྱུག་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་མཆོད་ཅིང་བཀུར་སྟི་བྱས་པ་དང་། བསླབ་པ་འཛིན་དང་། བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་དང་། དཀའ་ཐུབ་དང་། སྡོམ་པ་<tall beings will be liberated from negative rebirths and negative forms of existence by calling the names of these buddhas; by having relic stūpas, drawings, and representations made; by worshipping and honoring them with lamps, incense, flowers, and perfume; and by maintaining the training, way of life, austerities, discipline, and fasting.
Similarly, they teach the doctrines that these [conditioned feelings] are imbued with suffering, that they are not a self, that they are empty, that they are signless, that they are without aspirations, that they are calm, that they are void, that they are purified, that they are non-arising, that they are unceasing, and that they are non-entities,
“The deva said to the brahmin,
neither visible nor invisible,
causing the world of gods, humans, and demigods to have faith and assemble.
this is the transcendent perfection of perseverance, possessed by great bodhisattva beings who abide in the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable aspirations and the formless absorptions.
“Because they know the very subtle nature of phenomena, They have memory, understanding, wisdom, and realization.
“No, Your Majesty, we are the ones to offer the tribute.”
“Moreover: It can happen that all mountains quake,
Have no attachment to the powers and the strengths, No attachment to the dhyānas and the aspects of enlightenment,
The relatives said,
“Always make offerings to the jinas With parasols, banners, and with dwellings.
“How shall we arrange the seat of this holy being in the presence of the Bhagavān?”
arranged his upper robe on one shoulder, and placed his right knee in the center of a lotus flower.
“Bhaiṣajyarāja, what is the Dharma seat of the Tathāgata?
In the same vein, they investigate the applications of mindfulness, the correct exertions, the supports for miraculous ability, the faculties, the powers, the branches of enlightenment, and the noble eightfold path, but they do not actualize the finality of existence.
In that assembly at that time there were eight thousand bodhisattvas, who had newly entered the yāna, who thought,
Then, hold it in the place of emanation.
Similarly, Su­bhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, is neither expressible, nor is it inexpressible.
You shall hear more every half-month when you recite the Prātimokṣasūtra,
And those who have the true view, and those who have a pure view.
“For the sake of the poor, They become inexhaustible treasures, Causing those to whom they give their gifts To conceive the spirit of enlightenment
and likewise it offers the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth, the fruit of no longer being subject to rebirth, and of arhatship, individual enlightenment, and unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
and others who are as numerous as the sands of the river Ganges, pervade their own buddha realms with the power of their speech and proclaim, ‘You should place your trust in this Dharma discourse called “Complete Embrace by all Buddhas,”
the master of the thirteenth bodhisattva level,
And tormented by birth, old age, sickness, and death, Great sage, your compassion for them Will never change as you teach the Dharma of peace.
They remain in the recognition of nonexistence And they teach that which is certain and true. {130}
You attained immaculate omniscience beyond nirvāṇa,
and [the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path, have been taught without apprehending anything.
Therefore, have faith in the discourses of the Mahāyāna.
Monks gathered around and asked him, “What is the matter?”
They will not be intimidated.
These women that you have here are even desired by the highest of gods.”
Because the expanse of reality is non-apprehensible.
they explain the teachings to others in a way that is genuine and beyond duality.
[all those other attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, are not as well known as the name of the transcendent perfection of wisdom.”
they would have much greater merit than those [who establish sentient beings in entering the stream].
or walk along the north bank of the river Gaṅgā and give alms and oblations,
In this way, Bhagavān, we say,
At this, many hundred thousands of quintillions of bodhisattvas, such as Mañjuśrī, who dwelled in the world realm Sahā,
considering beggars to be spiritual teachers;
“The sixty-five travails,
And brahmins and householders, And also in front of other bhikṣus
The devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras,
As soon as Māra, the evil one, had heard these words, he stepped aside and stood there anguished and depressed.
Venerable Blessed One,
And each of them was five yojanas wide, And was particularly supreme, made of the seven precious materials. {3}
and the describing, explaining, demonstrating, and analyzing of these supramundane attributes is called the ‘supramundane gift of the sacred doctrine.’
Bodhisattvas are patient at all times, in all places, and with respect to everyone.
imperturbable correct conduct, resolute correct conduct, sincere correct conduct,
Through their generosity, ethical discipline, tolerance, perseverance, meditative concentration, and wisdom, which resort to notions of ‘I’ and ‘mine,’ they augment the round of cyclic existence itself,
That is how they described what had happened to them. I climbed down the magnolia tree and
likewise, Mañjuśrī, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas are pleased and rejoice when the lineage of the Buddha remains unbroken.
“ ‘For the one who has not heard this samādhi of peace, Practice without self-restraint will bring no realization,
you are free of any point of reference: I bow to you!
Su­bhūti, if great bodhisattva beings, while practicing the transcendent perfection of wisdom, do not grasp in the manner [previously mentioned], do not conceptualize in that manner, and do not conceptually elaborate in that manner, they will indeed practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
thus will I cease to accept gold and silver.
Such signs did the Bodhisattva see in his dreams, And he saw the fulfillment of his virtuous and excellent conduct.
“Do you not know even that much? I will show you.”
It is in the nature of gods and goddesses to have three thoughts shortly after birth:
Compared to the first, the second would engender a greater merit, an uncountably greater merit.
‘I plant the roots of merit of this generosity so that all may obtain the requisites that sustain life in the world, and so that these requisites may come together for me.’
In what way are they like the king of medicinal trees?
Noble son, it is the bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara who was at that time the son of King Attainment of Victory.
In order to bring benefit to mankind, He practiced the all-pervasive concentration.
Through the joy and the supreme joy that are born from respectfully taking to heart the Thus-Gone One, they became irreversible from unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening.
“The self-arisen buddhas themselves were visible, As beautiful as pillars of gold.
Even though billions of buddhas appear This sūtra will not be taught by them.
You have done much work for me by clearing away the rubbish heap.
Śāradvatī­putra! The purity of phenomena is not cognizant due to the inanimate nature of phenomena.
some are made of rubies,
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds act to pacify the suffering of all sentient beings.
rather she is patient and of good character,
“Ānanda! Anyone who seeks to censure those [sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage] would find no opportunity to do so, except in connection with the ripening of past actions.
Venerable Lord! Those great bodhisattva beings who undertake non-acquisitive cultivation of the transcendent perfection of wisdom
Whoever wants to be a ruler or the son of a wealthy merchant, Rich and happy with great wealth, Surrounded by an army able to conquer enemies,
“You have no ground to stand upon,
“Owing to the utter purity of all things, they do not apprehend a self. They do not apprehend sentient beings, and so on. They do not apprehend knowers and viewers.
they have no anger, they have no ignorance, their minds do not regress, and they rest in meditation.
Instead they will think,
“Su­bhūti, those great bodhisattva beings who have conviction in and concur with this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom will have the modality of omniscience.”
when she dies will be reborn in the world realm Sukhāvatī.
There are many hundreds of thousands of sandalwood trees.
With regard to other donors, they encourage and delight them.
If he says that, then all is well. A serious breach occurs if he does not say that.
“They do not see the one with ten strengths as form, But see the lion of men as the dharmakāya.
they would all, through the splendor of the bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara,
A chain equal to that of the āli kāli is coiled there
They should also commission this Dharma teaching to be written, and worship it with various clothes, ornaments, scarves, parasols, and carriages.
Their torso resembles that of a lion.
“Moreover, son of noble family, bodhisattva great beings should practice generosity to abandon two things.
The symptoms of being afflicted by a fine-winged nāga graha from my entourage, Blessed One, are as follows:
Further, Mañjuśrī, childish ordinary beings fall into the hell realms, or into birth as an animal, or into the realm of the Lord of Death, due to their own discursive thoughts.
When the bodhisattvas and great hearers here in the Sahā world saw the great display of mansions that pervaded this entire world,
Completely liberated in every way— Homage to you who are incomparable and unequaled!
“Mañjuśrī, just in the same way, all dharmas are same free from concepts, and free from distinctions.
until he passes into nirvāṇa, he will be worshipped by the bodhisattva Mahā­sthāmprāpta.
The presumption of self is total affliction,
And through billions of skillful methods, And ripens many beings For immaculate omniscience.
When becoming ceases, there is the cessation of birth.
It is difficult to become endowed with opportunity. Allow us to leave to become renunciants!’
Bhikṣus, training in discipline will lead one to abide for a long time in meditative concentration.
Similarly, Su­bhūti, the natural expression of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness, though without entity, is still consciousness [and the other aggregates].
Similarly, it does not enhance the emptiness of internal phenomena, nor does it diminish it.
My own diligence is little and weak; I am a lazy person.
A goddess living in the ashram went to the venerable Saṅgharakṣita during the evening watch
However, due to having a Dharma form bodhisattvas do not appear and are without thought or concept.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of a pratyekabuddha to beings who are to be taught by a pratyekabuddha.
you cannot be grasped:
“They beautified this entire earth And this fourfold retinue was filled with joy.
but, Bhagavān, we will demonstrate the power of patience and in that time we will teach this sūtra, we will uphold it, we will expound it, we will write it out, we will honor it, we will venerate it, and we will make offerings to it.
Mañjuśrī answered, “Bhagavān, they would not.
In the same vein, they dispense other benefits to sentient beings, including appropriate human resources,
Some you teach the path, Others you establish within the real;
With his purified eyes he will see those buddha bhagavāns.
Bodhisattvas, similarly, manifest the factors of awakening with the water of absorption.
you should ask, ‘You have not violated a nun, have you?’
“Bhikṣus, after that, his śrāvaka saṅgha became innumerable.
She must not be coarse, easily distracted, or prone to gossip.
Guide, ascend to me!
to strive for spiritual dominion;
acquire the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
those who cause the awakened mind to arise in those beings who have not yet engendered this mind,
All were known to have wives, children, and harems, Yet they were not enamored with desire, nor deprived of the bliss of meditation.
This genuine nature is unconditioned.
"སོ་སོའི་སྐྱེ་བོའི་བསོད་<tThey should have conviction that all merit—whether it is that of ordinary beings, that which is associated with training or nontraining, that of solitary buddhas, that of bodhisattvas, or that of completely perfect buddhas—is unreal and insubstantial, with no fixed place or location.
You are not a convert to a tīrthika order, are you?
Oṁ, Arapacana, dhīḥ! Svāhā!
“Lions have never been seen sitting on the ground in a row;
May Brahmā and Indra— Lord of the gods and sovereign over the realm of the Thirty-Three— The four guardians of the world, Māṇibhadra, Maheśvara, The rākṣasī Mahākālī, And likewise Caṇḍa Caṇḍālinī—
who desires merit should worship the Tathāgata;
There was an increase in the dreadful hells, And among the asuras and the animals.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of apprehensions. What are the four kinds of knowledge of apprehensions?
Ajita, I shall describe the merit that is accumulated through such a noble man or noble woman’s rejoicing, so listen well and remember.
Similarly, they teach the doctrines that that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are not a self,
Today this is aptly called Elephant Gorge.
So now that I have awakened to perfect and complete buddhahood, I will certainly do the same.
However, the designation ‘Tathāgata’ comes about in the world because of the voice of Dharma.
It is the utilization of the higher cognitions.
Ratnaśikhara, Ratnasaṁbhava, Ratnaprabhāsa, Ratnayaṣṭi, Ratna­mudrā­hasta,
It is called the moon, just as much as the full moon is.
Thus, although he cannot be withstood by someone of my feeble defenses, still, sustained by the grace of the Buddha, I will go to him and will converse with him as well as I can.”
do you think that the designations [of all the remaining sensory elements], up to and including the sensory element of mental consciousness, constitute a bodhisattva?”
“The Blessed One, the Thus-Gone One, is truly more amazing than anyone else.
“Having heard these four songs as if in a dream,
Then, at that time, all negativities will be purified, and all merit will be completely accomplished.
separating them from the attention endowed with omniscience,
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the real nature of the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty constitutes a bodhisattva?”
there was a young prince by the name of Mahā­karuṇā­cintin, who had an excellent body and was handsome and good-looking.
One who wishes to attain emancipation in things without defining characteristics merely wishes to attain emancipation in the element of exertion.
One could not even conclude the praises Of just one body hair of the most excellent in the world. {31}
Those people worn out by the road, With debilitating digestive disorders and cretins.
Similarly, the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration is neither heard nor seen, owing to the nature of phenomena being inanimate.
They all went to the city in order to see The slain, innocent Supuṣpacandra. {i}
All of the million millions of devas Who had come to see the Lord of men
At that time the following words come from within the sounds of the instruments:
His conscientiousness, devotion, love, and compassion have purified his mind.
the first closed his eyes as he sought to memorize the Saṃyuktāgama,
Taught in times past by all the thus-gone ones For the welfare of all the worlds.
They are the leaders of the body.
“Freed from pride, arrogance, and conceit, Always flexible, upright, and honest,
“Venerable Lord! In what way does the transcendent perfection of wisdom not attain and not apprehend even omniscience?”
The Blessed One is endowed with a golden complexion.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then wondered what kind of alms bowls the previous thus-gone ones had used to accept alms.
“Śāriputra, my assembly has become free of its dregs.
When he said the letter o, out came the statement: ‘The stream has been forded (oghottara).
it is the understanding of the noble eightfold path.
He rules over all the lands of the Śākya clan and is honored and revered by all the merchants, householders, ministers, and people in his court.
he should offer the gaṇacakra feast with wine and meat, with the teacher as the guest of honor.
The three letters and the sun melt
they perfect the four meditative concentrations,
Pleasing pratyeka­buddhas And millions of bodhisattvas With food and drinks to eat and drink, And also clothing and bedding and seats,
“Then Bodhisattva Ratnapāṇi asked Bhagavat Śikhin,
This concludes the chapter on how to construe the name Acala, the fourteenth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called “The Sole Hero.”
Bhagavān, these one thousand two hundred who have gained self-control were previously established as students by the Bhagavān,
but, on account of the essential nature, they do not apprehend sentient beings, nor do they even apprehend illusion.
An agent, eternal and singular— Thus the sages regard the mind.
the inconceivably numerous appellations for sounds,
Similarly, it should also be applied to the vehicle of the śrāvakas.
as oozing pustules, large pustules, small pustules, exanthema,
without basing oneself on the acts with immediate consequence.”
Here there is no use for syllables, sounds, and ideas.”
In this way, above all those hundred thousand quintillion buddhas, bodhisattva mahāsattvas in the sky held tiers of precious parasols, reaching as high as the realm of Brahmā.
What is meant by “the sixth”?
And have obtained the illumination of saṃsāra. Those are the qualities of wisdom. {28}
Such is the bodhisattvas’ perfectly pure giving.
Fully ordained monks, and so forth, are three-fold:
I served that dharmabhāṇaka With my flesh and my blood. {43}
One sleeps, Or is in excruciating pain.
that great bodhisattva beings do undertake training with respect to all things
“If today you grant me this grass, You shall reap the power of limitless merit.
With reverence and veneration they speak respectfully, pay homage, welcome them, join their palms, and bow to them.
Thunder roared and lightning flashed.
I myself will never [speak about anyone surreptitiously,] order someone to speak about anyone so, [or rejoice in someone so speaking about anyone!’]
In the same vein, according to circumstances, they induce and establish them in the absorption of the sense field of neither perception nor non-perception.
he took them as his teachers, venerated and worshiped them, and in doing so practiced chastity.”
“He afterward became a buddha in the world Who was always known as Sucintitārtha.
“Noble son, you may wonder how bodhisattvas never dwell.
“For so long he has abandoned killing and therefore he is the One with Broad Heels.
Bhagavat, if Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra did not see them
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Are always motivated to generosity,
likewise [all the aggregates] up to and including consciousness, are impermanent,
He stole out in the middle of the night and fled into the forest,
This is lying.
After twenty-one days one will obtain the speech of Sarasvatī.
How should they investigate the four applications of mindfulness?
The words buddha and correct conduct Have the same characteristic. {21}
When she heard the monk’s words, the girl’s improper thoughts became less overpowering than they had been,
Who is pure, kindhearted, easy to train, and a good teacher able to purify others?
‘This is the body on the basis of which the self is to be apprehended as the body,’
And why?
He is inconceivable in his eloquence.
We do not see him as a sentient being. If that is so, to what purpose has he made this great display?
Su­bhūti, sameness does not apprehend sameness, even provisionally. So
In the same vein, [other attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience,
“Mañjuśrī, if those who are possessed of excessive pride hear that teaching, it will frighten them.”
draped with nets of priceless gems,
Similarly, the purity of phenomena is not subject to affliction due to the natural luminosity of [all other attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience.”
nor did my ancestors, nor did ascetics or brahmins,
the knowledge of the extinction of contaminants,
When they were completely satisfied by eating the food, a rain of grain fell.
They appear only to disappear again.
The power of diligence is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
When meeting a Dharma teacher, one should respond with joy, faith, and delight.
He had many kinds of garlands and wreaths put up as adornments.
“While he tames trillions of beings for the deathless state,
“Gentlemen, the prince doesn’t understand the situation. Continue to collect tributes and taxes as you have done before.”
‘Noble one, I am a poor man who makes his living from wood.’“
I will liberate many millions of trillions of beings from saṃsāra so that they will quickly attain complete buddhahood with the highest complete enlightenment.’
Adorned with the red buddha,
“Thus, this twelvefold dependent arising—which comes from several different causes and from several different conditions,
And I, the self-arisen Teacher, request That you uphold this pure samādhi
Great Sage, now is your time;
Thus, that is not like saying,
They will engage in farm work and business, fight battles, and crave conflict.
The Śākya clan alone was seen to be free of faults.
there is then no sacrifice of the great compassion for all living beings living in the bad migrations.
If we die in chains, the way of the kṣatriyas will come to an end,
wisdom, like a thunderbolt, destroyed the view of the aggregates as a self, which is like a mountain with twenty peaks;
Above Kāmadeva there is a moon disk, and upon the moon disk a red lotus seat.
voiceless, immaterial,
This, again, is the sixth root transgression for beginner bodhisattvas.
The Blessed One is endowed with seven prominent parts.
The gods, who had requested this Dharma teaching from the Thus-Gone One,
There are immeasurably and innumerably more than those.
Śāriputra, these are the actions of paṇḍakas and ṣaṇḍhas who are gripped by desire;
the samādhi named Circle of Light,
Did you not, monks, earlier say to yourselves: ‘Venerable ones, look, here comes that mendicant Gautama, that lazy, gluttonous one who has given up on his ascetic practices.
“They are prepared for liberation. They will quickly attain the peace of liberation.
He is utterly unequaled,
make love to a woman. One will enthrall her.
Naṭṭā, Ratipriyā, Śyāmā, Naṭī,
“Śāradvatī­putra, it is as you have said! This mind [of the bodhisattvas] is indeed unattached to the levels of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas.”
(1) recollection of the Buddha,
and in the same vein, their cultivations of [all other attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, will not be interrupted.
Joining his palms together, he prostrated before the Blessed One, and asked,
Again, why should great bodhisattva beings practice austerity and undergo myriad sufferings for the sake of sentient beings?
They will also perceive the community of the śrāvakas and the community of the bodhisattvas who are associated with those lord buddhas,
It is the termination of all the multitudes of mantras. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {66}
It is the seat of tolerance, because it is free of anger toward any living being.
“Mañjuśrī, ultimately it did not truly happen.”
“Venerable Lord! I am inspired to say in what sense bodhisattvas are called ‘great beings.’”
All the bhūta creatures, Powerless, are today confronted.
reducing their bodies to mere skeletons.
Homage to Tathāgata Jñānārciḥsāgara­śrī.
let alone signs of wrong livelihood!
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield consists of the four immeasurables.
Due to their worship of the bodhisattvas their unsurpassable and complete awakening will be certain.
Yet when old age, suffering, and diseases conquer the splendor of the body, One is abandoned, just like a dried-up river is abandoned by deer.
and through non-analytical attention dedicates these merits toward unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, making common cause with all sentient beings, that one will generate many merits, greater than those.
However, given the situation, does the noble one wish to return to Jambudvīpa?”
“Mahākāśyapa, you go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
it is this: Su­bhūti, the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas teach that all phenomena are empty.
and upper stories made of gold and silver, the silver upper stories having gold pillars adorned with divine jewels and the gold upper stories having silver pillars adorned with divine jewels.
One should write the first garland mantra on birch bark, in the center of a sixteen-petaled lotus.
And just as this master was singled out by the tathāgata and perfectly awakened Buddha Kāśyapa
“We, for our part, will produce cloud banks of sandalwood and let a rain of sandalwood powder descend as offerings to the Bodhisattva.”
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the southeast, Padmapāṇi;
those of [the other transcendent perfections], from the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration down to and including the transcendent perfection of generosity,
Known as the mouth terminators , they eat women’s moustaches, thus preventing them from growing.
Great Cloud, Great Lion, Greatest of the Great, Great Ocean, Great Proponent, Great Hero, Vanquisher of Great Armies,
Now I am struck in both. I cannot bear being hurt in both places so I will run away.”
[3] they are not affected by poison; [4] they do not drown in water; [5] the devas protect them; [6] they attain a body adorned by the primary signs of a great being;
He taught the four truths extensively, And
They will know all the movement and activity in the minds of all those beings born in the six classes of existence in the world realm of a thousand million worlds.
immediately on seeing it all their ailments would be alleviated.
Enlightenment is subtle, since it is extremely difficult to realize.
When this Dharma discourse was expounded, the minds of sixty monks were liberated from all defilements, without remainder.
Even though they will not yet have attained the wisdom of the āryas, they will still have acquired that kind of purified mental faculty
They are empty because of emptiness.
This is their application of mindfulness to the observation of phenomena.
Abiding therein, great bodhisattva beings overpower the world with its gods, humans, and antigods, and
The brahmin Māṭhara thought,
those who desire a long life, or to have property and never lack it;
The non-grasping of a concept Is taught for the sake of detachment. {92}
He practices wishlessness but does not realize wishlessness.
“O Father, relinquish your fields and seek no further!
die among gods and are reborn among gods.
‘For that you will have to peel off your own skin and dry it in the sun to make paper out of it.
Who are the evil associates who entice them, so that they become afraid and terrified on hearing this teaching on the transcendent perfection of wisdom?
It is the joy of exploration of the three doors of liberation, and of the realization of liberation.
Through calling out in one voice to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara,
“Come, be seated, king of the best among men!
It also sees youthful gods, their bodies bedecked and beautified with ornaments, the finest gold, strings of pearls, bracelets, and armlets.
If you, the great tree of merit, depart.
having grasping and being without grasping, having concentration and distraction,
Had heard this excellent nature of phenomena, This teaching on the ultimate truth, And attained the acceptance of birthlessness. {40}
Upon each of those precious high platforms there were billions of devas
to win the hateful by means of tolerance;
“I have obtained today the highest treasure, The treasure of the Dharma taught by the Sugata.
This was translated, edited, and finalized by the translators Rinchen Tso and Chönyi Tsultrim.
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will have wisdom that is as vast as the ocean,
tathāgatānu­paripālite, sara sara, ayomukhi bhṛkuṭi, bhṛkuṭa­mukhi, kṛpe kṛpāluke,
Mahāpūrṇa, and Maha­rddhi­prāpta—together with many trillions of garuḍas.
As soon as the great precious stūpa of the Tathāgata was opened
In that universe, the trees emit a fragrance that far surpasses all the fragrances, human and divine, of all the buddhafields of the ten directions.
the bodhisattva Noble Avalokiteśvara, along with the monks and bodhisattvas, rejoiced and praised highly what had been proclaimed by the Bhagavān.
Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom accordingly
“What is experiencing the joy of the Dharma? It is never abandoning teaching, pleasing, and seeing the excellence of one’s yāna.
This is not Indra but the evil Māra, who has come to ridicule you.’
Likewise, the element of consciousness, despite possessing no form,
Moreover, if one wishes to see nāgas, one should pronounce the mantra upon a red utpala petal one hundred thousand times for each of its syllables.
Carrying spears, bows, and arrows, They run around everywhere, Harming and devouring People, horses, cows, and deer.
“In what way, you may wonder, do bodhisattvas transform all beings?
They gave us cotton robes.
the assemblies of yogins and yoginīs rejoiced at his words.
As they stood there,
There is the meditative stability named Taintless Lamp.
Venerable Lord! In which community will they be stable?”
Breathing through the right nostril— This is called the maṇḍala of fire.
They should praise and rejoice in others who abstain from the killing of living creatures.
Knowing this process of arising, He becomes an illuminating buddha. {222}
and whose knowledge had rent open the shell.
Once that, too, became lost, this practice manual appeared.
As the monk had taken a liking to them, he allowed their going forth.
“Su­bhūti, in the same way, one who wishes to attain emancipation in things without defining characteristics merely wishes to attain emancipation in names.
Instead, they sleep on a spot filled with leaves or grass very far from places with snakes, bees, meat flies, or holes in the ground.
They were a refuge and friend for all classes of beings. They considered practice, not words, as the essence. {40}
Each of the three robes are folded and laid over the ordinand’s left shoulder, after which both preceptor and ordinand rise.
The lalanā channel, with the nature of wisdom,
Then, as they engage in generous practices, their generosity does not make them conceited.
Senior Su­bhūti, it is because however you are questioned, you elaborate precisely, in the correct manner!”
When they heard these verses,
Through self-purity, he understands the purity of all sentient beings.
“Gentlemen, for whom are these tributes and taxes being collected?”
each the size of a chariot wheel and with many hundred thousand petals.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of incomparability. What are the four kinds of words of incomparability?
Son of noble family, certain beings who are not truly afflicted in their nature will nevertheless undergo the process of affliction in the three realms in order to bring beings to maturity; this is the bodhisattvas’ method.
Then, merely by the power of stability,
In a town, at a gate, in a market place— Wherever Tārā resides
One should then place it in a cremation urn and bury this urn in a cemetery.
And since he will have no home but yours, it is better that you let him go forth.”
Through the factor of formation there is name-and-form, and so on until the arising of a great mass of sheer suffering.
but even if I were to teach these benefits, I would not have finished describing the many kinds of benefits of this Dharma teaching.
Experiencing all phenomena as of one taste, it is beyond differences with respect to activity.
Śāradvatī­putra, just as the real nature is without foundation
They will not mention or disclose such [forms] to be the creations of demonic forces.
Mañjuśrī said,
Swiftly shower down the rain of true Dharma throughout the three worlds.”
They do not conform to the mundane and are difficult to understand and difficult to see and difficult to realize.
I shall hold it, and perfectly master it.
an unsurpassed guide who tamed beings, a teacher to gods and men.
“Senior Su­bhūti, why do you say that the non-arising of physical forms is not physical form, and that the non-arising of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are not consciousness [and so forth]?
Giving up their harems, and likewise All continents and all ministers and relatives. {20}
Disturbing emotions resulting from negative speech, harmful talk, adversity, criticism, blaming, cursing, beatings, threats, murder, bondage, and imprisonment did not perturb his mind,
Which is without an all-ground and beyond concepts,
These sense pleasures are impermanent and unstable.
the stride of mindfulness and insight,
One should eat the powder of the three myrobalan fruits with clarified butter and honey.
“Śāradvatī­putra, the ‘four formless meditative absorptions’ are merely conceptualized.
Homage to Tathāgata Guṇa­samudrāvabhāsa­maṇḍala­śrī.
I did not attain any qualities whatsoever through the other actions I had performed in the past.
“They will treat with kindness Those who give them food and drink,
“Blessed One, the acts of the bodhisattva great beings, which are non-acts, are at odds with the entire world.
May I hear only pleasant and harmonious talk, And may there be nothing unpleasant to hear or see.
With the form of a horse’s face
But when the outer element of earth is not deficient, and likewise water, fire, wind, space, and season are not deficient,
have all attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment having trained in this same transcendent perfection of wisdom.
the armor should be regarded as void because sentient beings are void.
likewise, they do not consider whether the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty have aspirations or are without aspirations.
Lord Vajrasattva dwelt within the bhaga of the goddess of the Vajra Realm, which is the essence of body, speech, and mind of all tathāgatas.
When the hundreds of thousands of beings heard that, They prayed for the supreme wisdom of the Buddha,
They do not engage with the notion that physical forms have aspirations, or that they are without aspirations.
One should eat bastard rosewood and the root of the rice plant together with winter cherry, sesame, and barley, having sweetened them with sugar to be of the same taste. Then one will become youthful again.
that the worlds of Yama will be cut off,
but the milk’s creamy constituent does not possess form.
Subtle and formless, it acts as the support of virtue, like a horse for its rider, or like a crystal focusing the sun on tinder, or like water reflecting the moon,
Furthermore, if a kṣatriya advocates the philosophy of the non-existence of causality,
the five [other] transcendent perfections are subsumed within this transcendent perfection of wisdom;
“In a young woman’s dream She gives birth to a son and then sees him die.
“Consider, noble son, the analogy of the sun that rises to shine in all the ten directions.
he will lay out the grass at the Bodhimaṇḍa,
Thus he had taken up negative qualities, while not taking up the mind of awakening, and thereby,
when great bodhisattva beings are engaged in conduct, they are fully aware that they are engaged in conduct.
But my sons, who are young, who are children,
In this regard, ‘long toes and fingers’ means that the fingers of his hands and the toes of his feet are exceedingly long, unlike those of other human beings.
She fainted and collapsed on the ground.
The domain of conformity to all things utterly pure in nature while manifesting behavior that suits the inclinations of all living beings, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
“A princely youth, Wearing Five Braids of Hair, Adorned with all the ornaments,
When I have arrived there I will reveal myself to those dharmabhāṇakas, inspire them to uphold it, encourage them, and bring them joy.
“Why?” “So that I may recite the Vedas.”
Then the god Sañcodaka spoke:
When they practice the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, they do not maintain their ethical discipline for the sake of a limited number of sentient beings.
I will ensure that their resources and possessions resemble those enjoyed by the gods of the Catur­mahā­rāja­kāyika realm, and the gods of the Trayas­triṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇa­rata, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin realms.
He spread out pure, divine sand And scattered perfect, beautiful flowers.
He cannot be clung to.
He is exemplary in his conduct.
they remain unaware of the magnificence of the thus-gone ones’ qualities.
this is the transcendent perfection of tolerance, possessed by great bodhisattva beings who practice the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable aspirations, and the formless absorptions.
And countless millions of Ābhāsvara devas Came to see the Lord of the World. {51}
and caused them to be receptive.
“Similarly, they neither associate the sensory element of the eyes with the limit of past time, nor do they disassociate it therefrom;
“Again, Su­bhūti, you have said before that just as space accommodates countless, innumerable sentient beings,
So go to the lord of trees and connect with supreme awakening.”
They do not quarrel out of jealousy, scowl with hostility, or vie with each other.
No one had even noticed that he had left.
How does it appropriate different bodies?
Pāpīyān, how is the awakening of the thus-gone ones distinguished?
Similarly, Su­bhūti, one who wishes to attain emancipation in things without defining characteristics merely wishes to attain emancipation in the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth, in the fruit of not returning [to cyclic existence], in arhatship, in individual enlightenment, and in omniscience.
I have a few questions for the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha.”
They will, however, continue to breathe out and breathe in with a subtle breath, and their life force, warmth, and consciousness will still remain in their bodies.
Then, Senior Su­bhūti asked the Blessed One,
He also taught many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of other beings, and they were all introduced to the highest, complete enlightenment.
On both sides of the road, right and left, he produced manifestations of residences resembling the celestial palace of Indra and divine mansions made of the seven precious materials.
“They have no longing for gold and no longing for wealth. They have no longing for higher rebirth and no attachment to money and jewels.
For its sake, chastity is practiced, discipline is observed, generosity is enacted, and the perfection of compassion is fulfilled. The attainment of awakening is accomplished. Māra is vanquished.
They wish the eye of insight to clear away the stains of unknowing
Venerable Bhagavān, in this afflicted buddhafield stained by the five impurities,
noble son, I cannot calculate the accumulation of merit from repeating the six-syllable mahāvidyā once.
He gets up, and says,
“Śāradvatī­putra, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom accordingly are said to engage in union.
“Yes, it would be excellent for him to worship in this way. Therefore, let the city be decorated!
With this mantra, tigers will flee:
the inconceivably numerous kinds of great learning concerning teaching the composite,
The Blessed One then addressed those gods as follows:
Because it brings the accomplishment of contemplating impermanence, suffering, emptiness, and selflessness.
he then descended back down to Jambudvīpa.
they think they should oppose this transcendent perfection of wisdom,
or you are of two minds about it, or doubtful, do not see him so.
and how do they fall into the clutches of evil associates?
His consciousness abandons the elements before assuming their function.
In the intermediate directions, they represent their respective goddesses, starting with Delusion Vajrī in the southeast.
one should know that these sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage have not been foreordained by the lord buddhas to attain unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
Unperturbed by the spectacle of the army of rogues.
Then the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Abhāva­samudgata, knowing the higher motivation of Prince Mahā­karuṇā­cintin,
Possessing the letters kṣa, ma, ra and ya, All the letters are adorned with e.
Similarly, when the moon-like bodhisattvas rise they brighten the faculties and lighten the mind.
“Kicking with his right foot,
Free from appearance, free from a ‘self,’
“ ‘I shall come,’ Vīradatta replied.
Monks, then the girls in the city of Kapilavastu, as many as there were, all came to the assembly hall where the Bodhisattva was seated in order to see him and lay claim to the gifts being offered.
Why did you become silent? Please tell us right away!”
The inquirer says to him: “Venerable, listen.
The outer creates obstacles to life.
Homage to the Blessed Buddha! Homage to Brahmā!
On the relative level, discipline is a gateway to all human and divine births.
The seeker asked further, “Gautama, surely you are not telling me that you have become a victorious one?”
Venerable Lord! Those great bodhisattva beings who are neither disheartened nor intimidated when practicing the transcendent perfection of wisdom and cultivating the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
However, Mañjuśrī, there is no Tathāgata to be found.
Through the essential nature of all phenomena, they understand the essential nature of all roots of virtue.
Here you may do whatever you wish!
Those of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three are better.
Then, by means of the Buddha’s power, Great Top-Knotted Brahmā, lord of the trichiliocosm, became aware of the Thus-Gone One’s notion.
He is the one who has actualized all the distinctive qualities of the Dharma.
“Then, Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that there is arising or ceasing with respect to that illusion?”
the samādhi named Love, Compassion, and Rejoicing,
In what way is the mind set on enlightenment indiscernible and non-apprehensible in thoughts of dedication?”
“At that time, all of those perfect towns Were adorned by many hundreds of parks,
Blessed One, how do bodhisattvas experience emptiness, how do they abide within the absence of marks, and how are they free from any fixation on their aspirations?
It is a recitation of entry into all Dharmas.
or the status of a head merchant or a god.
When the bandit turned monk admitted they had taken the life of an arhat, the monks asked the Blessed One about it,
it is difficult to aspire toward
They thought to themselves,
they are certainly not in disharmony with noble beings.
Having criticized those concentrations, absorptions, and attainments,
Divine son, understanding this utterly unborn state is awakening.
“Therefore, having now obtained freedom, A spiritual guide, and a conducive environment,
Moreover, Su­bhūti, while great bodhisattva beings abide in the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, even if all sentient beings were to approach them and cut off the limbs and appendages of those great bodhisattva beings who abide in the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, and discard them in the cardinal and intermediate directions, owing to the setting of their mind solely [on enlightenment], which those great bodhisattva beings have, they would not even resort to anger and
Once they have ceased to relate to phenomena with attachment, they will swiftly perfect the six perfections
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ aspiration that knows no dejection consist in?
He who meditates on these Dharmas Will have unending confidence. {15}
At that time thirty-two additional nurses were appointed to serve the Bodhisattva.
Bearing a skull cup and khaṭvāṅga, and so too a bow and arrow.
the entire land is filled with crops.
The sublime lord of men, with a joyous mind,
he draped his shawl over one shoulder and knelt on his right knee.
“Therein, there is no sensory element of the eyes, no sensory element of sights, no sensory element of visual consciousness, no sensory element of the ears, no sensory element of sounds, no sensory element of auditory consciousness, no sensory element of the nose, no sensory element of odors, no sensory element of olfactory consciousness, no sensory element of the tongue, no sensory element of tastes, no sensory element of gustatory consciousness, no sensory element of the body, no sensory element of tangibles, no sensory element of tactile consciousness, no sensory element of the mental faculty, no sensory element of mental phenomena, and no sensory element of mental consciousness.
they should apply themselves to liberation.”
The three abandonments—are renounced by the three vehicles, respectively, And those of the knowledge-holder vehicle adhere to the fruition.
and free of the habits of “I” and “mine.”
The king heard Māyādevī’s words, and then, Delighted and elated, he spoke to his retinue:
“Beings suffer from the burning torment of disturbing emotions.
who has many hundreds of thousands of samādhis;
This is your time, your moment; So, Supreme Sage, renounce your palace!
Since they do not entertain thoughts of desire,
Thus he has only one of two destinies, and no third choice:
Eighty thousand women welcomed the Bodhisattva and gazed at his countenance.
(10) The Blessed One is endowed with a contracted male organ.
“When a bodhisattva considers which things constitute non-virtuous phenomena, they include the following:
and graced by the sweet murmur sounding from gongs, single and multiple-stringed lutes, flutes, kettle drums, as well as the delightful and attractive cooing of pigeons.
The non-occurrence of the dharma and the sameness of meaning and expression are the same with respect to the non-dual meaning.
He attains the five higher knowledges, And soon possesses those qualities.
“The assemblies of each of those protectors Those sons of the buddhas— Guide, assemblies such as these, Where have they come from?
joined that assembly.
weeping and wailing pitifully.
“Friends, it is indeed excellent that you will exert yourselves in this way to protect the holy beings who uphold the sacred Dharma.
Fortified with milk, curd, butter, ghee, cream, and other nourishing foods,
“The Kośala family descends from outcastes. Neither the father’s nor the mother’s families are pure.
But those free of pride are taught that the very nature of desire, hatred, and folly is itself liberation.
People who had lost their king invited you and consecrated you to kingship.
“To whom should I teach this Dharma for the very first time?
bring the inner qualities of buddhahood to full maturation,
They do not consider whether the truth of the origin of suffering is connected with the truth of the cessation of suffering.
“They give thousands of millions of robes Of the value of millions of millions. They give robes with priceless value
“Noble ones, I ask you to contemplate, Out of compassion for all beings,
He should not be asked for prayers or looked to for answers.
and at the sight he spoke this verse:
or whether the tathāgatas have not appeared [in the world], the expanse that is the defining characteristic of reality is itself established.
[and the attainments], up to and including the understanding of all phenomena,
Goddess, it is impossible that I should become endowed once more with the qualities of an ordinary individual.
I even thought I would soar through the sky and see the four continents,
They are not attached to the thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment.
Censers made of all kinds of precious materials, Completely filled with agarwood,
and dedicate this for the sake of unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, making common cause with all sentient beings, and so on in the same vein as before.
“Why do the buddhas praise it? Because it is the benefactor that provides a medicine with infinite good qualities.
Then I will demonstrate my skills before them.
They have no attachment to the realm of desire, To the form realm, or to the formless realm. {70}
Son of noble family, bodhisattva great beings should practice generosity while actualizing these four things.
the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth,
like kings of geese moving with the speed of the wind, they will go to the realm of Sukhāvatī.
But you certainly have come very late.” He then took off his ring, which was worth several hundreds of thousands of silver coins, and gave it to her.
The mediocre should focus on the central deity in father-mother union.
That is the fourth strange and wonderful thing.
in a manner beyond reference point, please emit your sound to all beings:
Brahmā and Śakra, the supreme gods, hovered in the center of space;
“Noble son, the ocean is never late.
Present were Vema­citra, Balin, and Dhan­ada, rulers of the demigods, along with many hundreds of thousands of demigods.
On this occasion, the Blessed One’s teaching was particularly pithy and overwhelmed the masses of non-Buddhists.
Beautifully adorned men, women, boys, and girls
so the words and letters that had been taught did not engross him or take root in him. He became known as Yaśaskāma.
They have ripened the bases of miraculous powers, possess pure merit, and have detachment.
“Should you, for some reason, Have to travel to the south,
"ཕྱོགས་གཅིག་ཏུ་འདུག་ནས་ཚེ་དང་ལྡན་པ་ཤཱ་རིའི་བུས་བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ལ་འདི་སྐད་<tSitting there, venerable Śāriputra asked the Blessed One,
The Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha is asking if the Blessed One is in good health.
Those in the lower realms without all the freedoms are purified.
“Bhagavān, they are indeed non-existent. Sugata, they are indeed non-existent.”
When such a number had passed by There appeared a jina named Gaṇeśvara. {2}
who wish to beat the great drum of the sacred doctrine,
I obtained it, asked questions about it, preserved it, recited it to others,
Namaḥ saptanām saṃyak­saṃbuddha­koṭinām tadyathā Oṁ cale cule cunde svāhā. [The homage by seven times ten million samyaksaṃbuddhas is like this: Oṁ cale cule cunde svāhā.]
“In the very same way, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha does not form mental constructs
“Tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas, dwell happily!”
Having obtained a dead body’s eyes, heart, and tongue, Forehead and likewise nose, When the moon is in the eighth lunar mansion,
“ ‘Darkness’ and ‘light’ are dualistic, but the absence of both darkness and light is nonduality.
The brahmin ate and recited a benediction.
“Once you develop respect for me, Apply yourselves earnestly to practicing The teachings that you have heard,
Why? Lord, I remember one day
But that is the way it will be For the field of vision of their physical eyes.
Then I will calculate it.”
the samādhi named Vajra Womb,
“Blessed One, what distinguishes bodhisattvas who have achieved this absorption that encapsulates all merit?
They may also recollect a single eon, or from that up to many hundreds of eons, many thousands of eons, many hundreds of thousands of eons, and even many hundred billion trillions of eons.
Pāpīyān, when a bodhisattva does not pursue any trifling activities at all, such a bodhisattva will have set out with superior intent.
“Gentlemen, why do so many Śākya women cry out in misery in the twilight?”
like the fifth great element;
“What are the three natures of the elements? They consist of desire, anger, and delusion. What are their active factors, respectively? They consist of wind, bile, and phlegm.
It is solely by the power of their merit that one finds water and the other does not.
He sat down for a bit and then said,
“They who extend saṃsāra, Those individuals continue in saṃsāra.
‘virtuous’ or ‘unvirtuous,’
and consciousness are themselves omniscience, and omniscience is consciousness [and the aforementioned aggregates].
After performing rites of veneration over his father’s corpse, the lad left home.
should you abandon sympathetic ‌joy And enter the void?
These young girls now prepared various types of soups for the Bodhisattva and offered them to him.
Noble son, you may wonder about the character of the bodhisattvas’ steadfastness through merit.
the faculties that acquire the knowledge of all things,
Then the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Kamala­dala­vimala­nakṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña said to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Gadgadasvara,
“Knowing the characteristic of the true Dharma, He gazes upon all the realms.
Blessed One, the extracted water would be less. The amount remaining is measureless.
“In that way the name ‘bodhisattva’ is given, But if one seeks for this ‘bodhisattva’
If one anoints the eyes with it,
The essence of all dharmas is no-essence;
Yet the wind element does not pick up the flowers’ scent, nor is the scent of the different flowers perceived in the wind element’s absence.
and whoever comes from so far away that his parents cannot be consulted, their going forth should be allowed.
Young brahmin, are there any in the Middle Country like our master, the wisest of philosophers?”
When the nature of form is known, Then my body is revealed. {8}
and pure conduct is the nirmāṇakāya of all buddhas
If you ask what is the ‘emptiness of non-apprehension,’
One can also drive an enemy out by throwing incanted ashes from a charnel ground on the lintel of his door.
All things and living beings are just the same; they do not transmigrate nor are they born!
was ninety-nine quintillion eons.
Even divine forms cannot unsettle A wise one who is correctly trained. {16}
“You, son of the sugata, give an explanation That will bring joy and dispel doubt.
The Blessed One is endowed with the divine voice of Brahmā.
The Śakras value it above all else. The nāgas pay homage to it.
Should meditate on Hatred Vajrī.
‘I will not. And if I refuse, would you give me your sister?’“
After entering inside he established two hundred and thirty million beings irreversibly in the Dharma.
Sister, it is because all phenomena are empty of essence.
The infinitely many bodhisattvas that were prophesied later Cannot possibly turn back from awakening.
“Exhausting desire, anger, bewilderment, and affliction is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
These are the yoginīs, the mother of yoga
teaches them the path to enlightenment, and teaches the Dharma in whatever form a being can be taught through.
He reached there and he entered his home.
What is a cluster of stars?
Even without the seed syllable, one should meditate With one’s mind focused one-pointedly.
the love that is without conflict because free of the violence of the passions;
“What is the knowledge of the body’s condition? It is mindfulness of the body.
When one sees truly, one does not ever see any truth, so how could one see falsehood?
so they will be burned in this great fire, and will experience great suffering. But they are not dismayed at the thought of being touched by that great fire, they do not think of that suffering, and do not think of escaping from the house.’
disparaged, and criticized.
He was very happy, and felt joy and relief.
“Who is the Bhagavān Buddha?
it is so because of selflessness.
That which is summoned by light rays I have taught to be wisdom ambrosia.
That is the third strange and wonderful thing.
“Why is it unceasing mindfulness? Because it is the natural peace of focusing upon nirvāṇa.
This family must be difficult to defeat.
Perceiving that, the great kings Proclaimed three secrets:
Similarly, the water element, the fire element, the wind element, the space element, and the consciousness element, along with the nature of the consciousness element [and so forth], the real nature of the consciousness element [and so forth], the essential nature of the consciousness element [and so forth], and the defining characteristics of the essential nature of the consciousness element [and so forth]
All those perfect acts that you have performed, You must now share with sentient beings.”
It is the joy of being an ornament of the seat of enlightenment, and of not attaining liberation at the wrong time.
I can be categorized as a thing or a no-thing;
“Venerable Lord! Why does this immaturity of great bodhisattva beings occur?”
by practicing the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, and the transcendent perfection of wisdom, and
We delight one another. And they always keep my company.
At that time Chanda, who now cried even harder, exclaimed,
“It is I, [inquirer’s name].”
“If all the beings that a buddha can see Were simultaneously to attain buddhahood,
In proximity to this [book], they should not negligently engage in careless actions.
the teacher regarded as a guru, a spiritual teacher, and a revealer of the path.
Then, Bhadrapāla asked further,
At that point, one has become essentially identical to the semen.
smell odors with their noses,
If I have sex with this monk, I will be cured from my illness,
and form realms.
They introduce living beings to the great compassion and teach them the great love.
Mars, Mercury,
Since its discipline is flawless,
It is touched by śrāvakas, blessed by Brahmā, praised by Indra, revered by the world protectors, worshipped by Īśvara, extolled by the gods, and saluted by yoga practitioners.
“Why is it difficult to know for those without dedication? Because they have not previously obtained it.
Ānanda, it is because great bodhisattva beings also will attain emancipation through the transcendent perfection of wisdom, and
Su­bhūti, all these aspects of emptiness constitute the sameness of great bodhisattva beings. Having trained in these great bodhisattva beings will attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
“If you ask what are the ‘eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas,’ they are as follows: (1) The tathāgatas are without clumsiness; (2) they are not noisy; (3) they are without false memories; (4) they are without differentiating perceptions; (5) they are without uncomposed minds; (6) they are without the indifference that lacks discernment; (7) they do not degenerate in their resolution; (8) they do not degenerate in their perseverance; (9) they do not degenerate in their recollection; (10) they do not degenerate in their meditative stability; (11) they do not degenerate in their wisdom; (12) they do not degenerate in their liberation, nor in their perception of liberating pristine cognition; (13) all the activities of their bodies are preceded by pristine cognition and followed by pristine cognition; (14) all the activities of their speech are preceded by pristine cognition and followed by pristine cognition; (15) all the activities of their minds are preceded by pristine cognition and followed by pristine cognition; (16) they engage in the perception of pristine cognition which is unobstructed and unimpeded with respect to the past; (17) they engage in the perception of pristine cognition which is unobstructed and unimpeded with respect to the future; and (18) they engage in the perception of pristine cognition which is unobstructed and unimpeded with respect to the present. These are called the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
Let fall a rain of flowers on the Sugata. They scattered flowers while in the middle of the sky. {29}
Ambition, greed, and wanting praise, Fame obtained through deception, Seeking to exalt oneself And put down others:
And yet he does ridicule us, because he gives us a prophecy of our highest, complete enlightenment, without our having thought of it or wished for it.
That action of making offerings and prayers to the pratyekabuddha ripened
How should they train to be reborn in the god realm of Brahmakāyika?
By touching the earth with the palm of his hand, it trembled in six ways;
It also entails the completion of the six extrasensory powers, having resolved that all things neither come nor go.
You should place your vajra there
The analogy here is that of someone who travels out into the great secluded wilderness, where he suffers hunger, thirst, and exhaustion.
Venerable Lord! How do great bodhisattva beings, after abiding in the transcendent perfection of tolerance, acquire the transcendent perfection of perseverance?
being like an apparition, and being like a hallucination, something that does not come from anywhere and does not go anywhere.
die among animals and are reborn among gods.
“It would not be easy to recite all the praises of the jinas
(6) the total consummation of blueness,
You are the supreme physician who liberates beings from suffering
Similarly, Su­bhūti, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are non-existent, being inconceivable, [unappraisable, innumerable,] and equal to the unequaled;
immaterial,
Through divine vision, which transcends human vision, the countless, innumerable buddha bhagavāns in the eastern direction are seen.
He then squats with his two heels pressed to a grass mat on bricks so as to relieve pressure on the nerves.
There is no doubt that the target will be slain.
Then, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata knows the sameness of all dharmas through the sameness of awakening.
as well gems,
Hundreds of thousands of goddesses each sang songs.
Without such future existence there will not be any birth,
and as he stands before them, asks the following question:
The mother of the Bodhisattva could also see the Bodhisattva within her womb.
In the same way, son of noble family, bodhisattva great beings should see their bodies, made of the four major elements, as being like medicinal trees:
What is the scope of the skillful methods of the bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara like?”
owing to the fact that that [all those other attributes], up to and including buddhahood, are without essential nature,
dispense their generosity toward all sentient beings
Shielding his face with his palm, he turned his head and stared out unblinking and completely transfixed, but he was unable to see the jeweled structure.
But at these words the Thus-Gone One remained silent.
“Develop the aspiration for the state of enlightenment. Beautify the stūpas of the sugatas,
They do not consider whether the ears are connected with the nose.
who would allow me to go forth?’“
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess these ten qualities are endowed with excellent power.
If you ask why, the transcendent perfection of generosity is neither fettered nor liberated because it is non-existent. Similarly, the other transcendent perfections, up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom, are neither fettered nor liberated because they are non-existent.
Oh! Oh! You who when struck by swords and sticks Have the power of great patience and kindness.
the thirty-two major marks of a superior man,
“Reverend, as for one who has knowledge of the three and who has cast aside the three stains,
It then very swiftly takes rebirth.
You have been kings rich in merit and renowned for splendor: Nimindhara, Nimi, Kṛṣṇabandhu, Brahmadatta, Keśarin, Sahasrayajña, Dharmacinti, Arcimat, and Dṛḍhadhanu.
Hearing them he quickly enters In order to rescue his sons, thinking, ‘I shall not let my children, all these boys, Be quickly burned and annihilated.
commanding all worldly knowledge,
or similarly, the concept of physical forms,
killing, stealing,
As they rouse diligence, all obscurations fade away.
That everything is this way, You realized when you met Dīpaṃkara.
“This noble teacher too has strayed onto a spurious path.
Master, which of those sixty-four scripts will you teach me?”
This will cure fevers—a one-, two-, three-, or four-day fever, etc.
Śāriputra, knowing the different aspirations and different thoughts and natures of beings,
They are decorated with braided lengths of strings of pearls and silk, and they are hung with hundreds of strings of pearls.
There is no lord such as you in all the worlds.
‘Wait a moment, my dear,
the samādhi named Summoning the Asuras,
Venerable Ānanda, a monk who, because he himself is at peace within, sees all outer objects as at peace—such a monk has no conceited ideas about ‘the same’ or ‘not the same,’ ‘knowledge’ or ‘ignorance,’ ‘perception’ or ‘non-perception,’ ‘the conditioned’ or ‘the unconditioned.’
likewise [all the aggregates] up to and including consciousness, are calm.
Then, the Blessed One transformed the ground into vajra, and the bhūtas fled throughout the four directions.
On a lotus base within a jeweled vessel, Array the Lord of Secrets in the center,
Monks, in the early morning the four great kings and the twenty-eight great commanders of the yakṣas together with five hundred yakṣas arrived to meet the Bodhisattva and to offer him their respect and veneration, and also to listen to the Dharma.
It is the joy of accumulating all virtues, in order to cultivate the auspicious marks and signs.
They had subjugated demons and opponents and overcome all the activities of Māra.
He replied, “This is owing to the eradication of all conceptual elaborations!”
Mañjuśrī, all dharmas, non-arisen and unceasing, come into being after having not existed.
You know nirvāṇa to be unmoving,
Yes, they would, Venerable Su­gata!
So it is, Su­bhūti, that great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom should train according to this approach, which is without defining characteristics.”
you must spread a teaching such as this!
They will not construe the notion that conditioned elements are emptiness, and that emptiness is the conditioned elements.
He will be dedicated to purifying his own buddha realm and ripening beings.
In fact, not only does it not diminish, it grows stronger.
Since this is their ultimate mode, there is no counteragent.
Ajita, see the amount of merit that is generated by inspiring just one being,
And why? Because at that time, at that point, the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha was named King Glorious Splendor.
without arms, without legs, without ears, with leprosy or morbid pallor, or
He also teaches primordial wisdom endowed with skillful means.
Struck by the fiery light of Avīci, the former monk patricide exclaimed,
and gandharvas, rejoiced exceedingly.
were not accepted by a spiritual mentor and did not revere many buddhas,
One should know this to be the absence of skillful means which great bodhisattva beings might have.
Once they have gone forth, they should be ordained if they have reached twenty years.
who they are, how they are, and what kind they are; what they think, how they think, and why they think;
Merukūṭa, Merudhvaja, Merurāja, Meru­śikhara­saṁghaṭṭana­rāja, Merusvara,
That is how it knows, ‘I made these votive offerings,’
They offered them to the Thus-Gone One, saying to him, “Please regard us with compassion and accept these four golden alms bowls!”
the thus-gone ones wish to teach them the Dharma so that they may relinquish all the flaws of hardened ill will.
Kauśika, can you conceive of anything which you would wish to guard and protect, and toward which you would offer sanctuary?
If you ask why, it is because this vehicle of the transcendent perfection of wisdom is the vehicle of great bodhisattva beings and it is through this vehicle that they pursue omniscience.
the handling of ritual vases,
And may the special good qualities Arising from the sermons of each bhagavān be accomplished.
“Queen Vimaladattā replied:
“They reject all that should not be done; The wise ones engage in what should be done.
I am poor
He says, “Desires are like poles for impalement! Desires are like pikes! Desires are like the edge of a sword! Desires are like the edge of a razor! Desires are like a snake’s head! Desires are like bursting bubbles! Desires are rot! Desires stink!”
“Visualize yourself as the deity of activity, And place it in a box.
The teacher Viśmāmitra was appointed judge by the Śākyas, and he announced, “You are to determine who among these boys is superior, whether in penmanship or in the knowledge of scripts.”
They will be stupid, and unskilled in any craft. They will be in poverty with nothing in their homes. {39}
Similarly, they become absorbed in the four applications of mindfulness,
“The vinaya of the hearers is like a stone that cannot be repaired when broken.
Its high surrounding wall Is studded with all precious materials. It is sixteen leagues in height And made out of gold. “Each of its four directional turrets Is inhabited all around By vajra-holding yakṣas, With weapons manifested in their hands.
if, bound up in the eight adversities, you do not obtain favorable conditions;
Su­bhūti, if one were to ask in what way great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, encourage, secure and establish sentient beings, one hundred billion trillion in number, in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, in this regard,
Who are they?
“Venerable Lord! Why do great bodhisattva beings who are irreversible have no doubt, indecision, or hesitation with regard to profound phenomena and attributes?
The luminous body represents the body of the intermediate state.
and are neither defiled nor purified, going or coming is non-apprehensible.
If the son of noble family had manifested a display of unborn ultimate reality, the world’s inhabitants, including the gods, would have become confused and defiled.
I have pledged to fully awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood and
If you ask why, it is because all things are utterly pure on account of the emptiness of conditioned phenomena and the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena.”
Such is the bodhisattvas’ aspiration that is not inferior.
And they have constant love for all beings.
My spine appeared uneven and rugged, like a braid of hair with all its ups and downs.
there would be no unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, or the enlightenment of the pratyekabuddhas, or the enlightenment of the śrāvakas.
“What is the single teaching? It is not being reborn in the inferior state of a tīrthika.
They will know where the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas are seated.
Craving is the causal condition of clinging.”
How do they transcribe it, recite it, and gain the acceptance that comes with assimilating it?”
Noble ones, they become devoted just on seeing me and hearing me, and they enter and remain in the wisdom of the buddhas,
When he has attained his last lifetime
When he inquired who had killed the animal, he was told that it was Devadatta. The Bodhisattva said, “That was not good of Devadatta.
and then after that return to your buddha realm.”
In my conduct I use mere words But within this world remain within nirvāṇa, {12}
That name will not be found anywhere. One who knows that is a bodhisattva. {14}
Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is not a self.”
Such is the bodhisattvas’ excellent power of the retinue.
for example, to bless the element of space so that it would not get scorched during the eon of fire.
Like white and pale yellow birds,
all of them are transformed exclusively into consciousness.
Endowed with wisdom and likewise stable, They ask questions and do not become angry.
in that very life water began to drip from the novice’s hands,
‘We have been born into a family that holds the wrong view; we are not sons of a Dharma king.’“
‘I plant the roots of merit of this generosity so that I may attain an existence in which I take care of beings, taking care of them in two ways:
Come out immediately and I shall look favorably upon you.
will attain eight great forms of merit through this virtuous cause.
Durvāsa, and also Cyavana Came to the supreme city to see the Guide. {iii}
“The beautiful aroma of the guides of the world Spreads throughout the ten directions
and having studied it, they will retain it, hold it, master it and be attentive to it in the appropriate manner.”
Inside that temple hovered an identical second structure, which did not touch the first structure.
Śakra, mighty lord of the gods, then asked Senior Śāradvatī­putra,
They pay homage to houses, pillars, and rocks; clubs, swords, bows, axes, arrows, spears, and tridents.
He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of virtuous and non-virtuous attributes!”
Reverend, please grant me ordination.”
This, Su­bhūti, is the distinction between the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas and great bodhisattva beings.
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is like a mirage.”
and a teacher of gods and men.
Then, at that time, the Bhagavat spoke the following verses:
Does that mean that the man would be a liar?
“Divine son, ultimately all phenomena do not exist as something that can be apprehended whatsoever.
and similarly, when they teach the sacred doctrine to sentient beings in order that they might abandon their view of sentient beings to be matured, their view of fields to be refined, their view of enlightenment, their view of the buddha, and their view concerning the promulgation of the doctrinal wheel
“What are the six elements?
Will extract and consume The great blood and the great heart.
It is analogous, Blessed One,
They will also hear the Tathā­gata, Arhat, Genuinely Perfect Buddha impart the sacred doctrines, from the six transcendent perfections and the four applications of mindfulness up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
It involves repulsiveness, love, dependent origination, and so on.
were to engage in the act of sexual intercourse without first offering back his training with training intact,
Similarly, they discern feelings as resembling a water bubble, perceptions as resembling a mirage, formative predispositions as resembling a hollow plantain, and consciousness as resembling a magical display.
It is like the trunk of the plantain tree, having no core.
that mind and the factors arising from it then condition the formation of virtuous and unvirtuous actions,
To the memorials of the thus-gone ones and the statues of the thus-gone ones, he has offered golden ornaments,
“One should prepare the five maṇḍalas According to the division of the five yogins,
Diverse colors emerged, permeated infinite limitless world systems with light, and extended up to the brahmā worlds.
Similarly, why do you say that the non-arising of [all things], up to and including omniscience, is not omniscience [and so forth]?”
They all lack a self and do not abide.
“You have illuminated the ten directions,
and all those pratyekabuddhas of the present who abide in the innumerable, countless world systems of the ten directions
neither escape from the world nor failure to escape from the world;
“If you ask what constitute the eight aspects of liberation,
and who was encircled by many bodhisattvas,
“Then the dharmabhāṇaka Supuṣpacandra recited the following verses to that great assembly of bodhisattvas:
This will cure smallpox.
“If you ask what is ‘great loving kindness,’ it is an action in which the tathāgatas engage on behalf of all sentient beings, treating enemies and friends identically. That is called great loving kindness.
This is referred to as pure diligence, and in this way bodhisattvas have pure diligence.
Emptiness, Mañjuśrī, is purity;
Many thousands of gods, with palms joined, Bowed down to the feet of this resolute child.
The Bhagavān then recited these verses to the youth Candraprabha:
The nature of breath fills the six channels.
who desires virtuous qualities should take joy in solitude;
‘Alas, all of these foolish persons Will deprive themselves of the jewels if they turn back.
understand it, preserve it, recite it to others, promote it,
Venerable Lord, if the notion of sights as entities is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of sights as non-entities become a bodhisattva?
This concludes “The Prophecies to the Śrāvakas,” the sixth chapter of the Dharma teaching of “The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.”
along with a large monastic saṅgha of 1,250 bhikṣus, all of them great elders, śrāvakas, and arhats,
In the same vein, they abide in [the attainments], up to and including omniscience, which are neither fettered nor liberated.
When they noticed they had been sleeping on a piece of dry ground, they realized,
They will never dedicate it toward attaining the gratification of desire, political gain, wealth, or power.
Vilifying us, they spoke in verse:
and similarly, they do not make assumptions about [the other sense fields], up to and including the sense field of the mental faculty.
His fingers are long.
Holding fragrant, perfect nāga flowers And sat before the Sugata at no great distance. {iii}
places where natural medicines can be found;
fills the emanation chakra,
“And of crystals, and of emeralds,
How do they steer clear of weariness?
as well as to the king, the queen, and their court.”
die among animals only to be reborn among spirits,
I answer him by saying, “The afterlife is like and unlike this world.’
It is the absence of interest in honor. It is the absence of anger at dishonor.
Similarly, they will be reborn as a householder within the priestly class, like a mighty sāl tree.
which the herdsmen brought to the two merchants, Trapuṣa and Bhallika, saying,
May the vetāḍa action be interrupted!
Divine son, whoever does not conceptualize the sameness of all phenomena in not occurring as ultimately having substance, materiality, and essence,
I will do as the Bhagavat has instructed.
They are all respectful, their palms together in homage,
Dependent on this transcendent perfection of wisdom, great bodhisattva beings attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment,
Hearing the exhortation of the gods, he became as still as mud resting upon a boulder,
Māyā gave them to the sick, who all became cured.
For those whose hearts have become like a broken vessel,
I shall give a Dharma discourse.
Noble sons, even if, yearning for this Dharma,
“When he sees repeatedly Earth that is wet and muddy,
“When one speaks of the sameness of all phenomena in being utterly unarisen, Mañjuśrī, what phenomenon is that a designation for?”
at which point the group of six said, “Nanda and Upananda, what does this retired devotee know?”
with tearful eyes and stricken with agony, exclaimed the following verses:
“ ‘Perfect buddha, foremost among men, How should we venerate you?
similarly, that the designations [of the remaining sensory elements], up to and including the sensory element of mental consciousness, do not constitute a bodhisattva?
The god Lalitavyūha offered,
“May I obtain a prophecy like these!”
are the essence of joy.
As they investigate the origin of sentient beings they examine all phenomena.
They see perfectly the deaths Of beings and their rebirths. {55}
“I then pondered what must be absent for conditioning not to occur and what must cease for conditioning to cease.
When it rises, dimness and darkness vanish, and when the sun vanishes, darkness sets in;
Do not abandon those afflicted beings Who are agitated by the web of disturbing emotions.
They spoke in verse:
attains the five higher knowledges.
one billion Heavens of Delighting in Emanations,
Noble one, the time for me to pass into nirvāṇa has come.
Their bodies will be purified.
“If the beings that are in this world Were to recite the praises of the bodhisattvas
those of the Brahmapurohita and Mahā­brahmā realms; those of the Parī­ttābha, A­pramāṇābha, and Ābhāsvara realms;
As I consider for a while
it goes without saying that someone who hears this kind of Dharma teaching, proclaims it, maintains it, writes it, has it written, and honors the text or has others honor it with flowers, incense, perfume, garlands, ointments, powders, clothing, parasols, banners, flags, sesame oil lamps, ghee lamps, and perfumed oil lamps
like a magical display,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara said to the four-legged beings who lived there,
‘This noble man is going to the Bodhimaṇḍa,
Śāradvatī­putra, one should know that they would not be great bodhisattva beings.
I should maintain ethical discipline in this manner,
Having vanquished all the demon hordes, they are heroes.
Śāriputra, have faith in me, trust in me, and have confidence in me.
Such a monk should not be given soap or a toothbrush.
Those stricken with sickness were healed;
and apply themselves earnestly, as instructed, in this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom,
Reverend Upāli, sin is not to be apprehended within, or without, or between the two.
The eighth, fourteenth, and fifteenth days Of the waxing and waning lunar periods Are taught as auspicious times for everything.
You teach the Jewel of the Dharma,
For the real nature of the [sensory element of] the eyes
In all those buddha realms he saw blessed buddhas
adorned his body with two pearl necklaces, one long and one medium in length,
“Mañjuśrī, explanations given by magical creations of the Thus-gone One are not true, nor are they false.
“Mahauṣadhi, listen,” replied the Blessed One. “I shall tell you how beings that are not bound for a meritorious rebirth are reborn in the hell realms.
were to apprehend the physical body
This completes the third chapter from the Transcendent Perfection of Wisdom in Ten Thousand Lines, entitled “Non-fixation.”
We should pursue them within the ultimate truth.
The Bhagavān arose from that samādhi
With respect to that, a bodhisattva should understand well the cause of affliction and the cause of purification.
When people placed grass or cotton in his ears, it would stick out of his nostrils.
One’s complexion becomes sickly and one’s body emaciated. One’s hair and nails grow long.
How can you be so delighted When living amid a cemetery?
This was the method of the wheel of Arapacana.
Bhaiṣajyarāja, many beings will reject this Dharma teaching while the Tathāgata lives,
up to and including their unsurpassable, perfect awakening, and thus
He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of the five faculties!”
The Blessed Buddha pledged to pass the rainy season in the Kalandakanivāpa at the Bamboo Grove near Rājagṛha,
Āryā (Noble One)
“Bhagavān, it is wonderful! Sugata, it is wonderful!
“Then the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Jñānaprabhāsa,
The Blessed One has long toes and fingers.
The bhikṣu meditators have become vessels for meditative concentration, dhāraṇīs, tolerance, and the grounds.
he bowed toward the Bhagavān and praised him with these appropriate verses:
Son of noble family, a bodhisattva great being who possesses these four qualities will swiftly achieve acceptance that phenomena are unborn.
they make assumptions on account of those gifts,
I will liberate these beings from this mass of suffering.
“They practiced bodhisattva conduct For countless millions of eons.
the abiding nature of all things and the expanse of reality continue to abide, and these neither arise nor cease.
Similarly, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are naturally neither fettered nor liberated.
How should they train in the thirty-two major marks of a superior man, and how should they train in the eighty minor marks?”
free from distinctions.
Alas! For a long period of time these sentient beings have engaged with signs, that is to say, they have engaged with signs denoting the female gender, the male gender, signs of visible forms, and signs of sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena.
Youthful Mañjuśrī, however, made this plea to the Bhagavān:
those who have not venerated many hundreds of thousands of buddhas,
“Which of the Dharmas included In the vehicle of enlightenment are to be cherished?
do you think, Su­bhūti, that this illusionist or this apprentice of an illusionist would have established any sentient beings in the transcendent perfection of wisdom?
Some said, “The Kośala family has a large retinue, many mounts, and great wealth.
The sound was as loud and intense as when a blacksmith’s bellows is being squeezed.
Alas! You should once again confess and reject those roots of virtue!
or it is a deva, or is deva-colored, or is like a deva, or shines with a deva’s light.
Yet although I am an ordinary person, I will not die.
Holding her under her knees,
Likewise, those who wish to comprehend the four nourishments,
And having perfect conduct and a well-controlled mind: That is the way of the Dharma that the Sugata teaches. {88}
Hearers are not acknowledged among gods and humans and hence they do not receive this prophecy.
Then water makes the particles fall and renders the sky stainless and completely pristine.
“A Lord of the World will be present before them With the beautiful primary and secondary signs of the body.
‘In accordance with the aspirations expressed by the thus-gone ones, may this gift of crest jewels and crowns cause all beings to achieve the unseen crown of the head!’
he too called up the four branches of his armed forces
He sees himself victorious in the midst of a battle, With the immortals in the sky cheering him in joyous voices.
He actualized the Buddha and the Dharma and perfected the power of aspiration.
One should repeatedly enact protection and oblation acts,
Compared to the merit he would produce, the production of merit in the first instance, consisting of the bodhisattvas’ acts of giving, would not even amount to a hundredth part.
“If you ask what is the ‘emptiness of all intrinsic defining characteristics,’
And then yet later again, with time, it will grow buds, branches, foliage, flowers, and fruit.
“Fool, have you really committed this act?”
Things put in his nostrils would appear out of his ears, nose, and mouth.
and then accomplish the activities.
“Chanda, don’t badger me now. Instead, without any further delay, bring me my horse Kaṇṭhaka, well adorned.”
went quickly back up the southern road.
Physical forms are not one thing, and illusions another. Illusion itself is physical forms, and physical forms themselves are illusion.
As beings that seek the Dharma and practice the Dharma, They do not harm creatures.
it is because it does not abide in any location, it does not abide in any direction, it does not arise from anywhere, and it does not go anywhere.
generosity without expecting reward in the form of ripening;
some were being ground in mills,
Noble son, such are the signs seen within that pore.
When we saw two boiling iron vats standing empty, we asked,
to not serve noble beings; to attend to childish beings;
It is experiencing joy through veneration.
They should not dwell, in an apprehending manner, on the notion that ‘I, as a great bodhisattva being, should subsequently reach the irreversible level.’
The vajraḍākinīs dance and call out to Vajrasattva.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designation of physical forms as having aspirations or lacking aspirations constitutes a bodhisattva?”
and in the same vein, [the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path, are subsumed within it.
excellent unperturbed patience,
Just as for tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas miserliness and acquisitiveness never arise, so it is also for those great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Now may we swiftly become the best in this world; may we give to others the eye of Dharma.”
They remain in that knowledge of phenomena And are venerated by this world and its devas. {32}
A nāginī, a bhūtinī, A kiṃnarī, or a human girl,
the four assurances,
The temple was made from uraga sandalwood, which is so precious that a single mote of its dust is equal in value to a thousand universes.
and the outer form of his Dharma will remain for a further twenty intermediate eons.
“The eloquence of bodhisattvas is not unclear.
Brother Ānanda said to the Bhagavat,
meditate on it with unadulterated meditation,
They will reprimand themselves and disclose, give up, and relinquish negative actions.
and actualized his own awakening.
Sentient beings do resemble a magical display,
So why does he not look at us with circumspection?
“Next, purify gold and so forth, the seven precious things, And place these in a jeweled vessel or clay pot.
You wholly perfected the patience of a buddha.
Without having to rely on the statements of others, one becomes free from hesitation, doubt, and uncertainty with respect to the qualities of a buddha.
Such will be the physical states endured by those individuals who have defamed the sacred doctrine!
and they release those sentient beings who have heard this doctrine from birth, aging, death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, discomfort, and agitation.
One should add: ‘Destroy all my evil!’
the branch of genuine enlightenment that is doctrinal analysis, and the [other] branches of genuine enlightenment, comprising perseverance, delight, mental and physical refinement, meditative stability, and equanimity.
Are you weary?
A she-animal, a female hungry ghost,
he summoned his ministers and said, “Gentlemen, as the ruler of all who have been crowned and anointed kṣatriya kings,
Similarly, while they may become absorbed in the four immeasurable aspirations and the four formless absorptions,
“Elder, the two novices must be given a little scare.”
Accordingly, they decided to decorate another eighty thousand bodhi trees.
They do not know the path that will end suffering,
“The prince fails to appreciate the situation,” they thought. “Let us go submit the matter to King Mahāpadma.”
Blessed One, how do bodhisattvas express the Dharma, how do they follow the Dharma, and how do they become experts with respect to the realm of phenomena?
This king of elephants is known as Bodhi.
they do not then become frightened but are instead utterly and completely fearless.
They follow the Dharma but not based on going beyond Dharma.
It was the finest season, when the moon enters the constellation Viśākhā. The leaves of trees unfurled and the most exquisite flowers blossomed. It was neither cold nor hot,
“And also their various kinds of karma, Their happy and unhappy existences are visible.
One should eat this preparation with ghee.
‘What is the element of consciousness?
The young god donned a pair of glittering hooped earrings that swung to and fro,
He had already relinquished suffering and, as he now abandoned the feeling of comfort, both mental pleasure and displeasure vanished.
and knowing that those tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas had expressed their wish,
“If you ask what is the ‘understanding of the aspects of the path,’ it is the emancipation from cyclic existence that bodhisattvas acquire through the path of the bodhisattvas, inasmuch as they are not attracted by the vehicles of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, even though they understand the paths of all three vehicles. That is called the understanding of the aspects of the path.
Ānanda, the sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage
is it also for other beings?”
and, having attained them, they transformed their bodies to a height of forty-two hundred thousand leagues and sat upon the thrones.
They appear in the form of the sun and stars, And in the form of the moon.
Alas, these beings are helpless!
One can do nothing that would make him unhappy.”
likewise, they do not consider whether the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty are void or not.
One hiccups and pants. Likewise, one’s breath becomes cold.
Endowed with buddha knowledge.
they have the modality of the expanse of reality, they have the modality of the finality of existence, they have the modality of sameness, and they have the modality of the inconceivable expanse;
will see tathāgatas as numerous as the grains of sand in seventy-two Ganges Rivers.
Venerable Lord! When all things are without defining characteristics, how could a single defining characteristic be designated?”
They retain everything the Buddha has said.
and therefore the Bhagavān tolerated us and did not say to us, ‘This is the Tathāgata’s treasure of wisdom, which will be yours.’
and when he saw that the merchant’s daughter had become so weak he asked,
Yet no sound can be heard at this very moment As everyone looks with a peaceful mind to the Victorious One.”
This transcendent perfection of wisdom is established by means of deeds that are equal to the unequaled, and so forth, in order that one might not appropriate or become fixated on physical forms, and likewise, in order that one might not appropriate and become fixated on feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness, and in the same vein as before, in order that one might not appropriate and become fixated on [all attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience.
For a learned wearer of the saffron robes to fall is hard.
For its sake, the previous perfect and complete buddhas—the fully awakened ones—as well as the pratyekabuddhas and śrāvakas are honored like parents, objects of veneration, and gurus.
all of them are transformed exclusively into redness;
f you ask what is the ‘emptiness of unconditioned phenomena,’
Pure realms numerous as sand in the Ganga,
After the rainy season had passed, Upasena took up his Dharma robes.
Similarly, they teach the doctrine so that the bodhisattvas might cultivate the ten powers of the tathāgatas,
“Kauśika, thoughts of dedication are non-mind.
He had become a youth who did not indulge in desires, but was a young celibate, who had been keeping the vow for a year.
Beat the drums of merit and ring the bells of auspiciousness.
I had him killed today because of my desires, Which was extremely evil, and I will go to hell. {101}
“The measured is taught to be a conception; The measureless is nonconceptual.
All conceptions have been eliminated. Therefore it is called samādhi. {1}
and should be regarded as a place of worship.
When men and women see him, They cannot get enough of beholding him.
This family is a fitting place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived.”
and those who see the Buddha’s teachings as essentially desire will attain purification of karmic obscurations.
the bodhisattva is supreme over all the śrāvakas and pratyeka­buddhas.
Giving up a beloved spouse, son, or daughter is not comparable.
neither is it revealed, nor is it unrevealed;
As a result, they will be completely liberated from the lower realms and will not turn back from attaining perfectly complete enlightenment.
The second heart mantra: Āṁ
What condition has occasioned it?” And then he asked again in verse:
They would have no anger, And their love and compassion would not diminish. {33}
and they have been well trained in [all the other aspects of emptiness], up to and including the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, but they do not apprehend anything at all apart from those aspects of emptiness.
like a lion,
How many other blessed buddhas apart from that thus-gone one have these two holy beings served?”
“Bhikṣus, at that time the sixteen mendicants acquired, maintained, and understood that teaching of the Bhagavān.
“Similarly, how do they teach the sacred doctrine to sentient beings by means of the six extrasensory powers which originate from the ripening [of past actions]?
One then sees oneself as having a female form.
What wise person would be hurt by a gathering of such dependently arisen phenomena?’
“From them are emitted sounds, Countless numbers of the word buddha.
These are the eight supreme attributes that one will attain.
They should don the armor of the buddha body. Then they will illuminate the world system of the great trichiliocosm.
to quell both latent and manifest afflictions;
Then Nārāyaṇa appeared in his own form. He was vast, with the sun and moon on his shoulders,
The bodhisattvas possess it. It is realized by those who have the ten strengths.
for they gather sentient beings and turn them into suitable recipients for the Dharma that comes from the discovery of awakening.
that the nature of consciousness is emptiness;
So the Thus-Gone One wondered, “Where would he be now?”
Amid this, cultivate the practice of Vajrapāṇi. His feet are placed on the holder of the hare.
I go to the Dharma, my refuge,
and [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, have been taught without apprehending anything.
In this way, bodhisattva great beings who genuinely uphold the component of discipline will not deviate from these four things.
Similarly, the non-affliction and non-purification of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are without foundation.
So how would you explain what are words and what is meaning ?”
“Young man, the discernment of eloquence is teaching
The ones who have faith in this sūtra Have seen the tathāgatas of the past.
“They will have strong desire and strong anger. They will have strong ignorance and be conceited and arrogant.
Su­bhūti, it is because those great bodhisattva beings
Why did I suggest it? Incapacitated as I am by emotions, I trusted you would know what to do.’
“ ‘You have been long absent from the king’s capital. Weeping, they long for the greatly compassionate bhikṣu.
They have, out of compassion, in order to benefit the world, been born as humans in this Jambudvīpa through the power of prayer in order to teach this Dharma teaching.
Whatever those beings wished for, their wishes were fulfilled each time.
They have ended engagement with existence. They have liberated their minds through true knowledge.
The elders of the Śākya clan, both male and female, were also placed everywhere at road intersections, junctions, and many highways in order to guard the Bodhisattva.
‘Alas, those dwelling within cyclic existence are blinded by ignorance.
What are those ten? They are to be free of yearning and free of craving.
May I reach awakening, and then do everything so that these beings realize all dharmas.’
Similarly, [they discern] that consciousness [and so forth] are empty of the emptiness of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness;
wealth, or crops should worship this Dharma teaching and those who teach it with vast offerings.
The wisdom light of the Tathāgata Shines equally like the sun and moon, And it guides all beings Without diminution or excess.
Vimalatejā, the Dharma treasures of bodhisattva great beings who yearn for the Dharma are found within mountains, mountain caverns, and trees.
It neither bestows nor withholds the attributes of the bodhisattvas.
“May this elder Su­bhūti elucidate this transcendent perfection of wisdom.
At this point the Blessed One expressed his approval to the god Ratnavara:
while apprehending all those, up to and including the transcendent perfection of generosity, will make assumptions on account of [those transcendent perfections], up to and including the transcendent perfection of generosity.
“The eye, Mañjuśrī, is empty of a self and what belongs to a self;
He neither moved from the sun to the shade, Nor from the shade to the sun.
“Bhikṣus, those Brahmās wondered, ‘These airborne palaces of the Brahmās have become very beautiful, bright, radiant, glorious, and majestic. Who is this a sign of?’
I shall attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, and then,
“Those who possess this samādhi Are wise ones who will obtain
Indeed, Su­bhūti, there is no doctrine at all that is not included in the syllables and the absence of syllables.”
Then the physician thinks, ‘These sons of mine have deluded perception because of the poison or venom and so will not drink the medicine, but they are praising me. I will use a skillful method to make them drink this medicine.’
Venerable Lord! I do not consider anything which would attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, but which is other than illusion, or other than illusion-like mind.
Therefore, if someone wishing to go forth approaches any of you,
Subhūti replied,
Alambuśā and Miśrakeśī, Puṇḍarīkā and Āruṇā, “Ekādaśā, Navanāmikā, Śītā, and Kṛṣṇā Draupadī.
And also describes another enlightenment To those who are frightened of saṃsāra.
With this count serving as the basic unit of calculation, it is possible to calculate the number of grains of sand in ten Ganges rivers.
From these cognitive fields arises contact
Similarly, the applications of mindfulness are also free from contaminants and not included within the three world systems,
“Similarly, Su­bhūti, all things have the modality of generosity; [great bodhisattva beings, too,] do not transgress this modality.
when they cease, they do not think, “I cease.”
With the king of medicines he even heals Desire, anger, and ignorance. {35}
(5) the branch of enlightenment that entails correct mental and physical refinement,
So they set out for unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, saying, ‘Let us become a sanctuary for the worlds—a protector, a refuge, an ally, an island, a torch-bearer, a lamp, a helmsman, a guide, and a support!’
It is liberation through knowledge of the true nature, having gained the strengths of buddhahood.
Then, Śāriputra, the man gave all his sons carts drawn by powerful oxen that were as fast as the wind.
“Su­bhūti, if you ask what constitute the eighty minor marks which the tathāgatas have, they are as follows:
even though those great bodhisattva beings may have dispensed generosity from the time when they first began to set their mind on enlightenment, they have not conceptualized it.
I should undertake such perseverance.’
One should scratch her and inscribe the three syllables.
“Reverend Śāriputra, this goddess has already served ninety-two million billion buddhas.
Ajita, it is like this:
“When the Jina had passed into nirvāṇa, Following their proper conduct, they saw millions of buddhas,
and similarly, they do not entertain thoughts of hatred and delusion.
Let him follow this pure being.
The rākṣasī asked me, ‘Noble son, why did you sigh?’
“Nārāyaṇa, such is the skill in method of these bodhisattvas.
‘Mammā, mammā!’
but its nature is not afflicted.
By offering seats, one will attain important positions.
then reverend, what constitutes an impostor?”
Lately it has become common for brahmins to go forth.”
and nirvāṇa,
“this Dharma teaching is to be revered by the world with its gods, humans, and asuras.
Similarly, are [the aspects of consciousness], from visual consciousness to mental consciousness, also non-conceptual?
“They teach as if they themselves have desire And also have anger and ignorance,
Sugata, it’s impossible.
There he will not be afflicted by desire, anger, ignorance, pride, envy, rage, or malice.
hey will purify the negativity of body, and if they also purify the negativity of speech, and purify the negativity of mind,
There are extremely beautiful and delightful divine celestial palaces of crystal and silver.
do not consider the transcendent perfection of generosity as a designation,
They protected the Bodhisattva while he was in his mother’s womb.
Śakra, Brahmā, and the guardians of the world paid the Bodhisattva three visits In order to make offerings to the Guide.
When not observing any phenomena, they are free from evil.
Then, at that time, the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and
In that sublime residence of King Śuddhodana, all the provisions of butter, sesame oil, honey, raw sugar, and sugar-cane juice were never depleted and appeared to be full even though they were used abundantly.
And he has identical carts made for them.
During lovemaking, one should feed the root of black nightshade with betel to a woman.
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, the nature of physical forms is non-entity.
You will have the direct perception of the Sugata’s Dharma And you will attain the inconceivable buddha qualities. {4}
Will attain the accomplishment of Buddha,
"སྲེད་མེད་ཀྱི་བུ་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་སེམས་དཔའ་ཆེན་པོ་གང་དག་གི་རྣ་ལམ་དུ་ཐ་ན་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་འདི་གྲག་པར་འགྱུར་བའམ། ལག་ཏུ་འོང་བའམ། གླེགས་བམ་དུ་བྱེད་པའམ། ཁ་ཏོན་དུ་བྱེད་ལ། དེ་ཡང་སྤོང་བར་མི་བྱེད་པ་དེ་དག་ནི་ཁྱིམ་ན་གནས་པ་<t“Nārāyaṇa, I would not call bodhisattva great beings laypeople if they happen to even hear of this absorption, nor if they acquire it, transcribe it, recite it, and do not abandon it.
“Whenever a female form is seen In the world of the three abodes, It should be regarded as my form, Be it of low or respectable family.
This is the tantra on obtaining wealth, a kingdom, royalty, and the fruit.
Noble ones, you should do whatever will make it extensively widespread.”
It does not become an object, because it is free of words and letters;
“That great cloud, flashing with lightning, Is completely filled with water. It resounds with sound, Bringing joy to all beings.
and though they may indeed practice all the six transcendent perfections, and similarly practice in accordance with contaminated, uncontaminated, mundane, supramundane, conditioned, and unconditioned phenomena, exclusively in order that sentient beings might attain final nirvāṇa,
One should kick it with one’s left foot while
“Blessed One, will beings who have not produced roots of virtue ever even hear this Dharma teaching, let alone commit it to writing, commission it to be written, retain it, recite it, or offer flowers, incense, and incense powder to it?”
Some ascetics and priests Appear to be caught up in that.
Father, I will get hold of this monk And throw him to the end of the oceans.
They have no part of being a bhikṣu.”
The nature of these words Is profound, subtle, and difficult to see. {117}
They do not apprehend the emptiness of both external and internal phenomena as the emptiness of both external and internal phenomena.
Dissolve the body, speech, and mind of the aggressor Into the substances, and make the burnt offering.
And though one thinks for a very long time There will still be no cessation to thinking. {106}
Moreover, Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline
Monk, as all phenomena are inherently non-arising, they are tamed.
adorned by eight laṁ syllables, covered with a maṇḍala of Indra, and embellished with a double vajra,
Since the Bhagavān has taught the profound Dharma in this way, O Bhagavān
However, relatively, the vinaya of the bodhisattva great beings is aware of all the limitless and boundless worlds in the ten directions.
the Dharma will remain for twenty intermediate eons.
“Senior Śāradvatī­putra, I do not hold that [attainments] are designated with respect to things that are non-arising.
“If you ask what is the ‘knowledge of the path,’
to denigrate and be hostile toward bodhisattvas;
All is of one taste in being empty.
he or she honored each of them by enshrining their preserved bodies in a memorial stūpa made of precious stones, each as large as a world with four great continents,
You, Kuntī, and your followers should protect even those who only possess the name of this Dharma teaching,
Brahma­viṣṇu­maheśvara­śrī (Glory of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara)
At that point Mañjuśrī decided that the entire gathering should witness Māra Pāpīyān residing on a lion throne, adorned with all the physical marks of a buddha,
Mañjuśrī, with respect to what is real, no words can be found, because it is non-arisen and unceasing.
Similarly, with the water of training in absorption bodhisattvas cause the web of the roots of affliction to rot.
It is the completion of the doorways to liberation.
It is exquisite indeed, and overwhelms everyone, including misguided non-Buddhists, the countless wandering mendicants, and the naked ascetics.
“With regard to this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom which the Venerable Lord is explaining,
for the sake of a great number of beings, and for the benefit and happiness of devas and humans,
and they have continued to engage in an apprehending manner in the following views:
After they have transcended the sphere of the infinity of consciousness in all aspects,
the supports for miraculous ability, the faculties, the powers, the branches of enlightenment, and the noble eightfold path.’
“I see some bodhisattvas Who are bhikṣus living in the forests,
Those are the level of the śrāvakas and the level of the pratyeka­buddhas.
which is the family of all the buddhas, which is the secret subject of all the buddhas,
Do not look for the Buddha elsewhere.”
He also established countless, innumerable beings in irreversible progress toward the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood and then passed into nirvāṇa.
Even at the cost of their lives, they would never let their commitments fall apart, nor would they refrain from following through on them.
they are reborn through the power of their aspirations in those buddhafields.
and thus you have to understand the element of consciousness through the particularities of its causes.
as alms are not sought after noon, packed their begging bowls and Dharma robes,
it comprises the level of the śrāvakas and the level of the pratyekabuddhas.
and the defining characteristic of aspirationlessness.
Bhagavat, I am not satisfied by simply hearing about the six-syllable mahāvidyā.
The left knee resting on the ground signifies protecting the earth.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of fundamental ignorance and, in the same vein, of [all the other links of dependent origination], up to and including aging and death, as entities or non-entities, constitute a bodhisattva?”
Please explain about applying mantras— The pacifying and the enriching;
It is said that the lower sixth is situated At the center of the superior and disconnected ones.
Having donned their armor, even if they were afflicted on being struck by the clods of earth, sticks, or weapons hurled by enemies and assailants,
Thereupon, in order to make this clear, the Bhagavān recited these verses:
Nevertheless, childish, ordinary beings are attached to conceptions of a self, and so they think,
Divine children, wearing sashes, were seen moving back and forth between the laps of the women in the retinue of King Śuddhodana’s queen.
“Mañjuśrī, imagine a householder bodhisattva who attends as many buddhas and bodhisattvas,
all things are empty of all things, and
passing through those 18,000 other buddha realms,
likewise [all the aggregates] up to and including consciousness, are imbued with suffering.
Bones and sinews will be formed from the moon; And flesh, and other matter, from the sun.
“When the moon is in a clear sky, Its reflection appears on the sea,
From the right side, Siṃhanādin said:
and I became arrogant on seeing that I was their sole ruler.
“Sister, what you say is true. I must get going regardless of whether I am kicked out.
You are a wondrous lamp that discerns them.
Śāradvatī­putra, if great bodhisattva beings practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
From the sky tens of millions of gods folded their hands, Bowed to him, and offered prostrations.
For so long parents, monks, priests, spiritual teachers, worthy people, and religious people have been protected and defended by him,
I say that when any sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who have heard this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom; who, having heard it, aspire toward it;
The Noble Great Vehicle Sūtra The Perfection of Generosity
Such bodhisattvas may, alone and unnoticed, leave for a place of complete solitude.
Surely a being with supreme features, helpful activity, and wisdom light is here;
They experience suffering after suffering. I have powerful compassion for them. {112}
“Because the rain falls from the cloud, the great herbs Grow their stems, hollow stalks, and skins, Their spreading branches and their leaves, And likewise their fruits and flowers.
up to and including conditioned and unconditioned phenomena, then,
If you ask why this is mundane,
as well as those who worship such Dharma teachers with clothes and ornaments.
‘I have been absorbed in meditation.
Because, young man, for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who are careful, the highest, complete enlightenment is not difficult to attain, let alone this samādhi.
perceiving the Buddha is an obscuration,
with knowledge they illuminate;
the bodhisattva great being Dharaṇīśvara­rāja,
“I am powerful with the ten powers, Confident with the four confidences, And possessor of the eighteen unique qualities— The great sage who turns the wheel of Dharma of the Supreme Vehicle.
This gives rise to the five superknowledges, yet there is no attachment to them,
Why is that? Because if they become too weak they will turn their backs on virtue, and if they become too heavy they will become drowsy.
She had never seen, heard of, or experienced Such a rare happiness.
Later, as Tiṣya and Śārikā sported, made love,
Alas, these beings are suffering from disease!
one will confuse all of one’s adversaries and appease their anger.
pleasurable, painful, and neutral.
“Elevating self is a cause of affliction.
“O King, is there anyone in this city who can compete with me in the arts?”
Yellow is the wisdom of equality,
Having taken refuge in and seen these manifestations,
Thus, they see all these phenomena with the understanding that by purifying, disciplining, and comprehending the mind they will also purify, discipline, and comprehend phenomena.
Abiding happily in divine bliss!
They will not be fascinated by those smells, or intoxicated by them.
He saw that the bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta’s hand was burning and outshining all other lights,
Similarly, they do not think, ‘Through this ethical discipline, may I attain the fruit of one who has entered the stream, or the fruit of one tied to one more rebirth, or the fruit of one who is no longer subject to rebirth, or arhatship, or the fruit of individual enlightenment, or the maturity of the bodhisattvas, or unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment!’
contaminated or uncontaminated, conditioned or unconditioned, the attributes of ordinary people,
I shall introduce them to the Dharma’s guidance that has been taught by the Tathāgata and teach it to them.
They also entirely give up the subsidiary afflictions that are obstacles on the path to awakening and instead they apply their remedies.
“What is having a motivation that is not discouraged? It is not giving up the motivation and not giving up meditation.
It is ‘nirvāṇa’ because of a word. It is ‘peace’ because of speaking. There is equality in terms of conventional appellations. There are appellations in terms of ultimate truth.
As soon as the bodhisattva great beings and the great hearers had spoken these words,
As Śuddhodana’s son he abandoned his kingdom;
The connection with this nonexistence Results in a teaching that is one of conventions. {113}
“Noble son, for many years, for many hundreds, thousands, and hundreds of thousands of years,
Kauśika, it is because great bodhisattva beings and the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas are not present in the world dependent on the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas.
They do not live as householders and become involved in the affairs of householders.
Therefore, Bhagavān, we have contemplated many Dharma teachings that are similar to a rubbish heap,
“Maudgalyāyana, the strength with which I shot it was hereditary; it was not shot with any miraculous strength.
One should crush the fruit of elephant wood-apple and use it to smear a new vessel.
You have the feature of non-obscuration,
“Consider, noble son, how the god Candra rides a supreme mount and illumines the four continents.
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, bodhisattvas who pursue enlightenment through the five obscurations,
Beautified by ribbons, diadems, and jewelry, Who pulled my chariot with cords of gold. {85}
They do not make offerings to a tathāgata with the hope for anything at all
neither elaboration nor non-elaboration,
When those ordinary, immature beings who have not gone through arduous training hear such profound sūtras, they become extremely frightened and terrified.
“O Lord, they would be incorrect in stating that [such and such] is the defining characteristic of space.
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, They will be continually pure in celibacy,
gripping with the hand, gripping using the foot, gripping using the top of the head, cutting, cleaving, breaking, rubbing, target shooting without causing injury, target shooting at vital points,
will generate many excellent qualities and benefits in this very life.
they stayed still, looking at the Bhagavat without blinking.
For the sake of those sentient beings, when I have attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, then I should ensure by any means, through the four immeasurable aspirations, the four formless meditative absorptions, and the four attractive qualities of a bodhisattva, that those sentient beings act appropriately so that the faults of the perceptual views associated with those sentient beings do not arise!
It would be childish, dull, and bereft of clarity and skill.
“Therefore, the revealed nature of equality Is that all phenomena in essence have no nature.
Listen to the explanation Of that which is their field of activity.
“From now on, you should think of your preceptor as your father.
Whichever limbs one nails
Venerable Lord, if the notion of physical forms as void or not void is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of physical forms as such become a bodhisattva?
“What is knowledge of the past? It is the knowledge of causes.
“Similarly, these four applications of mindfulness are merely names, and the same applies to [all the remaining causal attributes] up to and including the noble eightfold path.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ fearless aspiration.
The postulant [postulant’s name] has asked the preceptor [preceptor’s name] to allow his going forth.
Su­bhūti, all things have the modality of physical forms.
That is how this great heap of suffering comes into being;
If someone keeps it in mind without distraction and writes it out,
he grabbed hold of the elephant by its trunk with his left hand and killed it with his right hand in a single stroke.
These are the eight great treasures that one will attain.
“Śāriputra, this holy person came here from the presence of the Tathāgata Akṣobhya in the universe Abhirati.”
Furthermore, your reality is just the same as the reality of all living beings, the reality of all things, and the reality of all the holy ones.
This great mantra removes all misfortunes that afflict bipeds and quadrupeds and accomplishes all endeavors, even when it has not been fully mastered.
(71) His face and forehead are proportional.
proclaim it, chant it, meditate on it with unadulterated meditation, promulgate it, and make it widely known to others.”
If he should exert himself, then all is well.
Whatever karma they create The corresponding result will come to them. {41}
“Moreover, Ānanda, the sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who resolutely wish to attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment should honor, venerate, respect, and make offerings to this same transcendent perfection of wisdom which has just been taught,
The effulgence of the Tathā­gata’s body was manifestly supreme alongside those radiances.
At that point the bodhisattva, the great being, Maitreya said to the Blessed One,
“Subsequently, through those roots of merit, after a hundred million eons had passed,
that faith, that tolerance, that confidence, that higher aspiration, that willingness, that volition, that renunciation, and that unrelenting perseverance until unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment is attained, will increase and flourish since they have been accepted by the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
The four meditative concentrations, and similarly the four immeasurable aspirations and the four formless absorptions, have the defining characteristic of non-disturbance,
they do not consider the notions that physical forms are permanent or that they are impermanent.
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who possess those attributes, indications and signs are revealed to be irreversible.
are endowed with pristine cognition that cannot be captivated.
Medhā to the right,
“Yes, there is.” “What type is it?” “Oh, it is but a poor one.”
sentient beings, having less desire,
from the time when they first begin to set their mind on enlightenment until they are seated at the Focal Point of Enlightenment, even for the sake of their own lives, do not deprive any sentient being of life,
As the Blessed One’s fame spread throughout the world, he became known by various names and epithets, such as the Blessed One, the Worthy One, the Perfectly and Completely Awakened One, He Who Is Both Wise and Virtuous, the Bliss-Gone One, the Knower of the World, the Peerless Guide Who Tames Beings, the Teacher of Gods and Men, and the Blessed Buddha.
We thought, ‘We have obtained a great deal,’ meaning nirvāṇa from the Tathāgata, which is like that daily wage.
Like a vase of unbaked clay, they naturally break.
Similarly, the pratyekabuddhas, the bodhisattvas, and the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas do not dream dreams and they are not dreamers of dreams, and so on.
They should praise and rejoice in others who cultivate the understanding through which the fruit of entering the stream is actualized.
How do they act according to the teaching of the thus-gone ones?
Both their body and mind become blissful. These are the benefits of endeavoring in meditation. {22}
Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the real nature of physical forms constitutes a bodhisattva
“The laypeople will come to think of them As their teachers.
You have great compassion that loves the world and seeks to benefit ordinary beings—gods and humans alike—by accomplishing their welfare and happiness.
Blessed One, if it is so that were I to become a buddha,
acquired eloquence,
One is thirsty, has red eyes, And is constantly suffering with fever.
When he saw them, he said to the monks,
Mañjuśrī, what are bodhisattva great beings, who have only one birth remaining, like?
urethral fistula, a latent or raging fever,
I will practice the six transcendent perfections until even the names of the temporal divisions of month, fortnight, season, and year, as employed by sentient beings, are no longer existent.
His elephants, horses, conveyances, and chariots all fell to the ground;
Su­bhūti! In terms of this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, those bodhisattvas of irreversible realization should investigate the transcendent perfection of generosity, the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, the transcendent perfection of wisdom, and, in the same vein, [all the other attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience.
They are all approaching their final existence and, surrounded by an assembly of gods, they each delight the gods with the appearance of their passing, demonstrating the gateway to the light of Dharma.
It is purity of action. It is the transcendence of the mind’s perceptions.
Similarly, they do not think, ‘May I be reborn as a universal monarch—lord of the four continents!’
“It may be possible for the winds to shake Those mountains declared to be unshakable
then it goes without saying that this is also the case for the thus-gone ones who have accomplished roots of virtue throughout millions of eons.’
and like someone who has perfected the accumulations. In this way he sat down on the grass seat and crossed his legs facing toward the east.
Knowing that, one knows Nirvāṇa, deathlessness, and peace.
so that they can hear from afar the voices
One should explain this tantra to him alone;
Similarly, Su­bhūti, all things have the modality of real nature,
they will never abandon their physical and mental perseverance.
It was unconfused, harmless, and without hesitation.
turn away from them,
“To whom can I turn to about my son? To whom shall I cry out in my pain? Who will give life back to my only son, Who is barely alive?”
There is no self in this body,
Those bodhisattvas who have the power of retention Accomplish countless benefits for beings. {209}
They will stand up and state, ‘That is not the teaching of the Buddha!’ {18}
what cannot be cognized by the ear, nose, tongue, body, or mind consciousness.
Monks, at whichever place the previous thus-gone ones, the worthy ones, turned the wheel of Dharma, at that place there appeared one thousand jewel thrones, made of seven kinds of jewels.
Moreover, ten million beings focused upon taking refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha, and generated bodhicitta for the first time.
“Nārāyaṇa, a bodhisattva relying on the true meaning does not reduce his words.
If someone were to make into the smallest particles of dust All the worlds in a realm of a billion worlds, And
The deceased’s body comes to possess the natural aspects of an ordinary person’s form.
You performed and amassed an incomparable and immutable wealth of Dharma.
“Where should he take up residence?”
“Su­bhūti, if the evil Māra were to conjure up the eight great hells with their sentient denizens in the presence of those great bodhisattva beings who are irreversible,
no-sign is stainless;
no-wish is non-disturbance.
Noble sir, how should a sick bodhisattva control his own mind?
“ ‘He possessed the Dharma of the tathāgatas. In the age of destruction he was a treasure of the Dharma.
When he said the letter au, out came the statement: ‘Spontaneously generated (aupapāduka).’
The Blessed One criticised lying in many ways
and said, ‘This profound Dharma is the attainment of buddhahood
and omniscience inconceivable, unappraisable, innumerable, and equal to the unequaled?”
The subtle Dharma that is difficult to perceive, And emptiness and peace that is unequaled and inconceivable.
It eliminates any views and brings about insight.
By reversing the conception of ‘I,’ one will not incite what follows from that.
do not have desire for any form, sound, smell, taste, or touch.
I pay homage to you, who know the benefits of sublime diligence.
What are these four?
“Noble son, bodhisattvas do not transgress the thus-gone ones’ points for training in the way that otherwise causes birth in the animal realm and, once born there, the unbearable suffering experienced by animals.
Mañjuśrī answered, “Bhagavān, yes, they do.”
While the Blessed Buddha was resident at the Banyan Grove near Kapilavastu,
the precise identity of clinging, the source of clinging, the cessation of clinging, and the path leading to its cessation.
the great bodhisattva mahāsattva Youthful Mañjuśrī,
With that the king may settle down, become gentle, and relax.
“As for truth, renunciation is born of true thoughts.
“My births have come to an end, I have lived the holy life, I have done what needed doing, I will know no lives after this one.”
“It did not fall upon them because they took refuge and adopted the precepts in the presence of the Blessed One.”
Bodhisattvas should live in freedom for all beings alike, and live without apprehending a self, sentient being, life, sustenance, being, or person.
Thereupon, the Licchavi bodhisattva Ratnākara, with five hundred Licchavi youths, each holding a precious parasol made of seven different kinds of jewels, came forth from the city of Vaiśālī and presented himself at the grove of Āmrapālī.
Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the real nature of the eyes constitutes a bodhisattva?
“At that time and in those days, the lifespan of the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ratna­padma­candra­viśuddhābhyud­gata­rāja
King Śuddhodana, sitting in the female quarters, thought to himself,
Then Vajragarbha asked:
“Your Majesty, who would you have defend a position first?”
“As numerous as are the names And aspirations of all beings,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sūryagarbha,
now he joined the Dharma-way of all awakened ones.
It became perfumed by very precious incense and perfumes.
“Son, the royal priesthood, for which you have made offerings to the gods, performed fire pūja,
Honorable One, having come here alone to a secluded place, I had gone into meditative retreat when the following thought arose in my mind:
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designation of sights constitutes a bodhisattva?”
They see bodhisattvas residing in perfectly enjoyable kūṭāgāras.
She then went south, but there as well she met the Bodhisattva.
Thus, if they so wish, they can place all Jambu­dvīpa upon the tip of a single hair.
is internally without support,
Through such acts they have to remain in hell for a long time and they develop the wish to hurt other beings in the hells.
There resounded from the sky above the beautiful, melodious, and gentle sounds of drums, without their being beaten.
Bodhisattvas likewise emerge from the waters of cyclic existence and yet they are not stuck there.
“And then at a later time The Jina passed into nirvāṇa.
When they hear of my past conduct They will make vast offerings to the buddhas. {49}
In the same vein, [all the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, are not one thing, and illusions another.
This can be undone by censing with honey incense.
Uttara­mati
By not being dominated by any propagators of other doctrines, one will have a voice like the roar of a lion.
“Śāradvatī­putra, just as darkness when the sun has risen is without foundation
“The Tathāgata is a reflected image
Because one resides in the mind—the mind that abides in the father’s semen—
Altogether a retinue of 680 million entered the palace, each sitting on a lion throne according to rank.
Ignorance and formative factors Are naturally empty and inert.
Even if all sentient beings had become pratyekabuddhas, who dwell alone like the rhinoceros,
“Reverend, I have come from distant lands just now and I seek to speak with you about passing the rainy season in distant lands.”
all of them are transformed into a single element, which is exclusively the water element;
he took off for the palace of King Śuddhodana surrounded by one million two hundred thousand gods, bathing the entire city of Kapilavastu in light.
There are two conditional, four secret, Sixteen natural, and two empowered chakras.
The strength of ten bodhisattvas who have achieved acceptance that phenomena are unborn is the same as the strength of one bodhisattva who dwells on the levels and has taken his or her last existence.
Their speech was honest with a smiling demeanor, their countenances without frowns of anger.
Similarly, they perfect the other aspects of emptiness, from the emptiness of external phenomena and the emptiness of non-entities up to the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics.
neither tolerance nor malice,
The monk officiant’s petition to ordain. After that, the monk officiant petitions the saṅgha.
Consciousness is the causal condition of name and form.”
To these, he applied himself with diligence, energy, and exertion
After the mother and the father unite,
He is invincible in his wisdom. He has the invulnerability of the strengths.
even though it has no perceptible limbs, eyes, or face,
an eon of both destruction and formation,
the knowledge of other minds,
exhibit himself approaching the sense field of infinite space, or
and recite the mantra according to the procedure previously set out.
“Noble son, you may wonder what their commitment to the vows of individual liberation consists in.
It is like a dream, being an unreal vision.
Su­bhūti, the transcendent perfection of wisdom is neither heard nor seen, owing to the nature of phenomena being inanimate.
In each of the mansions appeared 84,000 victory banners made of divinely manufactured fabric, each of them covered in a lattice of small golden bells.
I will by all means avoid this hell-like experience of the womb!’
Bringing all beings joy in this comprehensive manner, they empower them with the Dharma in order to bring them further perfect circumstances and joy.
“If a man were to stand before me and praise me With his hands together in homage for an entire eon, With many quintillions of verses While seeking for this supreme enlightenment,
Śāriputra, women’s bodies have twenty-five more groups of parasites that are not like the ones present in men’s bodies.
“Later, when the sacred Dharma has disappeared in that buddha realm, Mahā­sthāmprāpta will awaken there to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood.
They obtain their food through the Buddha’s merit, But these fools do not keep that in mind. {58}
[I myself] will never [rob,] order someone to rob, [or rejoice in anyone being robbed!’]
Such a monk claims, ‘What do I know? I know suffering.
“God, how do bodhisattva great beings carry out this type of practice of everything?”
The mighty strongman Vimalatejā, too, achieved acceptance of the Dharma accordingly.
For this reason they are all one continent of Jambu­dvīpa.
ndeed she is beautiful in form, pleasant in manner, and pleasing to the eye.
Having vajra-like meditative concentration, meditative concentration that is assiduous regarding what is correct and incorrect, meditative concentration of going via methods, illuminating meditative concentration, all-illuminating meditative concentration, manifest meditative concentration, precious moon meditative concentration, moon-lamp meditative concentration, meditative concentration without afflictive emotions, and victory-banner finial meditative concentration.
Thus spoke the Blessed One.
With your joyous speech, you delight gods and humans!
From the left side, Duścintita­cintin said:
Ocean nāgas, in the guise of brahmins and householders, gathered there and listened to the shape-shifting nāga teach the Dharma.
When existence ceases, birth ceases.
The venerable Maudgalyāyana then replied to the Blessed One,
In the emptiness of both external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness is not discerned.
Similarly, the transcendence of the understanding of all phenomena, the understanding of the aspects of the path, and omniscience is always without fear.
With the power of kindness, teach!
I have not been touched, I have not been burned by this great fire.
He has the power to know how all habitual tendencies are formed and how all defiled states without exception are exhausted. Therefore
“The followers of the bodhisattvas, Who are renowned and are as numerous
Those who have assumed such forms do not at all experience sufferings,
when he saw a poor man on his begging rounds holding a staff and a broken beggar’s bowl.
It is in this way, Su­bhūti, that great bodhisattva beings set out sentient beings for the well-being of the worlds.
They felt an immense love for the Guide And took refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha. {28}
Thus have I heard at one time.
“To the bodhisattva mahāsattvas he taught the Dharma that commences with the highest, complete enlightenment
the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Candra­sūrya­vimala­prabhāsa­śrī’s lifespan was forty-two thousand eons.
Similarly, they apprehend the sensory element of the eyes, and develop a view of the sensory element of the eyes in an apprehending manner,
Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, I can count every hair on all the four-legged creatures in the four great continents, such as lions, tigers, bears, hyenas, deer, camels, jackals, and so on, and oxen, donkeys, cattle, elephants, horses, buffalo, and cats,
attain the perfection of supreme miraculous powers.
I will give the Bodhisattva a palace Equal to my Vaijayanta.”
The Bodhisattva sitting with resolve for awakening Surely does not need any helpers.”
On the eighth ground, bodhisattvas are free from all constructs and afflictions, thereby attaining the body of peace.
 ‘By the power and majesty Of the buddhas and pratyekabuddhas, The śrāvakas of the buddhas, Brahmā, Indra, and the guardians of the world, “ ‘The yakṣa generals and Īśvara, The yakṣa warriors, And Hārītī with her sons,
and in return the monks gave them the leftovers from their begging bowls.
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection constitutes the steps of meditative equipoise.”
This concludes the first chapter, the introduction to the tantra, in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called “The Sole Hero.”
Those tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas who are alive and reside, teaching the sacred doctrine, at the present time, in the world systems of the ten directions, numerous as the sands of the River Ganges, are also non-conceptual, and they have abandoned all thoughts and concepts.
and for a hundred and forty thousand million years I listened to the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
Similarly, Su­bhūti, the transcendent perfection of wisdom is absolutely pure owing to the absolute purity of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness.
“Venerable Su­bhūti, is it then the case that those sentient beings resemble a magical display,
in the same vein, they teach the doctrine so that they might cultivate [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas,
These methods quickly liberate beings from negative views and actions, from unwholesome intentions, from wrong objects of refuge, and from a mind engaged in negativity.
There are some who only stand, some who don’t talk, and some who hold the vīrāsana body posture.
“ ‘Oh! Oh! You possess the Dharma and have marvelous qualities. You are as rare as a flower on the sacred fig tree.
In this way they complete the third concentration free of joy, and remain within it.
and in the same vein, the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, are non-apprehensible, owing to their utter purity.
pillars adorned with divine, precious jewels;
“The prince, the noble horse, as well as Chanda,
This sacred doctrine is compatible with [the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path.
they may attract by their generosity those sentient beings who are attracted by generosity,
They know with certainty the emptiness of phenomena And cannot be swayed by any opponent. {33}
Ratnākara, Susārthavāha,
What is the result of living a holy life? What are its benefits?”
Therefore, I will definitely practice generosity by offering residences!’
immediately on touching it the ailments would be alleviated by the brilliance of this precious gemstone.
They will not proceed through faith in others,
“Again, Śāradvatī­putra, suppose this wingless bird while descending from there were to think,
When the guide knows that they have rested, he causes the miraculous city to vanish.
“Divine son, the utterly unarisen does not comprehend the utterly unarisen.
Large boils will form On the right side of the rib cage.
seen as a heap of jewels;
The sword, the accomplishment of the netherworld, Invisibility, the extraction of essences,
Their hair is in disarray and they wail, Tormented by their craving for food.
“You see this most excellent being here in this city,
“Since I know the way to magnetize, I gather beings at my side.
You remain in the certainty of supreme wisdom And cannot be defeated by adversaries. {11}
will even lead to the state of awakening in this very lifetime.
Supreme human, knowing That there is for us this definite opportunity, Jina, sprinkle amrita upon us And give to us a prophecy.
Dedicating this toward supreme enlightenment, Saying, ‘May we attain that yāna!’ {15}
“You shall memorize the Saṃyuktāgama.”
In the same way that evil spirits have power over fearful men
A holy being, he is righteous and has gained respect.
and similarly, that the gods of [the other realms], up to and including Akaniṣṭha, are discerned.
As appropriate objects for others’ generosity, they are worthy recipients of offerings.
Son of noble family, you can also consider the accumulations of generosity and discipline as analogous to the trails of birds in the sky,
they should not fall under their power.
the seven worlds of the animate and inanimate.
Next the Bodhisattva asked,
And, Mañjuśrī, Śakra, lord of the gods, becomes so intensely and continuously oblivious from playing with, enjoying, and delighting himself with his divine pleasures
Among all Dharma teachings this is the most profound Dharma teaching.
Ornament the streets, crossroads, intersections, and marketplaces.
In the same way, the element of consciousness, through actions that lean toward non-merit, produces bad rebirths.
“Then the physician, wishing to use a skillful method to make his sons drink the medicine, says to them, ‘Noble ones, I am old, advanced in years, and aged.
Nor do they consider all these three aspects as emptiness.
they worshiped the Thus-Gone One, his saṅgha of monks, and the gathering of bodhisattvas
However, when one searches for phenomena, they disappear and cannot be observed.
Yet the bodhisattvas will obtain the absorption of remembering the Buddha.
They contain incantations and infinite gateways to the doctrine laid out in tomes yet to be discovered.
If you ask what these seven are,
they will examine where the anger came from, where it ceases, what it arose through, how it arose, and the reason it arose.
In the commotion, one bandit escaped in the midst of a crowded street and approached a monk in the Jetavana and said,
know them to arise from the mind’s dance.
the love that is without formality because it is pure in motivation;
“Venerable Lord! Since such false imaginations do not exist in this expanse of reality,
they are an amazement and wonder in this world; and they have attained great diligence, strength, and might.
“When one is old and youth has passed, Like a tree struck by lightning, One is worn out and terrifying to others, like a ruined house.
where it fully experiences its roots of non-virtue,
“In that way they will see in their bodies
“ ‘The description of designations and appellations, The continual avoidance of the suffering of saṃsāra,
They cease and die when they lack the collection.
who teaches the six perfections;
conduct that is inviolate, conduct that is beyond conceptualization, conduct that is praised by the āryas, and conduct that is praised by the wise.
May I apply the medicine of the three gateways to liberation—the remedy that employs means, wisdom, and knowledge.
is there no imputation of [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas?
He is established in the wisdom of the buddha bhagavāns of the past, future, and present.
that some are on the first ground and some abide on the tenth,
Moreover, Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings know that this bodhisattva has been foreordained by the tathāgatas to attain unsurpassed and genuinely perfect enlightenment
“Noble son, unvirtuous acts cause sentient beings to take birth in the hells and,
Their body is well formed.
one will become identical to Vāgīśvara.
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, actualize the extrasensory power of realizing the recollection of past lives,
not being saddened by disease; not being frightened by death;
I have safeguarded him the whole day, but you must safeguard him through the night.
This light illuminated infinite, limitless world systems, while resounding with the phrase, “This Dharma discourse is blessed by the Thus-Gone One, the Foe-Destroyer, the Completely Perfect Buddha!”
When the second level of the fragrant temple was illuminated, the light went farther and illuminated the outer chamber of the fragrant temple.
Monks, the Bodhisattva knew that Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, was arriving together with his retinue, and again he raised his golden-colored right hand.
and he heard this samādhi from all those tathāgatas.
The shape-shifting nāga asked, “Noble one, why have you become pallid, emaciated, feeble, withered, thin, and weak?”
so, Ānanda, the tathāgatas are diverse as to their physical bodies but do not differ as to their unimpeded gnosis.
see persons who kill living creatures, and [commit other non-virtuous actions], up to and including the holding of wrong views; who are short-lived, severely afflicted, sallow, feeble, under-resourced, or born into a bad family; or people who are mutilated, or debased in virtue,
Their consorts are the means of unification, Their music is the teaching of the Dharma.
They venerate the emanations of the lord buddhas who are exclusively neither fettered nor liberated.
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, it is because both things that arise and things that are non-arising are neither conjoined nor disjoined, and
“I have taught this excellent Dharma But if you do not practice it well
“What is contentment with having no high reputation? It is being pleased with whatever there is.
I will make ink from my blood,
the cessation of sensation arrests craving, the cessation of craving arrests grasping,
“A scribe, a princess,
“Divine being, moreover, when bodhisattvas practice concentration on all phenomena being the same and having no differences,
When he saw that they had gathered along with his armies, his retinue, his generals, and his gatekeepers, he addressed them with these verses:
Monks, when the gods Śāntamati and Lalitavyūha understood the Bodhisattva’s determination,
Seeing no one around, he thought, “What will I do if the merchants have left?
“Mañjuśrī, a long time in the past, incalculable, immeasurable, measureless, inconceivable, unfathomable eons ago,
In the same vein, how are [all attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, without limits?”
Mañjuśrī, sentient beings experience space as being low or high, according to whether the place is low, middling, or high.
Protector of the World, your mind is vast, Like the unlimited sky.
The son of noble family will appear to them in the form of a human being, a wild animal, a bird, in his own form, or as a body that corresponds to their fortune of merit.
this is consciousness.
and dispenses generosity, maintains ethical discipline, practices tolerance, cultivates perseverance, becomes equipoised in meditative concentration,
“ ‘Shame upon this sinful mind that creates calamity! Shame upon this kingship of pride and arrogance!
Day and night they seek for Thousands of millions of sūtras. {127}
and who wish to fulfil the roots of virtue so that they never regress into the three lower realms,
That is to say, they give food to those who need food,
The wise always hasten to their presence.
These follow because they have faith in me, Without having knowledge through their own wisdom.
“The god replied,
Whoever remembers this Dharma discourse or carries it with them, who reads it, masters it, or disseminates it among other people,
owing to the emptiness of non-entities,
holds a book that embodies all statements,
“Divine son, how was the poison neutralized?”
the treasure of the mind of awakening by maintaining the lineage of the Three Jewels,
there appeared eighty-four hundred thousand quintillion lotuses with gold stems, silver petals, and pericarps the color of flame of the forest flowers.
the bodhisattva great being Prati­saṃvitprāpta,
“No.”
They have not been conditioned by [the attributes and attainments], extending from the applications of mindfulness, and so on, up to and including omniscience.
“After I have passed into nirvāṇa, in future times When the Dharma is being destroyed
the sensory element of tactile consciousness, the sensory element of the mental faculty, the sensory element of mental phenomena,
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin gave him a great offering of parasols, shoes, cloth, adornments, scents, and ointments, and placing his palms together in front of the dharmabhāṇaka,
scent, and taste will reside.
Making common cause with all sentient beings, they dedicate these roots of virtue exclusively to unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
“Like the fierce and terrifying inferno, when this eon comes to an end, Old age, sickness, and death bring great and terrible fear.
In this way they came running, throwing their limbs in the air and rocking their bodies.
We do not understand it, we are not interested in it, and we do not believe in it. Therefore, we have also left the gathering.”
That Māṭhara had no confidence to respond was damning and among the reasons he was vanquished.
These are your homes with food; homes with drink; and homes with clothes and a variety of multicolored beds, beautiful gardens, and beautiful pools.
The gods speak truthfully. The earth abides truthfully. The Buddha and the Dharma too are true. May truth reign! Not deception!
along with many thousands of other gods, will deliberately follow them.
And, as the Buddha, vanquished the unbelievers’ gatherings.
Thereupon, the Buddha said to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
whenever they do not engage with the notions that [all attainments], up to and including omniscience, are with attachment or that they are without attachment.
“I was in the past attached to views. I was an esteemed tīrthika mendicant.
Su­bhūti, it is because the emptiness of the eyes will not attain emancipation from the three world systems, and
And the experience of the victorious ones is entirely inconceivable.
Their knowledge is boundless.
That is called the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics.
The Bhagavān answered, “Mañjuśrī, what do you think?
How are they delightful to accompany?
is neither afflicted nor purified, and is neither enhanced nor diminished,
‘We have come from a total of Fifty quintillion worlds.
They have become trained when they do not apprehend generosity, awakening, a self, or another.
Prostrations to every syllable of the holy Dharma, such as the mother of all tathāgatas, the Prajñāpāramitā.
those individual followers of the vehicle of the bodhisattvas have previously heard this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom from the lord buddhas in other buddhafields,
Young man, those are the tathāgata’s four kinds of inconceivably numerous appellations.
When in fact the weapon and killer do not exist; “
‘Oh! We shall work on the preceptor or instructor’s Dharma robes or have another do so.’
Please grant me ordination,’
His retinue abandoned him.
learning of the noble intention of the brahmin boy Bhadraśuddha, approached him and
How does one understand disturbing emotions?”
“All the beings who will be in that realm Will delight in the practice of celibacy.
O child of enlightened heritage, it is because when you dwell in accordance with these abiding states, you will become a sanctuary for those without sanctuary, an island for those without an island, and a light for sentient beings who are shrouded in darkness.
and perfecting themselves over many hundreds of thousands of eons.
The absorptions into nine successive abodes are a cause of purification.
and after 400 million eons she will destroy saṃsāra.
on a Tuesday, if one finds a cowrie shell lying with its face up, one should place it in the palm of the hand and recite the mantra one hundred thousand times.
Mañjuśrī,
and the outer form of his Dharma will remain for a further twenty intermediate eons.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then accepted the begging bowl from the great king Dhṛtarāṣṭra, regarding him with compassion.
another tathāgata, arhat, perfectly enlightened buddha Bhīṣma­garjita­svara­rāja appeared in the world realm Mahāsaṃbhavā.
for it enables one to comprehend the equality of all phenomena.
Then Senior Su­bhūti, picking up the thread of this conversation, addressed the gods as follows:
and similarly regarding [all the attributes and attainments], up to and including enlightenment.
Similarly, the moon-like bodhisattvas constantly wish for and seek the joy of the Dharma and have no liking for the pleasures of passion.
for they enable one to teach modes of conduct that accord with the interests of sentient beings and to practice all the teachings of the Buddha.
they do not change, nor do they harm one another,
“They make the realm of Māra shudder; They make the māras shake.
the sky above was covered with divine food, and these words were spoken:
His canines are sharp and well spaced.
confer its transmission;
They do not perceive all phenomena as empty, nor do they harbor doubt regarding any phenomenon.
Tremendous harm will unfold and a lot of unhappiness will be experienced in such a place.
They should also encourage others to acquire the meditative concentrations, up to and including the fourth.
In addition, the tathāgatas definitively know multiple world systems and diverse sensory elements.
instead of focusing on [the lineage of the Buddha], the lineage of the Dharma, the lineage of the Saṅgha, [and the Great Vehicle].
Similarly, through pure clairvoyance that surpasses the range of human sight, they perceive [all beings] who move in accordance with their past actions.
For this question, Lion of the Śākyas, supreme human. {68}
“You gave away horses, elephants, and chariots, Slaves, jewels, silver, and pearls.
I should encourage all sentient beings, also, to assume the first meditative concentration,
(4) correct action,
venerable Kauṣṭhila,
They declared, “Ah, today a second buddha has been born in this world!
but rather into a family of moderate means in which there were many renunciants.
Instantly, through the Great Sage’s radiance,
“Bhagavān, you are compassionate.
It guards itself for the sake of guarding others.
“Freedom from attachment, solitude, Knowledge of extinction, nonarising, Cessation, nonabiding, and nirvāṇa.” Such were the words that emerged from the instruments.
[7] verses that praise their greatness spread to the cardinal and intermediate directions;
Countless bodhisattva great beings developed, without developing it, the acceptance that phenomena are unborn.
gave a detailed teaching on this episode from the past by chanting the following verses to the youth Candraprabha:
—the cold, the heat, the hunger, the thirst,
“ ‘I pay homage to any monks Who possess this samādhi,
the light that sees all sentient beings face-to-face, the one that shines on the minds and thoughts of all beings so that they appear exactly as they are, the great array,
Bhagavān, all the abodes of Māra are shaken,
After passing the rainy season at the monastery, a retired devotee left for Śrāvastī,
He is neither the other shore,
‘This one is not the tathāgata, nor is he a śrāvaka of the tathāgata!
Furthermore, if bodhisattvas who refrain from late meals becomes afflicted by a disease that is a threat to their life, or an obstacle to virtuous practice,
They accurately know a mind that has desire to be a mind that has desire.
and said, ‘Elders, do you know who I am?’“
At other times, King Mahāpadma and his armies were dominant.
The sentient beings of that world system took an interest in the lesser paths.
then the voice of the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas, endowed with its sixty aspects, would not envelop the countless, innumerable worlds of the ten directions. However,
All the bodhisattva great beings then circumambulated the Blessed One three times and sat to one side to listen to the Dharma.
Some of the soldiers swung their lassos,
“Always be good and gentle. Always have pure conduct and a serene mind.
Covered with the lotuses of the seven purities—
“Blessed One, what is understood by no deception?”
You are the supreme physician, remover of thorns!
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is non-existent.”
He had a śrāvaka saṅgha of six hundred million arhats.
the 21,000 kinds of conduct in which all three come together.
“Upasena, how many years have you passed as a monk? How many years has your ward passed?”
In all those arrogant sentient beings that migrate in saṃsāra, You found no life force or substance.
If you ask what they do not know and do not see,
Likewise, Śāradvatī­putra, great bodhisattva beings breathe in mindfully and breathe out mindfully.
Upon seeing them, the meeting occurs with great intensity.
or from a seed that is damaged.
recognition of freedom from desirous attachment, recognition of cessation, recognition of death,
the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality,
They cast gold and gold dust And spread out clothing
Through the power of the Buddha, they recalled the blessed buddhas of innumerable and incalculable eons, remembering the qualities of the buddha realms of each blessed buddha, as well as the retinue that surrounded the buddhas and the teachings they gave.
He is not a whole, nor a conglomeration.
Consider, noble son, the analogy of the wide and infinite earth.
Having said this, the Bhagavān fell silent.
They will honor, venerate, respect, and make offerings to the tathāgatas.
Enlightenment is not attained by mere words. For one who is dedicated to practice, enlightenment will not be difficult to attain.” {31}
the king among kings, the king of Dharma,
It is like seeing the stainless and faultless light of Kāśyapa, the Dharma king.
They should always be trained in by the wise ones Who wish for the enlightenment of buddhahood. {157}
they hear many aspects of divine and human sound.
“When they see beings who are proud, Arrogant, and constantly heedless,
Those with reference points are left without reference.
The Blessed One thought,
he does not practice by thinking, ‘The future mind has yet to be obtained;’
Practicing the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
How should they train to be reborn in the god realm of Trayas­triṃśa?
Pratyekabuddhas and bodhisattva mahāsattvas will appear in the world.
to cure fever, heart diseases, cough, and so on.
So, since women steal one’s virtues, I have abandoned their company.”
they defaced a wall belonging to the saṅgha with their spit.
Wise ones, do not have any doubt about this. You should dismiss every kind of uncertainty.
For accomplishing the benefit of oneself and others There is no other means within the Great Vehicle.
is the non-cultivation of a self, sentient beings, living creatures, living organisms, lives, individuals, humankind, human beings, actors, agents, petitioners, instigators, experiencers, experiencing subjects, knowers, and viewers.
all things have the modality of the [other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas;
To your feet, replete with splendor, I bow down!
Wrathful ones are projected from his heart center And, like the winds at the end of an eon, cause them to disperse.
nor does the expanse of reality exist separate from physical forms.
“Noble son, the thus-gone ones’ teaching of the Dharma is inexhaustible.
In the same vein, they do not consider whether or not they engage in union with the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas or [with all other attainments], up to and including omniscience.
“Moreover, young man,
If you ask why, Su­bhūti, it is because they are absolutely non-apprehensible.
“I may have the strength of concentration and supernatural knowledge,
He cherishes solitude but does not avoid mental and physical efforts.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ fear of karma.
they will move from buddhafield to buddhafield,
refraining from accumulating alms bowls, Dharma robes, and utensils;
From their mouths will come the scent of the blue lotus.
They drink hot water, water leftover after washing rice, water filtered through a blanket, and dishwater.
avoiding formation by means of a preceding wisdom and being truly elevated throughout all lives without any evil;
“ ‘It is the mode of peace, complete peace, total peace. That mode does not dwell anywhere.
Utterly without compare,
The conventional distinction between virtue and nonvirtue Is for ordinary people, to be guarded in their minds.
Monks, I then went to Ārāḍa Kālāma and asked him,
They do not mingle with them either on their walkways or in their temples.
“What is being together with excellent beings? It is attending upon buddhas, bodhisattvas, pratyekabuddhas, and śrāvakas.
It does not bring higher knowledge, nor does it lead to complete awakening.
They sprinkle powder of sandalwood, Of the best incenses, and the powder of agarwood. While moving like birds through the sky, They have appropriately sprinkled them on the Lords of Jinas.
“It is dualistic to say ‘Buddha,’ ‘Dharma,’ and ‘Saṅgha.’
“Her eyes are like lotus petals;
He has the power to know all previous situations without attachment. Therefore
Though his consciousness lacks form, it makes various kinds of forms manifest.
Is eclipsed, dimmed, and shines no more than a pool of ink.
one does not run toward dharmas.
‘Though I roamed and searched in all the cardinal and intermediate directions,
the precise identity of feeling, the source of feeling, the cessation of feeling, and the path leading to its cessation.
I have come to learn spiritual practices from you.” Ārāḍa Kālāma replied, “Gautama, I shall give you a teaching through which a faithful person of good family can accomplish omniscience with very little hardship.”
In the same way
At that time King Śuddhodana had five hundred types of ornaments made by five hundred Śākyas.
the aggregate of liberation is still discerned,
Pure luminescent beings with great merit stand by your door,
“ ‘A being may make offerings By filling as many buddha realms As there are grains of sand in the Ganges River With flowers for the protectors of the world.
Your recollection has no outflows:
“Similarly, there is nobody at all who transmigrates from here after death and is born elsewhere.
“This entire ground having broken open, Throughout all the four directions
Then Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara offered lotus flowers to the Bhagavat and
Whether humans or guhyakas, may hold up their swords and axes.
Is the second union of great bliss.
Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have these four qualities will attain this samādhi.
I was even the guard at his door.
“What is the level of a noble being? It is the state of bodhisattva training.
The Blessed One, surrounded by a retinue of many hundreds of thousands, surveyed those before him, and taught the Dharma.
so instead I shall go forth among the ascetic sons of the Śākya, for they have secured from the king the liberty of a prince.”
He is without mental engagement,
As before he will conquer the south,
They are authentic view, thought, speech, activity, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, and absorption.
thus was he able to swiftly attain acceptance of the superknowledges.”
May the Bhagavat also, today, bestow his favor!”
whereas other bodhisattvas do not possess anything like it?”
There will be many bodhisattvas with great power Who will turn the irreversible wheel.
That color, however, was not present within the body of the seed.
and so they will consider leaving that place.
Breaks should also be understood to be four.
“The one who wishes to become a buddha, a lord of the Dharma Who is adorned by the thirty-two signs,
Thus, noble son, bodhisattvas take on whatever form may be required to train a particular sentient being.
out of sight,
Have no concept of a self, no concept of being, No concept of a soul, and no concept of an individual,
During that time the lower existences have multiplied And rebirths as devas have diminished.
‘Even should my skin, flesh, bones, and marrow shrivel up right here,
In the same way, one should do the practice of all beings—women and men.
Śāriputra, in that way the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha sees many millions of beings liberated from the three realms, which are filled with danger, fear, terror, and calamity. These beings come out through the doorway of the tathāgatas’ teachings, and are freed from danger, fear, terror, and calamity and attain the bliss of nirvāṇa.
And obtain the peace of this stainless samādhi.
“The attainment of those who form the resolve set on unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening is a most excellent attainment indeed!
Venerable Lord! How do those who have obsessively carried out and accrued unendurable deeds of speech carry out and accrue deeds that are destitute of the sacred doctrine?”
One emerges from the womb as a newborn.
The same is to be said about the ears, the nose, the tongue, and the body as well.
Mañjuśrī replied,
When seven days have passed, he or she should observe the procedure for worship,
One should cut the nail on one’s index finger And smear the finger with the above substances.
She should surround the area With threads of five different colors.
Taught this tantra for the sake of the world—
“Tathāgata Padmottama extended his arm like an elephant extending its trunk and offered a hundred thousand precious strings of pearls to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara,
He had achieved his goal and was elevated by his former aspirations.
One should chew up the root of rāmadūtī together with the leaves, put this on the penis, and make love. Then she will drip.
Mañjuśrī, this tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddha Stainless Light, the Essence of the Sun, was able to live for nine thousand eons.
Jārī and caṇḍālikā, Snehamallī and ghee, As well as dead intestinal worms
owing to their utter purity they do consider the non-arising of physical forms.
They will not delight in dancing, music, wrestling, meat sellers, butchers, chicken sellers, pig sellers, or pimps.
mastery of life, as one’s lifespan is blessed to last for innumerable immeasurable eons;
One hundred hetvindriyas is called a samāptalambha.
thought, “Goodness, is that Brahmā? Or perhaps Śakra, king of the gods, or Vaiśravaṇa? Or is it some kind of mountain god?”
“High bed, grand bed, And also eating at inappropriate times.
Dharmaśrī (Glory of the Dharma)
Buddha defeated Māra, And so the Dharma does to unrighteousness.
Likewise, ‘These are the meditative concentrations.
With the four means of attracting disciples, you gather beings And establish them on the path to perfect awakening.
Those who offer flowers to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara will have aromatic bodies, and
have been ripened for the highest, complete enlightenment.
At a time when the King of Aṅga and his armies were dominant,
If there are a hundred thousand aromas in one place they will smell them all and know them all.
Noble son, this is how they worship and venerate the thus-gone ones.
“I am from the South,”
“How blissful your body must be, bearing the Perfect Being!”
To their bhikṣus and bhikṣuṇīs, Upāsakas and upāsikās: {31}
And top-knot jewels and necklaces Worth a hundred million.
The inner torment of the deluded, attached, dying person is sorrow.
the one who is not stained by worldly concerns, the protector of the world,
I accurately understood the precise identity of name and form, the source of name and form, the cessation of name and form, and the path leading to its cessation.
Maitreya, you work for the benefit of many people,
They approach with their hands held out, and because they desire the food boiled in the cauldrons, they open their mouths and swallow the copper and brass.
are all conceptual and specific instructions
This completes the twenty-sixth chapter from “The Transcendent Perfection of Wisdom in Ten Thousand Lines,” entitled “Rejoicing.”
Such people prevent this sūtra from being written down and venerated.
In order to pay homage to all the buddhas and the bodhisattva great beings in all the infinite and limitless worlds in the ten directions,
nor reflect upon it.
“How, you may wonder, are they free from impure acquisitions?
The nature is purity;
He understood the mundane and transcendental sciences and esoteric practices, yet always took pleasure in the delights of the Dharma.
Not dwelling upon worldly dharmas,
It was an exquisite wheel adorned with all kinds of jewels, gems, and various other embellishments. It had a hub, a rim, and a thousand spokes.
similarly drives [all those other attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.”
For many hundred thousand quintillions of eons on this Vulture Peak Mountain
“The Lord of the World is completely beautiful, With a body that is the color of gold.
So, they would regress and become degenerate if they were to engage in such deeds destitute of the sacred doctrine. This is why bodhisattvas should restrain their verbal actions!
So come, let us go and worship the Lord of Men.”
Until the date of the full moon, they must keep a compassionate attitude toward all beings,
this, Śāradvatī­putra, is the transcendent perfection of tolerance possessed by great bodhisattva beings.
do not waste what has been given in faith like Kāśyapa’s monks.
they talk about the perfection of meditation,
Such is the power, speed, strength, and ability of a bodhisattva great being in his or her last existence, immediately after birth. 
do not have it committed to writing; do not retain, hold, or master it;
They had entered the unfathomable vehicle.
and likewise, when they engage in union with the emptiness of the sensory element of sights, and the sensory element of visual consciousness;
and gum trees produce many flavors.
“Noble one, you are our peer. We grew up together playing in the dirt with you.
and similarly, the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas of the world systems of the southern direction, the western direction, the northern direction, and similarly of the four intermediate directions,
Śāriputra, the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas who in the past
do not take what is not given,
They know the motivations and conduct of other beings And they know what should be said to them.
Su­bhūti, because the expanse of reality is not an entity,
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, physical forms are empty of the nature of physical forms, and in that regard, there is no birth; nor is the emancipation of nirvāṇa apprehensible.
They will not degenerate from the noble eightfold path.
and they will also know and behold many hundreds of thousands of bodhisattvas establishing in their discussions how omniscience should be attained,
“That the eye-consciousness does not perceive, Mañjuśrī, is signlessness.
For so long he has totally given up divisive talk and has not accepted advice that might lead to dispute, shining with the complete harmony of concord. He has criticized divisive talk and praised the qualities of getting along in complete harmony. Therefore he is called the One with Forty Even Teeth.
“Venerable Lord! The Tathā­gata, Arhat, Genuinely Perfect Buddha has not yet spoken of all the qualities which sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage acquire when they hold, maintain, recite aloud, master, and are attentive to this transcendent perfection of wisdom in the right manner.
It entails the absorption in the four immeasurable aspirations through acceptance that phenomena are non-arising.
“Why do you say that the designation of the sensory element of the eyes, the sensory element of sights, and the sensory element of visual consciousness does not constitute a bodhisattva
Inside the city Is a garden with flowers in full bloom.
I am cultivating [all other attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas,
Hence, with a wish not to relish or conceive of joy and bliss they raise their minds above the first concentration.
Noble one, I entrust this teaching to you.
With that he became the venerable Śāriputra’s attendant apprentice and follower.
(3) correct speech,
He is adept in how things arise based on causes, And how the cessation and termination of conditioned existence leads to the calm state.
Their minds fixed upon their games. The children continue to be unaware
In the same vein, they should not abide in [the other causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
Then, the Bhagavān addressed the bodhisatva Jayamati as follows.
one hundred thousand gods felt joyous, pleased, and elated.
“Venerable Ānanda, the term bodhisattva is a designation that functions as a basis for communication.
Venerable Lord, it is because the transcendent perfection of wisdom is non-conceptual.
They were free of mental afflictions, their minds were very calm,
nor is it past, future, or present.
He may follow the ways of hatred, yet he feels no anger toward any living being.
They embody all the accumulations of merit and wisdom.
established in a state of bliss,
then said to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Nakṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña,
“The body is empty of a self and what belongs to a self;
Reverend Śāriputra, did not the Tathāgata declare that all things have the nature of a magical creation?
the transcendent perfection of generosity, the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, and the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
and master it;
Su­bhūti, the real nature of feelings, the essential nature of feelings, and the defining characteristics of the essential nature of feelings, and similarly, the real nature of perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness; the essential nature of consciousness, [and so forth]; and the defining characteristics of the essential nature of consciousness [and so forth]
When one has accumulated karma through the conditions of the consciousnesses
that merchant or householder has equal concern for all the children. He would, therefore, deliver them from the house whenever he encountered them.”
He thought, “It is because of the being who has entered her womb.”
“Great King, (41) Prince Sarvārthasiddha moves with the serene gait of an elephant,
Similarly, they perfect the other [bodhisattva] levels, up to and including the tenth level, without any longing for them arising.
be free of the workings of demons.”
The noble ones’ pursuit is a nondualistic pursuit.
With their wisdom they bring happiness to many Trillions of beings, establishing them in the Dharma. {60}
Likewise, when the sun-like bodhisattvas shine all sorts of virtuous qualities become possible.
Later that same day, the monk arrived and the monks asked him,
But Gopā, knowing the intelligence and steadfastness of the Bodhisattva,
But that seed is not transferred from the tree-trunk to the tree-top, nor is the seed observable inside the tree.
Oh no, my son!
He will satisfy beings with the water of the Dharma.’
unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment is itself the emptiness of inherent existence.”
Therefore whoever has faith in me Shall eliminate the three lower realms.
They then added,
“While he behaves in accord with the world, And conquers the afflictions of desire inside the women’s quarters,
formative predispositions another thing, consciousness another thing, and the emptiness of inherent existence yet another,
and similarly, when they establish, cognize, and become fixated on the notion that [the aggregates] from physical forms to consciousness are purified;
To beings who are to be trained by means of the Hearers’ Vehicle they teach the path of the hearers, and not the bodhisattva path.
Venerable Lord! Those great bodhisattva beings who strive toward unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, and who wish to attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, are engaged in a difficult task inasmuch as all things are empty of their own defining characteristics.
the training, and the qualities will quickly display unending confidence of speech.
“Some said, ‘She cares for me with sandalwood, musk, and camphor.’
Although ultimately utterly unreal, relatively they train in the path by means of not training.
They will take refuge in me.
(16) emptiness of non-entities,
“The symptoms of being afflicted by a yakṣa graha belonging to my entourage, Venerable Blessed One, are as follows:
“The same occurred in the southwest, the same in the west, the same in the northwest, the same in the north, the same in the northeast, and in the downward direction.
They appear in the form of friends and relatives And begin conversation.
How wonderful it will be if I can perfectly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha among them!
The nāga daughters also joyfully and respectfully venerated the Sage;
A nāga girl joyfully and devotedly erects a splendid throne On which the guide of the universe peacefully sits.
It accomplishes all activity, even without practice;
then encourage them through many such reasons to acquire the levels of the śrāvakas and the pratyekabuddhas,
When the calls of the crow and the donkey ring out, It is wise to quickly retreat.
As soon as they connect with this vision, Belief in the transitory collection, Ethical discipline in the form of extreme austerity, And doubt are simultaneously cast off, And they see the truths of the noble ones. Thus, they are called the most precious gem of the Saṅgha.
“O King, great fortune! Your son has been born, adorned with signs!
“Su­bhūti, do you think that the tathāgatas are sublime and without contaminants?”
When practicing generosity by giving away their skin,
ultimately, there is no attainment.
approached the man, and asked,
They develop a vast attraction to the buddhas, And gain a vast, inconceivable benefit. {53}
And they will always be in the form of A donkey, pig, jackal, or dog.
What are the ten?
In the analogy, a sprout arises and, when it is the right season, it produces flowers,
When their attributes are meditated on, their nature is empty. Know that all phenomena are like that. {11}
Apart from focusing on omniscience, they have no other wish.
He will be unable to accept another bowl; Let’s go so that he can accept them!”
Having reflected on this silently for a moment, they said to each other, “This is the power of the Thus-Gone One!
The other gods who are overcome by their pride will see us paying homage to the Bodhisattva, and they will cast aside their pride, haughtiness, and arrogance.
“ ‘A pleasing sense of modesty and self-respect, Speaking appropriate words, knowledge of the world,
Then the teacher, the Vajra Holder, The Great Glorious One, stood up on his seat.
it is comparable to space.
Kauśika, physical forms are empty of physical forms.
Similarly, they discern through their minds endowed with omniscience that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are impermanent, and do not focus on them.
all arhats.
the manifestation of this great miracle, these earthquakes, and this great rain of flowers?
Up in the air they vanished and appeared down on the ground.
He stores the crystal, money, and pearls There inside this residence.
Venerable Lord! There would be many merits.
they do not associate with malice in order to desist from malice;
Some are writing out documents, And some are calculating interest.
He establishes them in meditative concentration, tolerance, the dhāraṇīs, and the grounds.
Ajita, this man, this lord of generosity, this lord of great generosity, gives these gifts in that way for eighty years.
‘Listen, all of you, just listen to this nonsense!
Bhagavān, with regard to the essence of space, it is thus. Its particular characteristic is that it is not differentiated; it is non-conceptual, completely non-conceptual, unmoving, and lacking in substance.
also praise the abstention from wrong views [and the other non-virtuous actions].
They will send emanations To make homage to millions of buddhas. {148}
“Mahauṣadhi, the tip of a person’s tongue senses bitter, pungent, sour, sweet, and salty tastes.
“When they arrived there, they bowed their heads to the Bhagavān’s feet,
And today, Lord, we have obtained the result Of that good conduct we have previously practiced.
I gave away male and female servants, riches and grain, And also jewels, pearls, gold, and silver. {3}
Brother Pūrṇa Maitrāyaṇī­putra, Brother Subhūti,
Through attention at the time of his death, his divine gaze will also see multi-storied, beautiful buildings,
divine princes, it is because dreams, magical displays, and nirvāṇa are without duality and cannot be bisected.”
Brahmā, going ahead, expelled all untamed creatures;
“When noble disciples experience feelings which are neither pleasant nor painful, then feelings of pleasure and pain come to a halt.
Bearing their loads of wood, they came to the house in which the teacher of brahmins lived.
Therefore, everything is ignorance,
They are unblemished.
“Venerables, prepare a sweat-chamber for the saṅgha and for me.”
so I will take some merchandise to sell in another land.”
Oṁ, Delusion Vajrī, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
Even though he may be equal to buddhas.
Moreover, those worlds do not harm each other and none of the beings within them will suffer any harm.
the attributes of the śrāvakas are also gathered therein.
Now swiftly manifest your strength and courage,
not even a place the size of a mustard seed, where he has not given up his own body for the sake of beings.
their burdens relinquished,
Divine being, moreover, when bodhisattvas, as they practice generosity, give by relinquishing the gift, the giver, the recipient, the context of giving, and the purpose of the gift, such bodhisattvas rely on nothing and do not remain fixed on anything.
Residing there they give their approval, saying, ‘Excellent, excellent, noble son! You have acquired such a wish-fulfilling jewel as this. Seven generations of your descendants will attain liberation. Noble son, even all the beings who live in your stomach will become irreversible bodhisattvas.
So if there should occur suffering,
The brahmin thought,
“Owing to the fact that sentient beings are without essential nature,
She is blue, greatly exalted in merit,
This completes the tantra of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa called “The Sole Hero.”
“Children of noble family, consider this analogy.
They will all be golden and be born miraculously,
They do not seek enlightenment as other than consciousness.
shone at that time throughout the world realm Vairocana­raśmi­prati­maṇḍitā.
Understanding the nature of concepts, his mind does not engage in duality. Such is the entrance into nonduality.
Who would like to increase His merit, splendor, power, and renown?
Anointing ears and eyes with clarified butter
The tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas accomplish that which is extremely difficult—
In it there are no lord buddhas, no bodhisattvas, and no śrāvakas.
A potter makes all bowls from clay equally.
This is the time to teach the Dharma,
These are the dreams that appear to the daughter of the Śākyas.
and to be unhindered in all actions while gaining realization.
The nature of consciousness is indeed non-arising.
“He ends the terrors of beings in the lower realms, In unfortunate existences, and in the hells,
the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, are neither heard nor seen, owing to the nature of phenomena being inanimate.
Venerable Lord, if the notion of sights as calm is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of sights as not calm become a bodhisattva?
May those in the womb be protected! May children have well-being!
attain the state of great compassion,
It is the giving of all accumulated roots of virtue to all living beings.
From these ornaments the sound of melodious songs of the five qualities, even more beautiful than divine music, also emerged.
the Blessed One received abundant savory food and drink, robes, alms bowls,
Not only does that acceptance have no object,
Those who ridicule and mock those who write out such a sūtra as this will have broken teeth,
The nature of omniscience is indeed non-arising.
Therefore those eyes will be stainless, Unpolluted, and pure.
likewise [all the aggregates] up to and including consciousness, are impermanent.
Mahāmaudgalyāyana then took the two novices for their daily practice.
“A fine and beautiful elephant, white as snow or silver, More dazzling than the sun and the moon, well proportioned, With beautiful legs, six great tusks, and joints as firm as diamond, Entered my womb—please listen to this story.
I remember that many eons ago in the past,
At bedtime, one should recite the mantra eight hundred times.
just as non-cessation, non-signlessness, non-affliction, non-purification and non-conditioning neither come to rest, nor do they not come to rest,
Three young Śākyas called Bhadrika, Mahānāma, and Aniruddha tried for a long time to lift the ornaments, but they were unable to. These ornaments were made for someone with a body as strong as Nārāyaṇa, and so other people were not able to wear them.
Some, like Brahmā, have peaceful forms; Their peaceful minds rest calmly and their concentration is firm.
One billion seven hundred and sixty million towns,
Oṁ, Prajñāpāramitā, hūṁ, phaṭ!
honors it, venerates it, worships it, and makes offerings to it—
On this day, my wishes have been fulfilled.
Smiling at one another, the nāgas and their nāga women
Just so do I, [postulant’s name], too,
the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came there and, having greeted me, said,
One whose mind is in equipoise Should prepare a pleasant seat. “First one should cultivate loving kindness; Second, compassion; Third, sympathetic ‌joy; And, to complete the lot, ‌equanimity.
Su­bhūti, when certain great bodhisattva beings, lacking the transcendent perfection of wisdom, offer donations to those who have entered the stream over eons equal in number to the sands of the River Ganges, and
One hundred visaṃjñāgatis is called a sarvasaṃjña.
on a human skull,
His voice is not loud.
“He may follow the ways of the rich, yet he is without acquisitiveness and often reflects upon the notion of impermanence.
At that time Śakra, Brahmā, and all the guardians of the world, who were present in the gathering, said,
“Noble one, since I entered the ocean I have guided all these beings that have appeared here.”
“Jñānābala and Jñānaviśeṣaga, Jñānābhibhū and Jñānasamudgata,
and do not say that which is anything other than true.
Ratnā­kara
And they sent down a rain of flowers, Having come to see the Buddha, the Lord of sages. {54}
Part of the way into their voyage, they and their seafaring ship were held up by nāgas.
You should persevere in those teachings which actualize the fruit of entering the stream!
Those of great magical powers Will be as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges.
Sons of noble family, you know that the time has come, so please go ahead.
Nonetheless, Nārāyaṇa, I will use an analogy in order to communicate this point, and in order that the absorption that encapsulates all merit may be brought to perfection, and in order that beings who desire merit may be granted a basis for obtaining that, and in order that the great diligence of beings on the vehicle of bodhisattvas may be brought to perfection.
Ānanda, I was skillful in my means, and so
“Excellent, excellent,” said the Blessed One. “Thus it is, noble son!
The non-perception of smell is to have no abode.
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom think,
I should be equipoised in such meditative concentrations.
"གསེར་དང་། དངུལ་དང་། ནོར་བུ་དང་། མུ་ཏིག་དང་། བཻ་དཱུརྱ་དང་། <tWhen practicing generosity by giving away gold, silver, jewels, pearls, beryls, conch shells, moonstones, coral, and other precious substances,
Having become a bodhisattva, you must complete the perfection of generosity.
the bodhisattva Mahāvikrāmin, the bodhisattva Anantavikrāmiṇ,
“They should meditate on the strength of patience, rely on patience, and promulgate patience.
The buddhas, the supreme humans, will know it And will expound this single yāna of mine. {102}
‘These great bodhisattva beings have been exclusively foreordained by the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas to be irreversible in their attainment of unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment,
of the great compassion consummated in the concentration of the holy Dharma on the liberation of all living beings;
Desire, anger, and dullness.
“All the composite phenomena there are, And all the noncomposite phenomena—
And quickly become compassionate. {84}
Similarly, you should not misconstrue unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment as the emptiness of internal phenomena, as the emptiness of external phenomena, as the emptiness of both external and internal phenomena, or [as the other aspects of emptiness], up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities!
Similarly, the transcendence of the eyes is not the eyes.
They will never have the many different kinds of afflictions,
And they follow that profound wisdom. {107}
“They do not preoccupy themselves with talk about the self, sentient beings, living creatures, lives, [and the other superimposed notions of a subject], up to and including knowers and viewers.
Compassion is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
They revel in countless absorptions, retentions, liberations, superknowledges, and magical abilities.
Ānanda, you should train thinking in this way.
The continual reliance on good beings: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {104}
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva Liberator from Fear came into the temple, and when he saw the monk crumpled on the ground, he asked him,
I was thinking about the wife of King Suvarṇapati of Suvarṇadvīpa. When her husband’s time had come, she leapt onto his funeral pyre.
“The jinas to whom offerings have been made in the past,
“At this point the bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta developed the supreme intention.
“Then both of those dharmabhāṇakas Said to the king, ‘Listen, Kṣatriya!
Those conceptions have been destroyed Naturally with their conceptions of women. {85}
Be a holder of their supreme Dharma,
And they have no longing for food and no longing for clothes. That is the uniqueness of this attainment of samādhi. {i}
Let him serve the One with Abundant Merit, The Jewel Mine, the One Who Bestows Fearlessness and Bliss.
King Ratnacchattra said to his sons,
His veins are not visible.
They discern that physical forms are signless, and do not focus on them.
“Since, in a previous existence, I offered alms bowls,
thus actualizing the fruit of a stream-enterer
Make offerings to him!
Having reached stability on the eyes of the central figure, They are to meditate on the thirty-seven features in full.
“Well then, dear boy, Kolita, know that the time for such a change has come.”
lest the outsider sectarians should hear your words.
we, the four great kings, will go there with our armies, our young warriors, and our retinues, to hear the Dharma.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara will come to this great monastery of Jetavana in order to see me, to bow down to me, to honor me, and to give a prophecy concerning the deity Maheśvara in a realm within this universe.
went to the Thus-Gone One.
and praised the teachings of the Blessed One.
and similarly, those who practice in order that they might grasp or reject the transcendent perfection of generosity, the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, and the transcendent perfection of wisdom;
“Noble son,” replied the Blessed One, “whoever has just one among these factors in a way that is flawless, uncorrupted, undefiled, pure, accomplished, and perfect has, noble son, all the other factors as well.
If someone were to provide tathāgatas, arhats, and samyaksaṃbuddhas as numerous as the grains of sand in twelve Ganges Rivers with robes, food, bowls, bedding, seats, necessary medicine, and utensils for an eon, the accumulation of merit that would come from serving those tathāgatas would only equal the merit of the tip of one hair on the body of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
He must never leave us!”
This, Maitreya, is how the bodhisattvas have excellent giving.
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin;
"དེའི་ཚེ་ལྷ་<tAt the same time, many trillions of gods assembled.
“Noble son, you may wonder how bodhisattvas pacify wandering beings’ torments of affliction.
I, for my part, have concealed it very well.
For many millions of years They never hear even the name of the tathāgatas Or the Dharma or my followers.
They would not be able to describe even a fraction of it, Let alone describe the benefit of studying it, or of possessing it. {24}
"The ground was strewn with purple, pink, red, and white lotus flowers, as well as the flowers of goolar fig, nīpa, vārśika, taraṇi, pāṭalā, aśoka, kuraṇṭaka, nutmeg, and utika<tei:note xml:id=""UT22084-061-002-25""/> trees."
I myself have noxious fangs.”
The islands, subcontinents, mountains, the four continents, and so forth can be compared to the various practices, retentions, maturations of sentient beings, saṅghas of disciples, and so forth.
Maudgalyāyana, if the blessed buddhas who dwell in other universes did not consecrate the worlds where those bodhisattvas live with an adamantine nature,
And who maintain this practice, Will be ones who listen to this sūtra. {22}
With your great majesty and beautiful voice. Even the majesty of the king does not shine so brightly. {26}
As I have faith in only what is perfect, I shall go forth from home into homelessness.”
Similarly, since sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena are non-apprehensible, it follows that so-called ‘sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena’ are nothing but mere names or conventional terms.
What is coalescence?
they should burn a finger or a toe or a limb or an arm.
His whole dwelling swayed.
I have suddenly come across this king or great minister.
and similarly, the fruit of arhatship, and actual arhats are all discerned,
and also wood,
“When the gentle, profound, melodious Speech of the Buddha filled me with joy,
He handed them over to the former beggar and said,
On the other hand, straying from the middle way, you will not pass beyond suffering.
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities are specialists in the discipline.
Monks, as soon as the Bodhisattva had this thought, a light known as the light which conquers all demonic congregations was emitted from the hair between his eyebrows.
All who see this lamp will dance.
Through the factor of birth there is old age, death, misery, wailing, suffering, unhappiness, and disturbance.
“Those with the ten strengths in the past, The sugatas of the present and the future,
The Bhagavān prophesied to them all that after four million, eight hundred thousand countless eons
Like the moon, he had perfected all pure qualities.
Pressing his palms together, he asked,
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, one should know that space is limitless because sentient beings are limitless.
A hundred, two hundred, three, four, or five hundred people lived in it.
They are not attracted to religious robes, alms, bedding, and seats,
To those who suffer they offer all that is needed.
Noble son, the eloquence of those with dull faculties may suffer from a lack of clarity, yet that is not the case with those whose faculties are sharp.
When they obtain this tolerance, they think,
(1) physical forms, (2) feelings, (3) perceptions, (4) formative predispositions, and (5) consciousness.
to attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
It is a wheel without disturbance within the realm of phenomena beyond center and edge.
sexual misconduct, telling lies,
“Noble son, this is the dhāraṇī called jayamatī. It exhausts all evil deeds,
Monks, the Thus-Gone One replied to the Ājīvika with this verse:
Since there are no differences between these,
“For example, Su­bhūti, space is neither material, nor is it immaterial;
I will give them eyes that can see reality.’ Saying this, you have meditated on knowledge.
“Su­bhūti, emancipation will be attained from the three world systems, and consequently emancipation will be attained in omniscience.
“Springtime is here, the best of seasons;
“Why, Su­bhūti, do great bodhisattva beings not become discouraged with regard to this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom?”
the radiant majesty of his merit shone brightly among gods and humans. As the light of the moon,
so that this Dharma teaching is passed on from one to another until it reaches a fiftieth person.
Therefore I believed I had attained nirvāṇa, But this was not what is called nirvāṇa. {12}
in the fruit of no longer being subject to rebirth, and in arhatship.
Similarly, the fruit of entering the stream, and likewise the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth, the fruit of no longer being subject to rebirth, arhatship, individual enlightenment, and unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment are all discerned in the world.
how could they possibly come or go?
Just as it is difficult to fill the oceans, desires can never be fulfilled. Like salty water, objects of desire only make you thirstier.
Then once again, the daughters of Māra spoke to their father in verse:
“Their prayers are fulfilled,
whether its faculties are impaired or not;
“I rang a bell and announced, ‘I will become the slave of anyone who will give me the highest Dharma and teach me its meaning!’“
“One should therefore meditate on Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa,
When bodhisattvas see a donor or a benefactor
“You may wonder, noble son, what these qualities, from being a source of jewels through to being inexhaustible, may imply.
Though a hundred spears strike them a third time, they still will not die.
As the light appeared, it illuminated all the infinite buddha realms within all the worlds in the ten directions.
“Young man, what is the cultivation of this samādhi?
Moreover, Senior Śāradvatī­putra, it is owing to the emptiness of internal phenomena,
However, Śāriputra, in order to teach that meaning extensively I shall teach you parables.
He made this proclamation, Always enduring abuse and condemnation.
and no misfortune will befall him.
or on a flat piece of wood or on the surface of a wall that has been wiped clean.
“Preceptor, heed me. Please sanction this, my, [ordinand’s name]’s, Dharma robe, as a lower robe.
‘Because of this bhikṣu even my own sons refuse to obey me! I will be left alone and friendless,
“Avadavats and flocks of birds with beautiful songs, With their beautiful songs that are pleasing to everyone—
Su­bhūti, since there are no sentient beings whatsoever among the five classes of living beings who are categorized as sentient beings, who are equal to the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas, how could any surpass them!
steadfast commitment,
From then on, her fortune became vast and excellent.
‘Oṁ cchrīṁ cchrīṁ cchrīṁ! Parch, parch! Stop the flow, stop! Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ!’
removed his robe from one shoulder, and kneeled, placing his right knee on the ground.
the behavior of such people will not be proper, but base.
he emitted ten rivers from his ten toes;
"If that person sits near a heap of embers,<tei:note xml:id=""UT22084-066-003-43""/> the more those creatures are tormented by burning, the more they eat."
These are called the ten recollections.
Moreover, Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings who practice the six transcendent perfections see sentient beings lacking the major marks,
“You are the delight of King Śuddhodana’s kingdom, Who has won its hearts and minds.
that the nature of the mental faculty is emptiness, and that emptiness is indeed the mental faculty.
Likewise, they will not become fixated on the four applications of mindfulness, and similarly, they will not become fixated on [any of the other causal attributes] up to and including the noble eightfold path.
“Blessed One, they do so to train such beings through those practices,” replied the bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkam­bhin.
These are called the faculties that will enable knowledge of all that is unknown.
That is how the ordinand’s Dharma robes that have already been cut and sewn are sanctioned.
“Śāradvatī­putra, the bodhisattvas who train accordingly do not train in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, and they will not attain emancipation in omniscience.”
The monks then asked the Blessed One about it, and the Blessed One decreed,
“ ‘ “On his right create Bodhisattva Mahāmaṇidhara.
‘I will do whatever work a slave would do for you!’
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that anything other than the real nature of the sensory element of the eyes constitutes a bodhisattva?”
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
My diligence is indeed not directed at the transcendence of suffering!’
It is because they conceive of all those phenomena, which are actually unproduced.”
‘In accordance with the aspirations formed by the thus-gone ones, through this offering of the marrow of my bones
Su­bhūti, because the [altruistic] thoughts cultivated by great bodhisattva beings from the time when they first begin to set their mind on enlightenment, up to the time when they are seated at the Focal Point of Enlightenment, are not entities,
The strength of ten collyrium-colored elephants is the same as the strength of one battle elephant.
He will appear in this very buddha realm.
Because the topic,
With the vajra iron hook, you summon all.
The gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas who witnessed the qualities of the Bodhisattva watched over him day and night, making offerings and forming aspirations.
the discernment of definitions, and the discernment of eloquence. They attain those four discernments.
What are those ten? They are skill in dedication, skill in converting non-Buddhists, skill in making others withdraw from objects, skill in dispelling lingering regrets, skill in being a protector of sentient beings, skill in providing sentient beings with a livelihood, skill in accepting, skill in delivering sentient beings from one context to another, skill in genuinely encouraging, inspiring, and exhilarating beings, and skill in worshiping and venerating the Thus-Gone One.
“Beings are scorched by attachment and anger, Yet they are falsely imputed—such ills are not for real.
bury it in a cow pen.
“Noble ones, if you are uncertain, unsure, or undecided, thinking that Queen Vimaladattā at that time, on that occasion was someone else, do not have such a view.
for it brings complete inner peace.
“Running before them Are bhūta yakṣas with large bodies,
then, Bhaiṣajyarāja, that bodhisattva has entered the residence of the Tathāgata, wears the Dharma robe of the Tathāgata, sits upon the seat of the Tathāgata, and then teaches this Dharma teaching to the fourfold assembly.
And blossoming forth with concentration, miracles, powers, and strengths, he will grant to beings a fount of faith.”
and subsequently you will not be reborn here, but on passing away, you will proceed to the higher realms,’
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the state of one who follows out of conviction.
You should worship them.
splitting their palate,
this transcendent perfection of wisdom is established by means of the innumerable deeds of the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas, and by means of their deeds which are equal to the unequaled, and so forth
“Grown in the fields of karma and born from the water of craving, we call it the transitory body.
“He replied,
Some slapped their thighs with their hands, and others beat their chests.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of unquantifiability. What are the four kinds of words of unquantifiability?
“Friends, tonight the Bodhisattva will leave his home. So you should delight in making offerings to him.”
“The bhikṣus who after my nirvāṇa Teach this without envy Will have no suffering, no obstacles, Will have no misery or be disturbed.
said to the four great kings,
Ah! Come here, guide who is like a father and mother— And close the door through which I will go to hell. {viii}
‘When food and drink enters the human body, it does not matter whether it is clean and fine, or of bad quality.
Merely visualizing her, the yoginī grants the best of things
They turn some sentient beings away from the aggregate of ethical discipline,
He will have a full one thousand sons, heroic, brave, and of ideal build who will destroy enemy forces.
in one instant of wisdom accurately know, hear, see, and understand everything that is to be known,
Are the bhikṣus, bhikṣunīs, and upāsakas present before me now.
“They have happiness day and night. Their bodies will have pleasurable sensations.
If they have gone forth, they should be expelled.
At that time the Blessed One, surrounded and venerated by a retinue of several hundred thousand beings, was teaching the Dharma.
and then asked it, ‘What can I do?’
First there was a rain of water, and the water brought them satisfaction.
And could remember countless previous lives? {61}
Yokes, shackles, prisons, The rain of weapons on the battlefield,
“Due to the absolute purity of what?” he asked.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ commitment to the vows of individual liberation.
By acquiring an innumerable, countless, and immeasurable number of demerits,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of modesty concerning purification. Those are the four.
never stop receiving the teachings on the perfections;
“Son of noble family, what qualities have you engendered to achieve such acceptance?”
Young man, in the past, innumerable, vast, immeasurable, inconceivable, unfathomable countless eons ago, at that time and in those days,
“Because I longed for this sublime samādhi
It disciplines one’s own mind and protects the minds of others.
Emptiness is not other than the ten powers of the tathāgatas, nor are the ten powers of the tathāgatas other than emptiness. The nature of the ten powers of the tathāgatas is indeed emptiness. Emptiness is indeed the ten powers of the tathāgatas.
That is called the emptiness of great extent.
Among them, the eyes are empty of the eyes because they do not endure and they do not disintegrate.
All this I shall see no more without him, who is so full of qualities.”
“Alas, this world is not at peace because of the self.
They also taught the Dharma in many worlds, Having such an activity through the power of the sugatas. {72}
Last night in my dream
They were not cut off after I went forth.”
In this way bodhisattvas trust in awakening and the emergence of the thus-gone ones.
“The time for what, my Lord?” The Bodhisattva replied:
Many hundred thousand quadrillions of yakṣas let a rain of flowers fall.
They maintain discipline out of the wish to bring aid, happiness, fulfillment, and welfare to all beings.
“Similarly, they should not dwell, in an apprehending manner, on the notion that ‘I should possess the thirty-two major marks of a superior man, and consummate each of these marks of a superior man with one hundred merits.’
That which performs the function of the body’s inhalation and exhalation is called the wind element.
the stride of stainless peace, the stride that leads to the city of nirvāṇa, which is auspicious, stainless, and free from fear.
“The sky with its moon and the stars may fall, The earth with its mountains and towns may be destroyed,
“As another analogy, a face is reflected on the surface of a very clean mirror;
Evil one, you are thrown on your back, Like a tree tossed about by the wind.
has declared four things that lead to an offense for monks who have gone forth and been ordained.
When this is attached to the alms bowl During a time of famine
“There he will ripen bodhisattvas More numerous than the Ganges sands.
How do they become sufficiently stable in their altruism to prevent their mind of awakening from decreasing?
Though he saw them, he asked the monks,
That is the second strange and wonderful thing.
As I stay here in this land With water falling from my hands I lack the power to reject it.’
‘I have.’“The prince thought, ‘If the small store of qualities this noble being has attained,
“If you ask what are the ‘twelve sense fields,’
He has also offered ornaments, golden vessels, and golden-colored garments.
“He is called the one who is like Vaiśravaṇa, the one who grants the treasury of the seven noble riches,
When the monks saw the two novices miraculously flying through the air, picking flowers, they asked one another,
Noble son, bodhisattvas follow the Dharma but not based on form.
What do you think, son of noble family,
He will beget one thousand sons,
Her hair, as black as a bee, frames a fine forehead and a beautiful brow.
“Noble son, I went to Tathāgata Padmottama.
Ultimately, all phenomena are the same in that they are unborn.
But though they appear they do not exist at all. Know that all phenomena are like that. {16}
He replied, “This is owing to the incontrovertible realization of all things!”
a variety of delightful gardens, and a variety of delightful bathing pools. Enjoy these divine pleasures.
That ray of light illuminated the great trichiliocosm with its intense luminescence and,
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess these ten qualities are not fixated on any of their aspirations.
Within six months, he will become equal to Sarasvatī.
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the result of an arhat.
it is the training of all bodhisattvas;
and in the same vein, the transcendence of [all the other links of dependent origination], up to and including aging and death, is always without fear.
“Noble son, in his retinue of queens King Attainment of Victory had ninety-nine thousand wives, none of whom had entered any other vehicle.
“Bhagavān, I too
and this is the time to be among gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, Śakra, Brahmā, the world protectors, monks, nuns, as well as male and female novices.
the precise identity of old age, the source of old age, the cessation of old age, and the path leading to its cessation.
Nor does the expanse of reality consider the sensory element of sights
They will perceive their Dharma teacher as the Teacher in person.
and uttered this verse:
It is the abode of the Buddha, the abode of the Dharma, and the abode of the Saṅgha.
That is to say, it is also known as emptiness, non-apprehension, the termination of the path, the exhaustion of craving, the non-residual [state], dispassion, cessation, and nirvāṇa.
‘Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, you who are a teacher of all magic! Teach all the magical methods to remove obstacles! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
The non-observation of innate joy
Bodhisattvas think like this:
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, it is in this way that great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom should refine physical forms,
“Venerable Lord, so be it!” he replied.
They themselves neither understand nor comprehend this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Homage to you, who are unstained and clean!
“Ānanda, by the command of the perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone arhats of the past, future, and present,
From then on, one will be accomplished in every respect
and canopies with victory banners.
as if they were fire, throw away all the pleasures of a kingdom as if they were a lump of phlegm,
“Nakṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña, this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma protects beings from all fear, and frees them from all suffering.
Please show the path by which, with the aid of the teachings, one may pass beyond suffering.
You should swiftly bring forth the mind that strives for unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment and study the Mahāyāna.
If from your heart you devote yourself to him with respect,
All those śrāvakas have not attained nirvāṇa.
These are called the four unhindered discernments.
the twelve sense fields, the eighteen sensory elements, and the maturation of past actions. These are considered to be non-specific phenomena.
All such graha kings And terrifying beings Assembled there Are bound by the noose incantation.
and similarly having mastered a single syllable by means of the forty-two syllables,
This sentient being has middling beliefs,
But if he, with perfect faith, should cut his hair, shave his beard, don the saffron robes, and go forth from home into homelessness,
They are great humans. They are human lions. They are human elephants.
They experienced the unendurable suffering of the great Avīci hell for ten thousand eons.
Then the bodhisattva mahāsattva Mahāpratibhāna said to the Bhagavān,
Grasping is pure, owing to the purity of craving.
Moreover, Mañjuśrī, it is in order to attain all phenomena that acceptance is attained.
Noble son, just as when comparing the full moon and the crescent moon, the bodies of the thus-gone ones and the bodhisattvas are the same as both fulfill the definition of a body, but they are not the same with respect to the power of their qualities.
Because it brings freedom from obscuration and the desired true nature of phenomena.
All the sentient beings of that realm are, without exception, bodhisattvas whose progress toward unexcelled and complete awakening is irreversible.
Su­bhūti, it is because permanence, happiness, self, and [all those attributes], up to and including attractiveness, never exist and they are non-apprehensible. This being the case, how could they possibly come and go!
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Have a vast, abundant, inconceivable eloquence.
Visualize an iron hook that emerges from the syllable hūṃ, Bringing the buddhas and bodhisattvas instantaneously before you. Make offerings and so forth to them.
who engages with [the other bodhisattva levels], up to and including the tenth level;
When not having any interest in the lesser vehicles, they are irreproachable.
“Venerable Lord! When the transcendent perfection of wisdom is actualized in that manner, what thing is attained?”
May I shine the light of Dharma for those who are thrown deep into the darkness of great ignorance within the world—for the people whose eyes are obscured by the cataract of ignorance, who lack the eye of wisdom, and who are blind with ignorance and delusion. May I raise the lamp of wisdom, which destroys the darkness for those who are blinded by ignorance.
Bhadrapāla,” replied the Blessed One, “the four elements produce the body through their contact;
“Blessed One, how does consciousness abandon the element of form at the time of death?
“Those with foolish understanding Kill each other with weapons.
Divine son, when a bodhisattva great being, without producing, has produced the mind-set that thinks, ‘I will protect all beings in any possible way,’ he will not yield from that.
“In the same way, a woman should worship a man— With respect, and with the mind filled with devotion.
What can I do?” “
Those merchants who had fled sought out King Prasenajit, their faces and bodies smeared with dirt, howling, their hair in disarray.
and so he truly saw the shortcomings of the physical body.
then reverend, what is it that makes those persons who are converts to a tīrthika order fit for exclusion?”
Tell us the reason why you smiled. {93}
This virtuous thought brought the former monk matricide’s time in hell to an end,
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin bowed his head to the feet of the dharmabhāṇaka and departed,
“ ‘The beauty of this bhikṣu’s arrival Is like the sun shining in the sky, Dispelling darkness with a thousand light rays, Illuminating completely every direction. {22}
in order that they may develop roots of merit, the Tathāgata teaches many kinds of Dharma teachings, with many kinds of goals.
Here I reached the end Of infatuation and aggression, The travails of conflicts and disputes,
will themselves certainly attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
It does not abide in anything, nor does it abide in any place, nor does it abide in any direction.
“A woman who has faith on hearing The praise of this precious sūtra
And so he began to search for him among the gods.
and one physically actualizes, achieves, and abides in the cessation of all perceptions and feelings.
Adapting to their dispositions and actions, and knowing their thoughts,
The mind moves, is unstable, and changes quickly.
“Blessed One, please do so,” said the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya, and listened as the Blessed One had instructed him.
Don’t help him by holding his robes or his offering bowl.
“I, as a capable man, shall do as the king pleases,”
“Why do we not give you a place to stay? It is because you have a fault.
silken fabrics,
While beings see and think That this world realm is burning,
Individual liberation, bodhisattva,
unless there are the two causative factors, jealousy and stinginess.”
If that is not perceived, There is no insight into any phenomenon.
“For the sake of this peaceful samādhi, All the immeasurable,
On the head, a crown-seal should be placed, Representing the five buddhas.
recite the mantra 100,000 times for each syllable.
“Noble son, bodhisattvas receive ordination into the excellent teaching of the Dharma-Vinaya
attained the highest, supreme enlightenment.
‘Sir, hello! I’m tormented by the scorching summer heat and I’m suffering from thirst.
Similarly, the diligence of bodhisattvas is also stainless and free of all flaws.
“Protector, you are to conquer the works of Māra And bring defeat to the extremists.
and those travelers saw the rogues, bandits, and foes holding weapons in their hands,
“Next they focus on their own bodies being one with the body of space, and with that focus they entirely transcend all perceptions of form.
He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of the emptiness of non-dispersal!”
Their bodies are the same as the bodies of all beings.
Noble one, I also entrust to you whatever relics there will be from my passing into nirvāṇa.
But what is the extent of those sections of the Dharma to which the Thus-Gone One refers using that expression?
“At that time the entire surface of this earth Was pleasant and had good harvests, and no disorder.
“When Dipaṃkara made the prediction for the Pure One, He said, ‘You will become a buddha, a lion among the lions of men.’
to that end, Blessed One, may all my woman’s organs now disappear from my body, and those of a man appear!
An encounter with you, O Sage, is always so long in coming.
“Recall all the suffering you have experienced Circling through cyclic existence until now.
For the sake of ripening those who experience anger they engage in activities of anger, yet they do not dwell on the experience of anger.
“The many millions of buddhas in the future, Who are innumerable, beyond reckoning,
They do not see any true source of anger, nor any way that anger emerges, nor any conditions that caused it to arise.
It is avoiding that which is outside the scope of correct conduct.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ excellent unperturbed patience.
“As for these living beings, there is nothing to be applied, and there is nothing to be removed;
Then, to those bodhisattva great beings, he signaled that he was about to deliver a distinguished Dharma teaching.
who is a parasol for beings;
“Isolation is the unexcelled state of the Teacher;
the rākṣasī named Hārītī, with her children and servants
the form of a man,
so that the śrāvakas might transcend the troubles of birth, aging, illness, death, misery, wailing, suffering, and unhappiness,
“What is arriving at the right time? It is knowledge of the time.
Similarly, the non-existent applications of mindfulness remain unattached to non-existent applications of mindfulness, and the same goes for [the other non-existent causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path.
the light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Ratnacchattra­kūṭa­saṃdarśana, who resided in the world Ratnavyūhā of the Thus-Gone One Ratnārcis’ buddha realm.
Similarly, it has not been revealed so that they eyes might be grasped or not grasped.
Some are established in unimpeded eloquence, And some in thousands of millions of retentions.
then, while they are abiding in, cognizing, and intent on physical forms,
“The analogy here is of a group of people who wish to go to a jewel island and set out to cross the great ocean by boat, but the boat breaks apart in the great ocean.
[4] they maintain the Dharma they have received; [5] they obtain the Dharma they have not previously received;
Their hands and feet are utterly pure.
Visualizing her in my complete form.
and the mercantile class, standing out like a tall sāl tree;
They will teach this Dharma again and again And they will not have the slightest weariness in doing so.
“Exalted in discipline and austerity, you act for the welfare of beings;
“He clearly realizes the faults of women;
the four unhindered discernments,
in that moment, from the sky above there descended a great rainfall of coral tree flowers and great coral tree flowers.
All the girls were virtuous, agreeable, and wholesome in conduct.
“It is as if there were a man Who went into the home of his friend.
Without attributes and without characteristics, They are taught to be without attributes. {109}
this same refrain should also be applied in the case of the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth and the fruit of no longer being subject to rebirth, up to and including [the fruit] of arhatship.
Venerable Lord! How are physical forms non-existent, being inconceivable, unappraisable, innumerable, and equal to the unequaled?
Even if one is celibate, One may engage with a woman of supreme, celestial birth.
Suddenly release the moon?’
in the same way, Venerable Lord, although great bodhisattva beings practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom, they do not think, ‘The level of the śrāvakas or the level of the pratyekabuddhas is far from me, and unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment is near!’
and this was the happiness and suffering I experienced.
those who have seen the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Śākyamuni and
In this way one applies oneself entirely to desire without there being any occasion without it.
and the fragrance of that food permeated the entire great city of Vaiśālī
Ānanda, it is indeed just as you say.
He said, ‘In the past when I was practicing bodhisattva conduct,
You should enter homes as if entering the family of the Buddha.
They should not lack the four immeasurable aspirations, the four formless absorptions, or the thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment!’
tall seating, grand seating, untimely eating, and accepting gold and silver,
Will not attain the highest accomplishment.’
there is a world known as Realm of Lotuses. Therein resides the one known as Padma­netra.
Kāśyapa, there are not three yānas.
They have gone for refuge in the Thus-Gone One.
it is, Su­bhūti, because the tathāgatas continuously honor, venerate, respect, and make offerings to, and similarly favor and pursue, the vehicle and the path—that is to say, the vehicle through which they have reached [the level of] a tathāgata, and the path by which they have attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
one’s wishes will come true.
“Moreover, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who yearn for this samādhi,
Then, monks, the thought occurred to the Bodhisattva,
It will be a teaching with excellent meaning and excellent words. It will be unique, perfect, pure, purifying, and consummate.
The realization of dharmas as they are is non-attachment.
the samādhi of completion through water,
“One could recount for hundreds of eons the many qualities Ascribed to the austere disciplines of mendicancy,
Gaining accomplishments for numerous eons, Has taught to the bodhisattvas
they have followed them for a long time; they have been diligent;
Will it be the Brāhmī script, the Kharoṣṭī script, or the Puṣkarasāri script? Will it be the Aṅga script, the Vaṅga script, the Magadha script, the Maṅgalya script, the Aṅgulīya script, the Śakāri script, the Brahmavali script, the Pāruṣya script, the Drāviḍa script, the Kirāta script, the Dākṣiṇya script, the Ugra script, the Saṃkhyā script, the Anuloma script, the Avamūrdha script, the Darada script, the Khāṣya script, the Cīna script, the Lūna script, the Hūṇa script, the Madhyākṣara­vistara script, the Puṣpa script, the Deva script, the Nāga script, the Yakṣa script, the Gandharva script, the Kiṃnara script, the Mahoraga script, the Asura script, the Garuḍa script, the Mṛgacakra script, the Vāyasaruta script, the Bhaumadeva script, the Antarīkṣa­deva script, the Uttara­kuru­dvīpa script, the Aparagoḍānī script, the Pūrvavideha script, the Utkṣepa script, the Nikṣepa script, the Vikṣepa script, the Prakṣepa script, the Sāgara script, the Vajra script, the Lekhapratilekha script, the Anudruta script, the Śāstrāvarta script, the Gaṇanāvarta script, the Utkṣepāvarta script, the Nikṣepāvarta script, the Pādalikhita script, the Dviruttara­pada­saṃdhi script, the Yāvaddaśottara­pada­saṃdhi script, the Madhyāhāriṇī script, the Sarva­ruta­saṃgrahaṇī script, the Vidyānulomā­vimiśrita script, the Ṛṣi­tapastapta script, the Rocamāna script, the Dharaṇī­prekṣiṇī script, the Gagana­prekṣiṇī script, the Sarvauṣadhi­niṣyanda script, the Sarva­sāra­saṃgrahaṇī script, or the Sarva­bhūta­ruta­grahaṇī script? Master, which of those sixty-four scripts will you teach me?”
Prostrations to the category of themes;
“Venerable Lord! When it is said that they should don the great armor, what is the extent of the great armor that they should don?”
when the Bhagavān said that we are true sons of the Tathāgata.
“The sound of your voice does not go beyond your followers. It cuts through everyone’s hundreds of doubts.
At first to renounce a householder’s concerns and go forth is hard.
“They have entered homelessness in my teaching And in future times when the supreme enlightenment is vanishing
Superior intention is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
likewise, the earth element, the water element, the fire element, the wind element, the space element, and the consciousness element are calm and void.
and when birth, old age, sickness, and death have become known that a bodhisattva enters his mother’s womb.
and seizes the mother because of motherly love received in one’s former births, and also for the sake of exquisite pleasure.
But aspire to the Dharma of all the jinas. These are distinctive qualities of the first patience. {4}
He stood up from his seat, joined his palms, prostrated to the Bodhisattva’s feet,
in the manner of non-affliction and non-purification,
The ear is outer form,
Some are greater due to pedigree, Others because of age or riches.
The Bodhisattva then said, “Monks, in twelve years the Bodhisattva shall enter the womb of his mother.” At that time the gods from the pure realms ventured to Jambudvīpa.
who has attained the ultimate yoga;
anger, and ignorance,
“Furthermore, the element of consciousness,
“Mañjuśrī, whoever sees all phenomena as not unequal, nondual, and not dualistically distinguishable has right view.
Before him were assembled devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans, who were gazing upon him, and
Likewise, it will form a boundary one league to the west.
the Blessed Buddha Kāśyapa.
“Mañjuśrī, are you this eloquent because you know and understand any phenomenon whatsoever?”
When those hopes were shown to be just that, and the prince Rāhulabhadra became a renunciant,
Similarly, [the remaining steps ensue] when one achieves and abides in [the formless absorptions], from the sense field of infinite space to the cessation of all perceptions and feelings.
and then encouraged, secured, and established sentient beings, one hundred billion trillion in number, in the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
By bodhisattvas who have newly entered the yāna, Those who have served many millions of buddhas
My body and mind were untouched by fatigue.
The most important among them is
One should add the mantra: ‘Destroy such and such disease of such and such a person!’
Therefore, even those who aspire for the sixth Meditate on the complete fifth, Preceded by the fourth.
Inasmuch as consciousness neither arises from anywhere, nor does it go anywhere, but
Su­bhūti, these are the six extrasensory powers of great bodhisattva beings.
Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī replied, “Of course,” and dressed the prince lavishly.
Suppose a son or daughter of noble family comes to possess this excellent quality.
or, if that were the case, that the practice of chastity would also become a non-entity, the path of the bodhisattvas would become a non-entity,
A god offers him saffron robes of beautiful stainless cloth;
eventually leading him back to his mother, to whom the lad’s friend said,
“Noble son, you may wonder about the character of the bodhisattvas’ skill in worshiping and venerating the thus-gone ones.
’ Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who practice the six transcendent perfections accordingly will perfect the six transcendent perfections and also approach omniscience.
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ excellent power of their retinue consist in?
"མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ་མ་ཉམས་པས་ན་མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ་ཐོབ་པ་ཡང་<tTheir superknowledge is unimpaired, and they achieve superknowledge.
‘Namo buddhāya, namo dharmāya, namaḥ saṃghāya.’ The insects remembered the words namo buddhāya, namo dharmāya, namaḥ saṃghāya, and the thunderbolt of wisdom destroyed the mountain, which has twenty peaks, that is the view of the aggregates as a self,
Self-Born One, that you now live in my country Is for me the greatest gift of all.”
Physical harm is to run, race, and let one’s discipline become corrupted for the sake of acquiring things.
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings should don the armor of the transcendent perfection of generosity,
Similarly, the non-arising, non-affliction, and non-purification of the ears, nose, tongue, and body are without foundation
“In the past, for billions of eons, You trained in concentration to purify the afflictions.
“Sugata, the merit that those noble men and noble women will have created on that basis will be great.”
I am thirsty for the Dharma, so quench my thirst with the taste of the Dharma!
This real nature is uncreated.
he has not followed the noble path.”
Then, if appropriate, he should give various Dharma teachings.
Su­bhūti, do you think that the real nature of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness can be terminated or abandoned, or does it cease?
accompanied by many adorned horses and elephants without riders that were being led along,
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti saw the crown prince Mañjuśrī and addressed him thus:
“For example, Su­bhūti, suppose there was a heroic man,
Be gracious to me, O mother!’
the samādhi named Aspiration,
It is pure, having relinquished desire, anger, and bewilderment.
after innumerable, countless eons he will attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
By means of the sūtra noose They are all bound by the five fetters!
“ ‘Whoever wishes to realize the qualities of a buddha, Which are inconceivable and beyond measure,
“The king invites you all to come inside.”
There will never be any darkness In their teaching of the enlightenment of buddhahood. {43}
reveals the vision of the tathāgatas’ wisdom, causes entry into the vision of the tathāgatas’ wisdom,
Prince Bimbisāra sent mounted emissaries in the four directions with the message,
Knowing the heroism of those individuals, Pure beings who have defeated the kleśas,
“Conditioned things are inert and empty;
is reborn solely from the element of dharmas.
And for no fewer than fifty years In sorrow he searches the ten directions.
Blessed One, I have harbored doubt.
And someone were to worship as just explained, With divine flowers and the most precious flowers of this world,
and the left side of the divine palace had become completely filled with divine clothing.
“He thus gained this name of Yaśaskāma, Which became renowned everywhere.
If you ask what constitute the four unhindered discernments, they comprise
When the bodhisattvas had given their explanations, they all addressed the crown prince Mañjuśrī:
the nine planets
As a comparison, I can count how many atoms there are, but,
This concludes the twenty-fifth chapter, on exhortation.
Ānanda, the wealth and enjoyments of sentient beings of this buddha field will be like those of the gods of the Thirty-Three.
whereas the female form is nonexistence.
Once they had arrived, the Bodhisattva’s body began emitting light, which manifested into lion thrones.
On the tenth ground, bodhisattvas attain the body of wisdom.
The realm of phenomena neither increases nor decreases, and
went to where the Blessed One was staying.
She is going to kill you.
‘It is he we should protect.
those things that are non-entities, those that have an essential nature of non-entity, and those that are empty of intrinsic defining characteristics.”
it is because the irreversible great bodhisattva beings do not require even a single demonstration of the sacred doctrine
They set out for perfect awakening beyond suffering And call out, ‘May all be successful!’ ”
He replied, “This is owing to the non-disintegration of all things!”
They had perfected the samādhi of glorious adornment. They had perfected the samādhi of the essence of great brilliance.
Many hundreds of Śākyas tried to revive him, Sprinkling water from vases on him as he lay motionless.
they will know that this individual is a beginner bodhisattva, practicing the transcendent perfection of generosity, having just begun to set his or her mind on enlightenment, and so on,
Emptiness is indeed consciousness. The nature of consciousness is indeed emptiness.
When the Blessed one gave this teaching,
Wherever they go, there beings should honor, venerate, and make offerings to them,
About this state the noble ones have taught, ‘When one is mindful and blissful, that is equanimity.’
They manifest in various forms, As many as there are types of creatures.
having understood that all things are by nature but magical creations,
Even your father, mother, friends, and relatives Are not free from old age, nor is any other class of people.”
ask him, ‘You are not a shape-shifter, are you?’
They should have perfect generosity Through remaining in seclusion. {53}
He did not renounce and let go of his spouse, or his child, village, town, city, royal palace, or retinue.
Looking at form, one is never satisfied—whether at first, in the middle, or in the end—and therefore one physically engages in an ocean of non-virtuous deeds.
and then the entire great caravan called out in one voice to Avalokiteśvara, saying,
Then Daṇḍapāṇi said to the Śākya youths, “This has now been tested and witnessed. Next let him demonstrate his skill in archery.”
listening to the Dharma from the Bhagavān for sixty eons.
“ ‘The one whose mind is at rest in that nature Is always without desire, anger, and ignorance.
“You may wonder, noble son, what these qualities may imply, from the bodhisattvas’ being unstained through to their being protected.
Through this practice they make all manifest inner marks disappear.
Bhagavān, what they say would not be believed. It would be difficult for the world to believe them.
The Bodhisattva then went to the hermitage of a brahmin woman called Śākī.
“When the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class wishes to examine the precious jewel,
And the eight gods, together with their Śakras,
who has a sacred thread made of the nāga kings Nanda and Upananda;
To the bhikṣus, bhikṣunīs, upāsakas, And upāsikās who were there at that time, And who held the view of objective reality.
No one can harm me here beneath this tree,
As they concern themselves with form they do not observe any arising, origin, or cessation of form.
will gain eight hundred qualities of the ears,
The Blessed One was dwelling in Vaiśālī in the mansion in Āmrapālī’s great grove , together with a great assembly of ten thousand monks. All these monks were foe-destroyers whose defilements were exhausted.
And only these rites belong to the heart mantras.
And the thoughts of all beingsAre known in a single instant. {100}
It is the exhaustion of craving and it is cessation free of desire. It is nirvāṇa.
no need to mention the pieces of all the seeds.”
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess ten such qualities are the shelterless.
‘Even the members of low castes and outcasts are fond of wealth; they cherish it, like it, and enjoy it.
“So it is that great bodhisattva beings, from the time when they first begin to set their mind on enlightenment,
when they then employ such skill in means?
Thoroughly burn with a blazing fire.
obtained the pleasures of the five senses.
“Your Majesty, even if one man were to attain All the pleasures of the gods And everything desirable among humans, It still would not suffice, and he would search for more.
He has appeared out of the roots of virtue that were brought about by previous buddhas.
Oṁ, Jayā, Vijayā, Ajitā, Aparājitā, svāhā!
The surrounding environs of their land are like a desert, with few groves, lakes, and ponds. This is a primitive land, like a remote village.
The sword is wisdom, and the noose is skillful means.
Someone who recites one verse from this sūtra Where those kinds of wise people walk,
He has put together a work known as Māṭhara’s Treatise.”
It is the natural expression of all things.
the faculty of wisdom. These too should be cultivated without apprehending anything.
Noble lady, a woman may maintain diligence, create merit for many thousands of eons,
“we will now proceed to Jewel World.”
It is just the same for the element of consciousness:
Other than the Tathāgata, no śrāvaka, pratyeka­buddha, or bodhisattva can outshine your merit, knowledge, wisdom, or samādhi.
to have the conviction that all phenomena are the inexhaustible true nature.
who commit this transcendent perfection of wisdom to writing, and then retain, hold, master,
“Noble son, because they possess ten qualities bodhisattvas are free of doubt.
It is neither miraculous [nor magical].
he would not be able to end his praise of this Dharma teaching,
he dispatched bell ringers and made the following announcement to the people in his city:
In that life such was my name. Such was my family. Such was my social class. Such was the food I ate.
“While riding in the chariot I saw a bhikṣu Who was perfectly handsome and attractive,
Friends, whoever has this outlook and, thinking that other sentient beings should receive this instruction, teaches this Dharma teaching of The Play in Full elaborately,
it can carry pleasant smells and can carry bad smells.
"རིགས་ཀྱི་བུ་འདི་ལ་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་སེམས་<tNoble son, bodhisattva great beings do so by reflecting in this way:
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for the bodhisattva mahāsattvas from being devoted to meditation.”
n the same way the element of consciousness, after leaving the body behind,
Also, when any great bodhisattva beings, without being separated from the attention associated with omniscience,
and to develop bravery of mind.
Venerable Lord! How is the transcendent perfection of wisdom absolutely pure because space is not apprehended?
They are large bodied and terrible, Mighty and loud, With ten necks and a thousand eyes, Great grahas with red eyes. “Dispatching their retainers,
he is then asked: “Have your parents given you leave?” The ordinand responds: “They have given me leave.”
Next he meditated the fact that his own body was just like theirs,
should be diligent, without regard for life or body,
Similarly, it is owing to the emptiness of external phenomena and the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, that the three vehicles have been extensively taught without apprehending anything.
Some brought forth trees of beryl, some trees of crystal;
“When a person sees a mass of foam That is carried along in a river
“For hundreds of lives you trained in forbearance;
He asked, “Venerable Lord!” What is the immaturity that craves for the sacred doctrine?”
Then, the incarnated bodhisattva gave the vessel full of food to Vimalakīrti,
and the transcendent perfection of generosity,
Fail to appear and you too will soon find yourself in this state.”
some were made of silver;
like the reincarnation of one who has attained ultimate liberation.
Reject all the darkness of ignorance, And become a lion among men, delighting in peace. {101}
so too the element of consciousness is gladdened by the status of sovereignty, and is satisfied with its body as well
The mind that would be equipoised in union with the transcendent perfection of wisdom is actually equipoised in union with space.
physical forms that have not been grasped are not physical forms.
One will be able to perceive all smells.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ excellent compassionate patience.
the one who serves the world, the one who knows the world,
“Then, Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, beyond that pore, last of all, there is the pore named Dhvajārāja.
it is because there is no opportunity for emptiness to impinge upon emptiness.
"དོན་དམ་པ་ལ་མཁས་<tThey do not partake of a Dharma versed in the ultimate nor of a Dharma concerned with nirvāṇa.
A full nine thousand of those with matted hair Followed behind the śrāvaka saṅgha.
His private parts are well sheathed.
Those who have made statues of the sugatas: They will all of them attain enlightenment. {84}
Since this severely strict punishment Was uttered by all buddhas
It is insensate, being driven like a windmill.
(75) The hair of their heads is untangled. (76) Their heart is excellently adorned with the śrīvatsa motif.
Whoever hears the meaning that is taught In this way will attain enlightenment.
Blessed One, who are the bodhisattvas who remain in hermitages,
Let him serve this one possessing excellent qualities.
They will go to the foot of the Bodhi tree in order to attain the enlightenment of buddhahood.
giving,
How are their perfections of patience?
“The purity of phenomena is profound due to the absolute purity of physical forms.
One should cultivate the clear understanding of non-attachment.
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood
One should climb on to one’s bed and, holding one’s penis with the left hand, recite 108 times.
“Ānanda, were your life to last an entire eon, it would not be easy for you to understand thoroughly the extensive meaning and precise verbal significance of these three names.
These childish beings are exhausted, like water running into the surface of the earth.
cultivated the eighteen great fields of knowledge,
I shall encourage others to keep abstaining from wrong views [and the other non-virtuous actions].
This mechanism of suffering has emerged from karma and disturbing emotions.
investigating the self,
After hearing the Dharma, they provided the visiting monks and wanderer monks with all the supplies they needed,
It was enormous with a circumference of seven hundred miles,
Why is that? Because this Dharma is beyond all words, beyond all statements, beyond the entire domain of language, and beyond any verbal expression.
followed by the universal monarch and his four army divisions.
“Fifth is dullness and stupor;
The wonderful, inconceivable Dharma of the jinas, That is what is called the pure restraint of the mind. {73}
Again, Śāradvatī­putra, there are great bodhisattva beings whose minds are not without omniscience,
in this way, this entire great heap of suffering ceases.
One who, when this Dharma teaching is being taught,
Likewise they resort for refuge in mountains, rivers, sources of rivers, lakes, ponds, pools, oceans, reservoirs, lotus ponds, and wells; trees, bushes, vines, grass, tree trunks; cow pens, cemeteries, crossroads where four roads meet, and markets.
“Lord, in which buddhafield did the noble Vimalakīrti die, before reincarnating in this buddhafield?”
Beyond that pore, there is a pore named Amṛtabindu. In that pore a million trillion devas live.
“Bhikṣus, those who have the vows of training should have the three Dharma robes.
Like the orb of the moon, Like a conjurer,
the hearers, bodhisattvas, the whole assembly, and
Sometime later, the monk matricide fell ill.
“Your Majesty,” they replied,
He is a peerless guide who illuminates the path.”
Each one has eighty thousand peaks,
Similarly, you should undertake perseverance!
Heard in all three realms and by all beings.
In that manner exclusively they encourage, secure and establish sentient beings in meditative concentration; and, in various ways, they encourage, secure and establish them, so that they will never be separated from the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration until they have attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed and genuinely perfect enlightenment.
write it down, commission it to be written, memorize it, read it,
is genuinely perfect buddhahood, the nature of the tathāgatas, self-origination, and omniscience.
All these are the [causal and fruitional attributes] which are to be perfected by great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
who in the presence of the Bhagavān were gazing upon the Bhagavān with tranquil minds, placid minds, and gentle minds.
Then, gradually, he brings him into the house, And for an entire twenty years
in the same way the element of consciousness, because it appropriates actions, produces large and small forms.
each and every one of those bodhisattvas attends as many buddhas, together with bodhisattvas and hearers,
When this is completed,
He has never wavered in his firm resolve to teach the same Dharma to everyone. Therefore
clothes, a parasol,
and similarly, why would they have a view concerning the sensory element of sights, and in the same vein, why would they have a view concerning [other sensory elements], up to and including the sensory element of mental phenomena,
acts of service undertaken on behalf of a clan chieftain,
In the east, one should draw White Acala;
“It is known by wise beings. It is the knowledge of gentle beings.
and those beings will serve and honor many buddhas.
Bearing their loads of wood, they came to the house in which the teacher of brahmins lived.
“Gods, excellent! Excellent!
will the Bodhisattva Maitreya teach this transcendent perfection of wisdom, having attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment?
He also will not worship those who teach it, write it down, read it aloud, memorize it, disseminate it, or transmit it.
[5] they are beloved by the fourfold assembly; [6] they enter the assembly without fear or lack of confidence;
While he was stringing the bow, a sound resonated throughout the entire city of Kapilavastu.
He should stand in equanimity toward all living beings.
“Ānanda, do monks grant ordination into the monkhood to persons who have not yet reached twenty years?”
“It is strewn with divine flowers And scented with divine perfumes. I will offer this spacious palace;
it is not endowed with awareness,
Each of those supreme humans liberated as many beings As there are grains of sand in the Ganges. {165}
Even though we have tried and persisted for a long time in this way, we have not been able to realize our goal.
“Monks, in this way, while the Bodhisattva dwelt in his mother’s womb, he ripened 36 million gods and humans within the Three Vehicles.”
not seen, not heard, not smelt, not tasted, not touched,
this transcendent perfection of wisdom is instructive
Thus their buddhafield will become utterly purified by the excellence of exalted wisdom,
They do not forsake the transcendent perfection of wisdom, and they do not lack the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
“Immeasurable one, devoid of the skandhas, Great hero, we ask you to reveal to us, Courageous one, from where have come These bodhisattvas who have no fear?”
ferry them to the other shore of the ocean of saṃsāra.
Devas and humans as numerous as the Ganges sands Will constantly place their hands together in homage to him.
They will be capable of warding off all heretical refutations and imputations that might arise.
And the assemblies of gods all know my thoughts. They know my discipline, qualities, restraint, and carefulness;
this is to be cultivated,
At that moment, too, a wind called ‘desiring nectar’ stirs.
On the fourteenth and the thirteenth day, Introduce the students to the activity.
and simultaneously, in the same instant, the same moment, the same second,
Why did you smile? Pray tell, what was the reason?
perceiving the individuals who explain the Dharma as teachers and regarding them as spiritual friends.
Therefore the thus-gone ones are said to possess the marks of inconceivable merit.”
Similarly, it offers the prospect of rebirth among the gods of the Catur­mahā­rāja­kāyika realm,
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind do not associate with wrong views in order to desist from wrong views;
The ripening of a large result is experienced from having performed a minor action. Thus, it entails the production of a large result from a small cause.
Endowed with the joy and happiness that arise from meditative concentration, they then accomplish the second meditative absorption and maintain it.
When they die they will see a thousand buddhas.
“As another analogy, a bee may stay for a long while on a flower because it clings to its taste but, once it has partaken of that flower, leaves it behind and moves on to another.
Likewise this Bodhisattva has no army,
After putting water inside the flower, it will drip.
And yet, the particle neither fills up nor do the worlds diminish.
Through miraculous power he came before the Jina, Accompanied by eight hundred million beings. {159}
he respectfully approached them.
Clever curlews, swans, cuckoos, and peacocks Are circumambulating the Bodhisattva.
“Young man, at that time, the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ghoṣadatta
We should accept as the tathāgatas those great bodhisattva beings who are not separated from this transcendent perfection of wisdom.
it shuddered, it shuddered strongly, and it shuddered intensely;
aversion will disappear and aversion will not arise;
However, at this moment the Bodhisattva’s magnificence and power caused the fig tree itself to bow down and pay homage to him.
Similarly, the very nature of [the other aggregates], up to and including consciousness, is the expanse of reality,
they themselves do not have the capacity to display such a field of experience and the distinguishing qualities of his practice.
There is the meditative stability named Eradication of Referents.
Divine princes, bodhisattvas should indeed train in all these.
they wish to disclose their root transgressions,
On waking on the sandy beach, the group of six said,
“Śāradvatī­putra, the ‘four applications of mindfulness’ are merely conceptualized.
Monks, during the six years that the Bodhisattva practiced austerities, he was continually followed by Māra, the evil one.
all the karma they have generated by engaging in the five acts with immediate retribution will be completely exhausted.
Not pass away without fulfilling his intention, And thus leave this triple world suffering and without a defender.
providing for the suffering world,
Just as the wind element carries both kinds of smell as it passes,
“As beings are, so are their thoughts; As are their thoughts, so are the jinas.
the bodhisattva mahāsattva Sarva­sattva­priya­darśana’s arm was restored as it was before, which was due to the bodhisattva mahāsattva’s having gained the power of wisdom and having gained the power of merit.
I will stay here and look after this milk porridge with honey.”
It is just as you have said.
Women are the Buddha, women are the Saṅgha, Women are the Perfection of Wisdom‌.
They have trained in the way of definitive knowledge, Have vast understanding, and constantly have joyful wisdom. {26}
The assembly of gods showed him great reverence, honoring him as one who would leave their midst and take birth in the human world,
And gods can see humans,
they do not attain emancipation in omniscience?”
Who are they?
they will delight in hearing this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom,
It is a state of complete peace, free of clinging, free of grasping, unobserved, undemonstrable, uncompounded, beyond the six sense fields,
places that are delightful to move in; and places that are nothing but peaceful. Such are the places in which they stay.
then, by any means, I should ensure that those sentient beings act appropriately so that the faults associated with those sentient beings do not arise!
Gather them with your noble wealth.
and repeatedly said, ‘I have realized this profound Dharma’ and ‘It is difficult to know the intended meaning of the teaching’?
Please teach it to bring benefit and happiness.”
Among the audience of gods, there were eight thousand who had previously refined the roots of virtue, who now formed the resolve set on unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.
Since her form is like a magical emanation, the word māyā, meaning ‘magically emanated,’ was included in her name.
If you ask what is their fixation, and on what they are fixated,
“When these peaceful methods are not sufficient, With terrible weapons Set their homes ablaze.
I shall take refuge and adopt the precepts in the presence of the Blessed One.”
“Your disciplined conduct and austerities are beyond compare;
Just as in space, the limit of the past is non-apprehensible, and
Tathāgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddhas will appear in the world.
By the power of the victorious ones, the instruments call out these verses:
The sense of smell has no form, either.
“It seemed so to those who saw and heard them.”
that evening he sat in front of the Tathāgata’s stūpa, bound his right hand in cotton, and immersed it in sesame oil.
He is the one upon whose face the lord of the yakṣas gazes.
The Dharma is primordially without a self, without a being. Although it is taught, it does not cease. {24}
and five thousand gods who held reference points all made this supplication:
and the upper half extends upward for 84,000 yojanas. Noble son, if Sumeru were to become a mass of birch bark;
They teach them the supreme eightfold path Of peace that is difficult to see. {57}
By defaming the enlightenment of the buddhas,
“Then Yama’s guardians gathered their swords, clubs, short spears, long spears, maces, discuses, tridents, and so on, and, taking all their Avīci utensils, went to the Dharmarāja Yamarāja.
One will be cured even of the quartan fever and other recurring fevers.
Then at that time the man thinks,
Uttara­mati,
the samādhi named King of Arrays,
“More than five hundred physicians Diligently sought to cure that illness,
They should also recite the names of the four great kings.
‘You with infinite vision, turn the wheel!
the proficiency in mantra and yantra, Which have been described as being of many types.
“Mañjuśrī, in the same manner the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha is empty,
I pay homage to all the vajraḍākinīs Who cut the bonds of conceptual thought and descend to act in the world.
went to the mansion in Āmrapālī’s great grove .
Thus, due to such causes, conditions, and bases they will regard their preceptor as their teacher, regardless of whether their preceptor has received little or abundant teaching, is knowledgeable or ignorant, or is disciplined or of inferior discipline.
‘Give heed, give heed to me, Ākāśagarbha of great renown, endowed with great compassion and intent on the welfare of beings!
How would they be able to sleep, eat, or laugh, If they abandoned it?
the eye consciousness arises by way of five principles.
Since I would cross that many worlds just to free a single being,
“I have a dhāraṇī called jayamatī that I received from the Thus-Gone One Jayaghoṣa when I was a bodhisattva.
‘Oṁ, blessed Hatred Vajrī, you are an accomplished being! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
If you ask how it is unobstructed, it is unobstructed with regard to physical forms.
So out of the great love and compassion he felt, like a swan spreading its wings, he flew up into the sky above
He teaches the Dharma in the form of a tathāgata to beings who are to be taught by a tathāgata.
“What is not resting in the uncompounded?
In a timely manner, they pay respect to disciplined mendicants and brahmins.
it is even more astonishing that
And I asked questions about this samādhi for A hundred and forty thousand million years. {9}
and he listened as the Blessed One had directed him.
Accompanied by the pleasant sounds of thousands of cymbals, The queen ascended and rested like a divine maiden.
This great bodhisattva being, in such and such a world system, has donned the great armor,
Also present were devas who were of the four classes of gandharvas—Manojña, Manojñasvara,
Monk, as all phenomena are non-arising by nature, they are entirely free from pain.
Place in a vajra hollow, And grind with the world-protector.
“Blessed One, when I hear about the conduct of those wicked beings, it almost makes me faint!”
“Noble sons, the Tathāgata’s intention is to relate a great Dharma teaching.
Su­bhūti, if all things were apprehended not to be empty,
then honors, venerates, and respects it,
Develop wisdom, completely pure wisdom, And quickly become compassionate. {84}
Their minds have no attachment to phenomena. They practice with joy, benefiting beings. {10}
Rather, divine son, on the ultimate level, ultimate truth transcends all conventions.
and they should also encourage others to acquire the cultivation of the four applications of mindfulness.
Gopā, with such good omens, lay down and sleep.”
In this world I see no one Capable of disturbing my diligence.
They do not attach importance to the sentient beings who are to be brought to maturity.
“The wise who understand the composite and noncomposite Have ceased conceptualizing attributes.
The six hundred million yakṣas
writing,
There, for the sake of renunciation, The Bodhisattva persevered with continuous and stable strength.
“Children of noble family, if you know that the time has come to leave, then do so.”
He accepted it along with a gift of water, sesame, and gold, and then vanished.
All widows should indeed be attended upon;
“Āditya and Candra came from his eyes,
Because he has these signs, Prince Sarvārthasiddha will not stay at home, but will certainly develop renunciation and depart from his home.
In the cities of Indra, Brahmā, the Sun, and the Moon, there is no equal to him.
On the relative level, the correct conceptual workings of the mind are a gateway to nirvāṇa.
The ministers then prostrated at the king’s feet and asked,
“Women are heaven, women are the Dharma,
Even the gods had done their best to decorate the forest.
not despising the unlearned, and respecting the learned as if they were the Teacher himself;
and they have asked what is the bodhisattvas’ purification of the buddhafield.
Then the blessed goddess of the Vajra Realm, having entered the absorption of Hatred Vajrī, said this:
or of all tīrthikas such as the Carakas, Parivrājakas, and Nirgranthas, and so forth; or of any others, down to the roots of what is wholesome of those stuck in what is wrong; it is through having the Tathāgata as their basis and support that they grow and become sizeable.
“Śāriputra, the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas have obtained that which is a great marvel.
Arise, bhikṣu, and teach the supreme Dharma! {46}
In the event that there is no majority within the saṅgha and he has been ordained, the ordination is to be judged valid,
The entire assembly of Śākyas was shocked and astonished.
Thereby swiftly attaining the grounds.
They should also praise and rejoice in others who act in order to bring sentient beings to maturation.
Śāriputra, this is the Dharma teaching that begins with a section on the sense pleasures.
“Through practicing that conduct Millions of beings become ripened.
the sensory element of the body, the sensory element of tangibles, and the sensory element of tactile consciousness;
Conceived as four finger-widths, or a full thumb-length above the central deity,
Should it be with lotus flowers, perfume, Flower garlands, clothing, Or perhaps with food and drink?
and if fresh, untarnished human flesh is prepared with various flavors and given to him to eat, then this bhikṣu will be cured of his illness.
who spoke this panegyric:
“The one thousand two hundred Trāyastriṃśa devas assembled there to listen to the Dharma were made joyous and happy and made various divine offerings.
Adorned by a plenitude of seats and beds That they donate directly to the sugatas. {38}
They will not construe the notion that physical forms are calm.
When they dispense their gifts, miserliness does not arise.
It is the bridge over the swamp of desire,
[all attributes and attainments], up to and including that which is termed ‘omniscience,’ are to be counted as imperishable?”
will be unable to bear the majesty, the glory, and the exaltedness of those eminently powerful gods endowed with great occult power and great miraculous abilities,
“Since he cuts the stream of all formations, he is not within the sphere of performance.
do they then teach the Dharma?” Mañjuśrī said,
Contact is the causal condition of feeling.”
Divine being, the buddhas appear so that all features of the various views may be realized.
They sent rains with thunder, released bolts of lightning, caused a rain of hot iron sands, gathered black clouds, and made storms arise.
yet relatively they are unharmed by the torments of attachment.
Potalaka too was delighted. He sat straight up, raised his right hand, and exclaimed with great joy,
The colors yellow, dark-green, white, and black in the intermediary directions
who sees the realm of hatred as the sphere of nirvāṇa, and who sees the realm of delusion as the sphere of nirvāṇa, will attain purification from karmic obscurations.
As the lower realms are pacified, As all beings feel joy, He Who Will Establish Beings in Happiness, The Bringer of Joy, has been born!
When thoughts become nonthought, At that time there is nonthought. {98}
“They will strike with their hands and feet. They will always engage in fun and play.
without establishing, they established these beings in the teaching.
“Divine son, there is.
If you ask why, Su­bhūti, it is because in a modality that is neither diminished nor enhanced, going or coming is non-apprehensible.
and those disciplined in that way are indeed well disciplined.’ ”
they will become wise in asking questions about the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha,
“Bhagavān, I request that you teach this meaning. I request that the Sugata teach it.
They do not take possession of anything and they do not think in terms of wealth and ownership.
That pore is 84,000 yojanas wide.
Hundreds of thousands of gandharvas and kiṃnaras sang melodious and profound songs,
“Mañjuśrī, is there a method of patience for a bodhisattva great being who has forsaken patience?”
The Jina taught at the Bodhimaṇḍa An inconceivable, subtle, immaculate wisdom. {10}
It was well watered and very clean.
His buddha realm will be pure and
nor does the expanse of reality exist separate from consciousness [and the aforementioned aggregates].
“If you ask what is the ‘emptiness of essential nature,’ it is the absence of any essential nature with respect to anything originating from combinations [of causes and conditions].
Ah! This sublime being will be able to cut entirely through the whole incessant web of affliction with the sword of insight.
It must be descended from a noble family, a family of bodhisattvas.
It then occurred to him, “Craving occurs when there is feeling.
Father, please do away with these decrepit bodies of ours.”
may establish sentient beings in the fruit, but
“Is it possible, O lord, to attain the level of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa even without a woman?
Su­bhūti, it is because the natural expression of their past limits, though without entity, is still consciousness [and the rest].
They do not teach non-Buddhists, the disrespectful, those lacking faith, or the deceitful and dishonest.
I can calculate the time when such a building would be emptied down to the floor,
the concept of feelings,
and on arriving, bowed his head at the Blessed One’s feet before taking a seat off to one side.
All crossroads, junctions, roads, and marketplaces became as even and smooth as the palm of a hand and were beautifully bestrewn with flower petals.
Once the great divine voice had called the gods,
“Blessed One, is there any bodhisattva great being here in this gathering who has attained this illusory absorption?”
They lack strength, influence, determination, and the ability to overcome.
A parasol emerges from the ground and covers the entire three worlds;
It should be known to cause the unsurpassable perfect wisdom of buddhahood.”
They are given, Māra. Go home with your retinue.
“If, in a waterfall, a lake, and so forth, The acts of protecting the body are perfectly performed, It will be the supreme protection.
“ ‘The unequaled teaching of the buddhas, which is dedicated to beings, That supreme Dharma has been taught by the heroes of the past.
“ ‘The conduct of the sugatas, the qualities of the jinas, Are birthlessness, peace, and the absence of attributes.
They prostrated, made offerings, and listened to the sublime Dharma,
“Even though rains of flowers, Enough to fill a world system to the brim, Descend onto your body from the sky, They are like rivers flowing into an ocean.
The lamp, with its glow, will burn steadily under water.
Similarly, they undertake training while realizing the four noble truths,
I teach them a method so that by knowing the many evils In the three realms they may escape from them.
“The dancer is red,
Indeed they cannot be conceived, appraised, or quantified by the world with its gods, humans, and antigods.
And disturbed the humors of wind, bile, and phlegm Throughout the four directions.
“Blessed One, I am the Dharma-upholding king named Vaiśravaṇa.
And they have no longing for a body and no longing for a mind. That is the uniqueness of this attainment of samādhi. {ii}
the one with mastery over all dharmas,
Turning the wheel of Dharma, You teach primordial peace and non-arising,
if someone, whoever they might be, faithfully emulating the Tathāgata, strives to maintain even a single precept in order to honor the Tathāgata, or strives to focus on worshipping the Tathāgata even for a single day, or a single night, or a single moment,
This concludes the sixth chapter, on entering the womb.
mastery of Dharma, as one displays the light of the gateways to the Dharma beyond center and edge;
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the nadir, Padmottara;
“The eyes, the ears, and the nose, The tongue, the body, and likewise the mind,
Upon seeing this, she was choked with tears and began to weep.
that is possessed by all the buddhas,
Bound by the five fetters, They stood with palms joined And addressed the Lord of the World:
What are the stains and flaws related to diligence?
Hence the expression penetrate flawless reality .”
You are just like them”; Worldly persons, ascetics, and brahmins,
“What is not being motivated by material gain? It is having few desires.
Monks, the Thus-Gone One thought,
Also present were the four lords of the asuras—the asura lords Bali, Kharaskandha,
awakening, and sentient beings, and,
It is born of mental quiescence and transcendental analysis.
“When that night was over, on the fifth morning, he went back into the capital city of Ratnāvatī and entered the harem.
so that like devas in the sky, each with its own song, they emitted the sound of music.
Describing the length of the seasons.
O! I am without miserliness. I am a donor. I give alms. O! I give everything. I respect the lord buddhas.
such is its nature. This is called peace.
Venerable Lord! Does this precious gemstone exist among the gods, or does it exist among humans?
"The water in the parks possessed eight special qualities<tei:note xml:id=""UT22084-061-002-15""/> and was limpid, flavorful, cool, pristine, and pure."
There are great bodhisattva beings who can indeed see with their eyes of flesh as far as three hundred yojanas.
“Mother, how long must I endure such suffering?”
Not long before, word had spread about a tīrthika named Sañjayin.
In this regard unconditioned phenomena are empty of unconditioned phenomena.
and in the manner of non-standing, non-sitting, non-grasping, and non-abandoning.
Nārāyaṇa, even if all beings contained in the great billionfold universe had as much insight, wisdom, and merit as a solitary buddha, their collected insight, wisdom, and merit would still not match one hundredth of the amount possessed by a bodhisattva great being who has been definitively emerged for five hundred eons; it would not even bear comparison.
Then Brother Śāriputra made a third request to the Bhagavān, saying,
Without giving anything up means not to abandon any dharma.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designation of sights as afflicted or purified constitutes a bodhisattva?”
The light of that light ray pervaded all those buddha realms from the great Avīci hell up to the apex of existence.
the samādhi named Well Taught,
I served and made offerings to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Śālendrarāja
While passing through the Karpāsī forest, he convinced a noble band of sixty youths of the truths.
Now I get out of the cross-legged posture.”
and those things that I was inspired to say, commencing therefrom, are also non-arising!”
[Please ensure] that they have mindfulness so as to not become forgetful, that they have intelligence so as to realize the intended meaning of the teachings, and that they become realized so as to accomplish realization of the truth.
Just as they have correct knowledge of one single being, they also have correct knowledge of all realms of beings.
The cessation of craving is perpetual nonattachment. This truth of cessation is my third truth.
Follow that road and observe.
To exert oneself in the correct way is to be unobscured about everything.
So please stay in my kingdom and enjoy yourself.”
and in the same vein, [all the causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, are non-apprehensible.
Social activity is a stain and a flaw in relation to diligence.
drink the powder with ghee or fermented rice water.
physical forms are pure, and [all other phenomena, attributes, and attainments], up to and including omniscience, are pure, owing to the purity of the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities.
This is why it may be styled ‘the transcendent perfection of wisdom’.”
They were not subdued by a lord of the world And fell into the lower existences.
But to know the mind, and to be neither attached, averse, nor confused with regard to phenomena—that is called ‘peace.’
That being so,
The not-at-all-tathatā is not afflicted
Even among gods we go unhindered, high above the realm of yakṣas and gandharvas,
When King Bimbisāra heard this, he waived the crossing fee for monks from that day onward.
It had only one entranceway. It was roofed with hay. Its terrace was crumbling.
They should have few involvements,
teach the sacred doctrine to sentient beings by means of the six transcendent perfections which originate from the ripening [of past actions]?
In all such cases, the same refrain should be extensively applied, exactly as indicated above with respect to the psycho-physical aggregates.
It is the sharp wisdom of the congregation of the tathāgatas. It is entering truth and constant knowledge of the Dharma. {59}
“Why is it eyes for those who wish for the view? Because it brings the accomplishment of seeing for oneself.
His wife gave guardianship of their son to relatives while supporting and providing for him through her own industry.
their view of existence, their view of non-existence, their view of the psycho-physical aggregates, their view of the sensory elements,
is free of the three defilements,
O Kauśika, this world is really doomed!
mastering all these roots of virtue and
You will become a king, a supreme ruler, a powerful master of the earth;
Sweat ran from my armpits and from my forehead and, as the sweat fell on the ground,
He now manifested the thirty-two and eighty marks of a great being as well as a halo of light, one fathom in diameter, around his body.
They should not even dwell on the notion ‘[In this, my buddhafield], may the term “bodhisattva” and the term “buddha” exclusively exist.’
and offer perfume and incense of aloe wood.
“Bhadrapāla,
Issued from inexhaustible morality, concentration, and wisdom, the remains of the food of the Tathāgata contained in this vessel cannot be exhausted.
it is because, excellently abiding in the emptiness of space,
that the refinement of the buddhafields is discerned,
Also the world guardians of the four directions Vaiśravaṇa, Dhṛtarāṣṭra the nāga king,
Squint eyed, he inspires fear.
It is delighting in solitude.
winds begin to blow in the atmosphere and the sky above;
is there no imputation of the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities?
You with the voice of a kalaviṅka bird’s call, Who resound with the sound like that of kokila birds and peacocks,
they will degenerate from those [superior] attributes due to their inappropriate actions, which are only associated with interim states.
Glowing with virtuous, stainless, pure golden light, resplendent like the sun and moon,
The husband who is of dark-green color— He is said to be Green Acala.
Noble sir, if a bodhisattva considers all living beings in such a way, how does he generate the great love toward them?
you should not misconstrue this unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment as [the fruitional attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience.’?”
and they see those tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas.
deluded by their householder lives and intoxicated by wealth, do not seek out the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha
Similarly, may you become skilled in the formation of three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, and similarly twenty, thirty, forty, and up to fifty, up to a hundred syllables, and up to a thousand syllables!
A section index: Not tending the begging bowl, Dharma robes,
the mighty earth of the world systems of the great trichiliocosm quaked, quaked more intensely, and quaked with utmost intensity; it shook, shook more intensely, and shook with utmost intensity; it vibrated, vibrated more intensely, and vibrated with utmost intensity; and it did so in six ways,
Why? Well, what would be amazing about finding pure beings in pure worlds?
Are you a member of the ruling class, a priest, or a king? Monk, please tell me everything, if you don’t mind.”
Five thousand gods purified their Dharma eyes regarding phenomena so that they became cleared of dust, and immaculate.
All the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, humans, non-humans, kings of the nāgas, royal lords of the citadels, vassals, universal monarchs, monks, nuns, male lay vow holders, and female lay vow holders carried divine flowers, garlands, salves, aromatic powders, garments, umbrellas, royal banners, cymbals, and bundles of silk scarves in order to venerate the Tathāgata.
that they do not cognize [all other attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, as omniscience [and the rest],
“Until I have made an end to birth and death,
Instead he now only felt interest in the Buddhadharma.
Prostrations to the tathāgata, Buddha “Joyful Eyes”
“He is not omniscient, not non-omniscient;
“Gopā, even if I were to speak for seven days About the offerings that humans and gods arranged At the time of our King’s departure from home, I would not be able to cover it all.
“Supreme Being, your mind is without a fixed abode; Like wind, it never lingers anywhere in the world.
Mighty One, Subjugator of All Places,
As soon as the king awoke, he immediately asked the chamberlain,
Similarly, they should not dwell on the applications of mindfulness, and they should not dwell on [the other causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including omniscience.
These are the sense fields.
the sensory element of the mental faculty, the sensory element of mental phenomena, and the sensory element of mental consciousness.’
“ ‘They have no concept of existence and no concept of nonexistence, No concept of woman and no concept of man,
Revealing the deaths and births of beings. {64}
“They say, ‘These beings conducted themselves badly with their bodies,
Those with perfect discipline engage in practice. That is why they are known as those who engage in practice.
Generosity with material things is insignificant, whereas generosity with the Dharma possesses great miraculous power.
Upon seeing these pleasure groves, they become overjoyed and call out, ‘Friends! A refreshing breeze stirs in this pleasure grove, so come along!’
or similarly, pertaining to the fruit of entering the stream, or the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth, or the fruit of no longer being subject to rebirth, or arhatship, individual enlightenment, or genuinely perfect enlightenment?”
and become a monk In order to search for peace with no expectations for the future.”
A monk then spoke a verse:
“Blessed One, what were the skillful means to which the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya adhered, thus accomplishing supreme, perfect enlightenment?”
You understand well the mind of all,
If you ask why, it is because the transcendent perfection of generosity is not a transcendent perfection.
The reason, Ānanda, is that
The seer took Saṅgharakṣita to an unoccupied thatched hut in the settlement and told him he could sleep there.
Thus, they all remained upon the path to nirvāṇa
The Bodhisattva replies in soft words,
Acting in accord with circumstances, this Dharma robe will be right and fit to wear.”
“In the third of the final, Place the last of the fifth.
They take no pleasure in it, For they know that phenomena have an empty nature. {29}
All the blessed ones, the thus-gone ones, then addressed the great bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi, so as to examine his noble mind:
“Even if bolts of lightning, battle-axes, spears, and arrows were to rain upon me, And if molten iron, blazing like a fork of lightning,
Meanwhile, the area in which the Lord was teaching the Dharma in the garden of Āmrapālī expanded and grew larger,
free from thought,
In the same way, in the future he will hold the entire Dharma of innumerable, countless buddha bhagavāns.
“Noble son,” said the Blessed One, “bodhisattvas practice in relation to a mundane mindset.
“Just as it is not easy, using pigments, To paint various forms in the air,
hung with one hundred and eight-string necklaces and sixty-four-string necklaces;
If you ask what constitute the seven branches of enlightenment,
‘Offering medicine represents the perfect well-being of the ambrosia by which all beings are freed from old age and death. Therefore,
Bodhisattvas should be steadfast and grounded in practice.
“Phenomena appear dependently. Phenomena are produced dependently.
Similarly, the transcendent perfection of generosity is empty,
It fulfills whatever wishes the bodhisattvas make.
their minds thoroughly liberated by means of genuine understanding,
In all of King Śuddhodana’s delightful parks, woodlands, and gardens, the various trees blossomed and carried fruits of all seasons.
What are these four?
That is called the emptiness of emptiness.
Boils, white leprosy, herpes, Itches, blisters, Blood blisters, and rashes— All seven are cured!
there are none that do not accomplish the buddha-work, because all discipline living beings.
‘So be it.’
Dīrghanakha saw the Dharma,
He thought that all who dwell at home Are unable to make the supreme offering to the Dharma. {21}
So you will also attain supreme, sacred, and peaceful awakening!
He is accompanied by two goddesses, Tārā and Bhṛkuṭī, who stand to his right and left respectively.
and cried out, “A trickster! A shape-shifter!” Understanding well what such words meant,
Venerable Lord! Then is this purity of phenomena due to the purity of all things?
Similarly the tortoise position,
“When anyone abides in this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, as it has been revealed,
engage with them, perfecting the levels, from one to the next, by means of those virtuous attributes, and
and adorned his own house, too, with a variety of many adornments.
With the call, “Gentlemen, come, let us go!” they set out.
There is a man who wants water and is searching for it.
O child, enough with your questioning!
Because perfect enlightenment stands upon the impossible. Because it is impossible, no one attains the perfect enlightenment of buddhahood.
free from concepts
Thus, since they lack the intelligence of various methods, they do not consider all sentient beings,
Great king, marks of this type are not found on the body of a universal monarch;
“Sunlight, moonlight, stars, firelight, and the luster of jewels,
With the diagram, you kill all enemies.
His speech is beautiful, sweet, and pleasant to hear, a voice melodious like that of Brahmā;
and awakened to the peace and sacredness of supreme awakening. You felled the tree of disturbing emotions.
“What is being without ignorance? It is not imposing embellishments on phenomena as they truly are.
Mixing these together and making them into an ointment Delivers one from all harms.
Those boys have already mastered their letters and have begun to study the grammar treatises,
Rather it was with truth, restraint, and austerity That he overcame the villainous thugs.
Su­bhūti, these designate the Great Vehicle of great bodhisattva beings.
Giving away one’s kingdom does not compare.
The fourth meditative absorption ensues when one achieves and maintains the fourth meditative concentration, that is to say, when even that sense of bliss is abandoned and former states of suffering have also been eliminated. Here, neither suffering nor bliss is present because blissful and unhappy states of mind have both subsided, while equanimity and mindfulness are utterly pure.
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities recollect their former lives.
When the six cognitive fields cease, there is the cessation of contact.
Our faces have beautiful brows and are well anointed;
The jewel of the foremost teacher, The jewel born from the sea, The jewel of a woman, the jewel of a horse, The jewel of a sword, The jewel of an elephant—such jewels Should be offered mentally to the buddhas.
The next morning, the monk put on his lower robe, picked up his begging bowl and Dharma robes,
Because great compassion that falls into sentimentally purposive views only exhausts the bodhisattva in his reincarnations.
And then suppose they worship the tathāgatas three times in the night and three times in the day with flowers, incense, perfume, garlands, salves, lamps, cymbals, royal banners, and flags, from the eighth day of the waxing moon until the fifteenth.
Through those words of truth May the entire world not be burned! {24}
“What is having veneration for the guru? It is being fearful of the guru and perceiving the guru as the kalyāṇamitra.
Make him repudiate it!’“
and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas,
“ ‘It was for the sake of the highest enlightenment That I accomplished this great purpose with my body.
so that all the evil māras and all the devas in their entourages cannot overcome them.”
“Mañjuśrī, how do monks exert themselves?”
“What is the causal relation in outer dependent arising? It is as follows.
Great bodhisattva beings who practice accordingly will acquire a state that is without obscuration and without blindness with respect to all things.
What are these two?
the three varieties of myrobalan, indigo plant,
He does not emulate anything other than consciousness [and the aforementioned aggregates].
This sūtra, which would bewilder foolish beings.
There is the meditative stability named Renunciation of Delight.
If bodhisattvas think, “Those who engage in that manner are cultivating the transcendent perfection of wisdom,’
without quarreling or disputing;
The Tathāgata rejoices and commends your good promise.”
Passing by the first seat, he sat down on the second.
You, who are an ignoramus, Do not know what is outside.
ointments, cloths, ornaments, parasols, victory banners, and flags will not die an untimely death.
Do not take the lives of others, And likewise do not take others’ possessions that have not been offered.
Eight, with right, left, top, bottom, Is concealed in the amount of thirty-two.
the bodhisattvas who will be born in that buddha field will all be born from the centers of lotuses.’
they do not praise the diversity of phenomena.
They always hear pleasant and melodious sounds And their words are always pleasant. {48}
Such being the case, O Blessed One, please eloquently teach the Dharma!
“It is restraint of the body. It is restraint of the speech. It is restraint of the mind.
Then the strong and diligent being Took seven steps.
At that time the Blessed One spoke these verses:
Having paid homage to their teacher and honored him, they all joined their palms and made offerings to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha, and honored him in various ways.
What does it mean to refrain from physical pretense?
One hundred vivāhas is called an utsañga.
it has not been produced by [the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path.
One could not finish praising their past conduct.
he manifests in various forms at the time of death and transference, at the last movement of consciousness,
Without causing harm to anyone. {6}
the knowledge of suffering,
holding a basket of divine flowers that was the size of Sumeru,
Similarly, Su­bhūti, this vehicle is also neither blue, nor yellow, nor red, nor white, nor crimson, nor pale yellow, nor golden, nor multicolored.
Moreover, Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings who practice the six transcendent perfections see sentient beings correctly embarking on the vehicle of the śrāvakas, the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas, and the vehicle of the bodhisattvas,
And those I have brought to nirvāṇa, To liberate them from the continuity of suffering. {20}
Evil one, I will not pass away into parinirvāṇa until the tradition of the Buddha, his teaching, and his community are well established in the world; and until infinite bodhisattvas are prophesied to reach unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening.
They cut through the creepers of doubt in all beings And are constantly engaged in wisdom.
The saṅgha of bodhisattvas and the saṅgha of bhikṣus also sat on the appropriate seats that had been arranged for each of them.
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, the irreversible great bodhisattva beings
Just wait a minute, reverend Śāriputra,
That is why we experience the unique pleasures and pains of each of the six realms.”
(1) the power of faith, (2) the power of perseverance, (3) the power of recollection, (4) the power of meditative stability, and (5) the power of wisdom.
they honor, venerate, respect, and make offerings to the lord buddhas, and they repeatedly listen to the sacred doctrines of this most supreme vehicle of the bodhisattvas, in the presence of those lord buddhas.
They all dwell on the noble eightfold path and always aspire to the Dharma.
Those who felt malice toward that bodhisattva did not see a tathāgata, nor hear the word Dharma, nor hear the word saṅgha for twenty thousand million eons.
like the erection of a eunuch;
“The splendorous appearance of this perfect man Will henceforth prevent any greed and quarrels Among beings in this sublime palace.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness constitute a bodhisattva?”
It should be written out or bound into a book, fastened to some high place, and then worshipped.
If someone wishing to be allowed to go forth approaches any of you, ask him, ‘You aren’t a debtor, are you?’
I will turn the wheel of Brahmā which has not previously been turned in the world in conformity with the sacred doctrine by any virtuous ascetic, brāhmin, god, demon, Brahmā, or anyone else!
Venerable Lord! How wonderful is the Lord [Buddha’s] eloquent exegesis of these aspects of [attachment and] non-attachment, possessed by the sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who espouse the vehicle of the bodhisattvas!
Why is that? It is because you have all been practicing bodhisattva conduct and
“What is the practice? It is the practice of the path.
“These were the rites belonging to the mantra of the goddess.
‘I have obtained countless strengths, Liberations, and dhyānas’—
Ānanda, deluded persons who possess these four abandon this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom.
“Noble son, the single seat is the seat of omniscience.
Bhagavān, through a skillful method you have bestowed upon us our inheritance of the Tathāgata’s treasure of wisdom.
Śāradvatī­putra, so it is that great bodhisattva beings who seek to perfect the transcendent perfection of generosity should train in the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
I am absorbed in meditation.
Would it not be wonderful were youthful Mañjuśrī to deliver such a teaching!” The Blessed One knew in his mind what the god Ratnavara was thinking, and so he said to youthful Mañjuśrī,
“I, too, having become unattached, And seeking this peaceful samādhi,
If I shall also be old, how can I enjoy myself and play games?”
they will bring innumerable, countless, measureless sentient beings to final nirvāṇa in the expanse of nirvāṇa, where there is no residue of the psycho-physical aggregates.
As the best senior heirs of the one with ten strengths, They will for a long time make offerings to many jinas. {59}
In the same vein, they do not apprehend the designation of fundamental ignorance, and they do not apprehend [the designations of the other links of dependent origination], up to and including the designation of aging and death.
and the darkness endured while in the womb.
“I transmit to you, Maitreya, this unexcelled, perfect enlightenment which I attained only after innumerable millions of billions of eons,
Through it the highest, perfect faith arose in me And I always honored it. {11}
As soon as they sat down, the monastery vanished and each of their begging bowls turned into iron clubs of different sorts.
He has revenues, interest from loans, and similarly land, Male slaves, female slaves, and a crowd of servants.
Next, concerning the third secret,
“Ignorance provides the causal condition for formations.
“What, you may wonder, are the twelve grounds?
they will never turn away from attaining the state of unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.
They are always respected by the ruling caste, priests, merchants, and householders.
