He will be someone who is continuously dedicated.
I made an offering to a bad recipient,
One should drink the root of vernonia with clarified butter.
Similarly, for all beings bodhisattvas serve as the basis for going to the higher realms and moving completely beyond suffering.
Even if one were to always make offerings to the Sugata
I request the Tathāgata to teach this.’
It was these sixteen gods, all of whom had attained irreversible patience, who guarded the seat of awakening.
Mañjuśrī, that Dharma drum is invisible,
“Śakra opened the gates that were fitted with a lock;
Lion of Men, remember your past aspirations;
They will always uninterruptedly guard, protect, and offer sanctuary to those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage.
for which reason it is said to resemble the color of gold.
With the melody of Brahmā and the voice of a kiṃnara, Emanating trillions of light rays, He, who had cherished the truth for many millions of eons,
The ground was covered with the adornment of many different forms and colors of seeds and seedlings;
When practicing generosity by offering music,
the merit of those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage would be much greater than the merit of the aforementioned sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage [who establish sentient beings in entering the stream].
In which the great accomplishment will arise
These people have cast off their jewels and rings, taken off their shoes, bared one shoulder,
Oṁ, now you are the third. Stabilize the vision of such-and-such a person! Ṭhaḥ ṭhaḥ! Svāhā!
To distracted sentient beings they teach the path of tranquility and special insight, and not a path of distraction.
You are free from distortions,
They do not harbor ill will, either, and in order to make such beings happy, they cultivate diligence and give rise to strength, diligence, and great power.
filled with clarified butter and honey between the skulls of a woman and a man.
“Even toward beings holding weapons Who cut into pieces their body and limbs
When one sees that all phenomena have never originated, that is genuine seeing.
will obtain all the results previously described.
Also, from the empty space above, the great melodious and profound sounds of the realm of Brahmā were heard.
can smell from afar all the divine pleasant aromas of the Dharma that there are in all the worlds in the billion-world universe.”
At that time, the bodhisattva mahāsattva named Mahāpratibhāna,
Then the bodhisattva mahāsattva Padmaśrī asked the Bhagavān,
and shining with moonstone gems.
this supreme Great Vehicle would not overpower and attain emancipation from the world with its gods, humans, and antigods. However,
“The unpolluted phenomena of emptiness Are within the field of experience of the bodhisattvas.
when in Citrā, the flowers;
“Noble one, did you raise this novice while a renunciant or householder?”
is not captivated even by the evil Māra, let alone by others, in the same way,
Parasols, flags, and banners of all sizes were hoisted;
They teach the Dharma that they have understood themselves though a diversity of skillful methods, visions of wisdom, illustrations of causes and reasons, supports, expressions, and modes of communication.
“Will you not allow these two boys’ going forth?”
It is also like the parasol of a universal monarch, Which is an assembly of wooden machinery.
and in the same vein, they have a view concerning [the other sense objects], up to and including mental phenomena.
“Stirred by objects of desire and imagination, three fires are born, Setting the three existences ablaze and causing deep torment.
Rejecting doubts, Deceit, and arrogance,
In the Middle Country, a quorum of ten monks is needed.
will not be reborn among lower social classes or among inferior classes.
It has not come from anywhere and it will not go anywhere.
they move from buddhafield to buddhafield, and even refine the buddhafields.
Śāriputra, this buddha realm is beautifully adorned by such displays of the excellences of buddha realms. “Now what do you think, Śāriputra,
by being mindful of and attentive to forsaking improper arrangements, improper actions, and improper behavior.
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom practice the essenceless doctrine.
Who enter towns and praise them. {104}
They will have completely brought Great pleasure to all the lords of the world.
The very essence of all the buddhas, “That, indeed, you have found in this maṇḍala.
Wherever this sūtra is present,
“Having obtained one quality, Those bodhisattvas, whoever they are,
Son, you have brought us delight like a cooling breeze.’
Then, in order to console her, the Bodhisattva told her,
King Śuddhodana’s residence became adorned with a net of jewels.
Thus, to those who continuously praise themselves they show something that is still more excellent.
“It is midday, Bhagavān, the time to eat.
an unsurpassed guide who tamed beings, a teacher to gods and men.
And even more, as numerous as the Ganges sands, And he practiced this supreme celibacy. {42}
When there is no movement, this is stambhaka.
saw a spread of fine shelters with choice food laid out for the community and thought,
They then achieve and maintain the third meditative concentration, where bliss remains but joy is absent due to the absence of attachment to joy—this is what sublime beings describe as ‘equanimous, mindful, and pure’.
Padmaśrīgarbha, when you look toward the east, what do you see?”
cannot be appropriated, on account of
It shows that you, Gopā, can soon leave your female body And swiftly attain a male body.
He turned toward the state of nirvāṇa and turned his back on saṃsāra.
venerable Kampila,
Bhadrapāla prostrated himself before the Blessed One and then took a place facing him.
Therefore, having renounced everything,
Pathyā, nāgara, and dīpaka,
If you ask why, Su­bhūti, it is because great bodhisattva beings are endowed with such extensive attributes.
“Bhagavān, when the Tathāgata was a young man, you left the Śākya town of Kapilavastu for homelessness.
They will exist throughout that realm And will have pure minds and great miracles.
“I will cause the retinue of consorts to look unappealing.”
Living in such unconcern, he entertains no concepts of ‘path’ or ‘nonpath.’
clouds that rained down divine parasols,
In unison, the gods then proclaimed this verse:
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Have the strength of being established in the strength of patience.
Śāradvatī­putra, just as great bodhisattva beings perfect the mundane and supramundane transcendent perfection of generosity, so it is that they perfect the other transcendent perfections, up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Similarly, sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena are like a dream, like a magical display.
“He is a vessel made of Dharma and is indestructible, While these vessels, made of stone, are destructible.
One should then incant, on the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight, the ashes from a charnel ground with 108 recitations of this mantra, and place these ashes on the woman’s head. She will become enthralled.
they do not do so out of [...] pride,
So if we set out upon the ocean,
One should drink yellow myrobalan, leadwort, and fresh ginger, with sour cream.
When Chanda heard Gopā’s words, He felt deeply unhappy.
“What is the basis of wisdom? It is without a basis.
"ཁྱིམ་<tHe also manifests as someone who renounces the household life, goes forth to live as a renunciant and practices asceticism,
Similarly, they do not consider whether sights are connected with sounds.
they do not reify these trainings, nor do they reify any path to train upon, nor anyone who trains.
He summoned Prince Bimbisāra and gave him charge over the four branches of the armed forces.
insight must be cultivated with respect.
It began to quiver, tremble, quake, wobble, thunder, and roar, each in three degrees of intensity.
They do not consider whether sights constitute a self or a non-self, and the same goes for [the other sense objects], up to and including mental phenomena.
A divine king called Subrahman Retrieved the supreme jewel bowl, And is still now performing worship with it In the Brahma realm, together with his companions.
The drums, big and small, all break when touched and emit no sounds.
“Great Sage, the child is sleeping now. Please wait for a short while until he wakes.”
One of green nature, for his part, to a green girl.
The householder provided the monk with all the provisions he would need,
Then you will believe me.’
Mātṛkā is in the form of a mother.
Some juice of buffalo spinach Mixed with sea salt
When he attains enlightenment, living beings skilled in all liberative arts and activities will be born in his buddhafield.
Bodhisattvas do not teach the Dharma to those who are not ready to receive it.
Who is it that goes to hell,
“They had no longings and were detached from the realms of existence. They were in meditation, the field of experience of remaining in dhyāna.
“He spoke those words And the earth shook.
In other world spheres, they had been sent out by quintillions of tathāgatas.
It is called dependent arising because it is causal and conditional, not non-causal and non-conditional.
“Bhikṣus, the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Mahābhijñā­jñānābhi­bhū
“Kolita, do we first pay our respects to the Blessed One, or to the one from whom we have heard of his Dharma?”
conch shells that coil to the right,
“What is avoiding that which is outside the scope of correct conduct? It is abandoning the five obscurations.
In the same way, the rest of the five hundred disciples were reluctant
They are: the outflow of desire,
“Previously in Magadha, the Dharma was impure, Therefore impurely construed talk has emerged there.
Mañjuśrī, any bodhisattva who hears this teaching on the revelation of knowledge and is inspired, fearless,
“Great King, excellent! Explain your secret well! I rejoice and give my blessings.
the coming to pass of anything [in cyclic existence that has no beginning or end] is utterly non-apprehensible because it does not endure and does not disintegrate.
Now your entire saṅgha of bhikṣus Has come to the capital in order to see you. {vii}
They will never savor unpleasant tastes.
How are they experts concerning the relative? How are they experts concerning the ultimate?
All the time he is reciting their praises.
Possessing all the powers of patience,
and omniscience is mental phenomena [and the aforementioned sense objects].
level, delightful, attractive, beautiful, made of crystal, adorned by jewel trees, strewn with flower petals, and filled with many devas and humans.
Someone like me can’t comprehend any of that. All is known by the buddhas, yet not by me!’
Ultimately, all phenomena are the same in that they are unreal.
Then comes the number called sarvanikṣepā.
It is illumination by wisdom. It is excellent correct conduct.
it is because in this transcendent perfection of wisdom the paths of the ten virtuous actions are extensively revealed.
However, he had not had his meal and therefore, fasting for a sixth day,
and the bodhisattvas will subsequently attain that [state].
Reverend Ānanda, go then discreetly so that no one observes you.
Therefore, Śāradvatī­putra, great bodhisattva beings should train without attachment to anything.
Those beings are fond of the bodhisattva, have faith in him, and are enraptured by him.
“Reverend, when the Blessed One became a renunciant,
I myself should complete the transcendent perfection of wisdom, and I should also connect all sentient beings with the transcendent perfection of wisdom.’
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas from perfectly pure, correct conduct. What are the ten benefits?
With happiness and gladness he bowed with palms together toward the Bhagavān.
if they have not misconstrued the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, and the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
Similarly, O gods, this doctrine is profound owing to the profundity of the applications of mindfulness, and likewise owing to the profundity of the correct exertions, the supports for miraculous ability, the faculties, the powers, the branches of enlightenment, and the noble eightfold path.
“ ‘I gave of my own flesh To the learned one with correct conduct, Who is a holder of this supreme samādhi. May I obtain from him this Dharma! {29}
He saw that the Bodhisattva’s body bore the thirty-two marks of a great being,
‘Brother, I cannot be sustained by the medicinal plants in this forest. Let us go to the outskirts of town.’
One hundred niravadyas is called a mudrābala.
He resides on the slope of Pāṇḍava, the king of mountains.
The body is the condition for touch, but the tactile consciousness has no form.
“Reject the extremes at all times. Do not follow nihilism or eternalism.
“Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who have turned back from the level of the śrāvakas or the level of the pratyekabuddhas are irreversible bodhisattvas.
The strength of ten great Nārāyaṇas is the same as the strength of one bodhisattva who has been definitively emerged for one hundred eons.
Venerable Lord! The purity of the applications of mindfulness, the correct exertions, the supports for miraculous ability, the faculties, the powers, the seven branches of enlightenment, and the noble eightfold path is due to the purity of the self.
who creates the lamp of Dharma;
The husband who is of blue color Is known as Blue Acala.
I, too, am fond of my life; I, too, cherish it, like it, and enjoy it. Therefore,
“Gods, the defining characteristic of physical forms is that they are capable of assuming material form, but the tathāgatas attain manifestly perfect buddhahood with respect to the absence of their defining characteristic.
Then the goddess of the grove addressed the sages with the following verse:
Then the king of the elephants named Airāvaṇa spoke:
By reciting the mantra continuously, one will free oneself and others from bondage.
Kāśyapa, it is the Tathāgata who knows those beings
“If you ask what are the ‘five faculties,’
and [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, are empty of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, and so forth.
along with a great saṅgha of twelve thousand monks. Among them were
Homage to Tathāgata Asaṃkhyeya­vīrya­susaṃprasthita­śrī.
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara teaches the Dharma to some beings in the form of a gandharva.
It has no location that can be found Even though one searches throughout the ten directions. {46}
Because it brings the attainment of the best Dharma, the superior Dharma.
“In the assemblies of the bodhisattvas There are accompanying students Who are as numerous as the sands In four, three, or two Ganges,
the abode of nothingness, the abode of neither recognition nor non-recognition,
Others adorn themselves with bodily hair, reeds, scalp hair, fingernails, rags, ribs, and skulls.
he will become the teacher of gods and humans.”
“Mañjuśrī, it is like this: A bala­cakra­vartin king obtains his kingdom through his might. The allied kings who are his adversaries go to battle with him.
So I will now assemble the ship of Dharma. It is constructed with the strongest wood— Giving, disciplined conduct, patience, and diligence— And firmly secured by my indestructible, superior motivation.
They were free of all obscurations and emotional involvements,
the six transcendent perfections,
You have ripened many gods and humans.
“ ‘When the harem heard those words, They were all perplexed. None of them had the fortitude To take on such an act. {13}
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas! Thus did I hear at one time.
nor invisible.
and it leads to the maturation of virtue, pure and impure.
They should cultivate the noble truth of the path that leads to the cessation of suffering.
Their arms and legs are compact.
Their eyes are wide.
Some are filled with water that has the eight qualities,
In the village of Nālada lives the brahmin Tiṣya.
The wise ones will dispel all unhappiness And contemplate their followers with love.
The buddha bhagavāns will also wish to see them.
“Bodhisattvas are not born with the type of impairment of the faculties that renders one unreceptive to the Dharma of the buddhas.
Pleased, they decided with their companions To feed the Victorious One.
The practitioner of mantra should then request what he wishes.
Then those tathāgatas each sat on their own lion throne and sent their own attendants carrying a basket of precious flowers to Bhagavān Śākyamuni.
When you were these rulers, as well as others, you gave what is hard to give;
‘this is mine,’ or ‘that is me,’
“How does the element of consciousness abandon the body and then go to the next world?
Completely rejecting both of those, The wise ones are established in enlightenment.
Śāradvatī­putra, just as the finality of existence is without foundation
that arhatship is consequent on having renounced the five fetters associated with the higher realms [of form and formlessness],
Kauśika, It is so!
“Protector, once you were a bear, living in a mountain lair;
Venerable, since, from now on, you should not so much as kill an ant intentionally,
and the other bhagavān buddhas of the east, who are as numerous as the sands of the river Ganges, pervade their own buddha realms with the power of their speech and proclaim,
Then the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Prabhūtaratna said to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Gadgadasvara,
If one is imprisoned, constant recitation of it will set one free.
Remember your past disciplined conduct and austerities;
they also do not fall into nothingness.
Similarly, how is this transcendent perfection of wisdom instructive because feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are unseen?
may I cause all beings to purify the stainless eye of Dharma!’
and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas,
The Bodhisattva dwelt comfortably in this great celestial palace,
“From this day forward, you must endeavor to fully safeguard your intentions
Some are frightened by the seven bases of consciousness and instead relish the taste of the seven branches of awakening.
These would be impossible!”
Blessing all the worlds to be adorned with ornamental arrays, they bring supreme joy, contentment, and appreciation to gods and humans.
seeks monkhood, to go forth and be ordained in the well-proclaimed Dharma and Vinaya,
These are called the eight aspects of liberation.
Then at that time Brother Śāriputra recited these verses:
The ordinand [ordinand’s name] has sought consent from the saṅgha to receive ordination from the preceptor [preceptor’s name].
In each of the mansions appeared 84,000 lattices of small bells that, when stirred by the wind, sounded tunes resembling the music performed by skilled musicians playing trillions of divine instruments. Such were the sweet and beautiful tunes that rang out from those bells when stirred by the wind.
Those who delight in the ten virtues, And are single-minded in their devotion to the Great Vehicle
In each of the mansions appeared ponds, the bottom of each lined with gold dust, adorned with beryl and crystal, and encircled by a ring of the seven precious gemstones. The ponds were filled with blue and pink lotuses, water lilies, and white lotus flowers, and on them were wild geese calling out. The ponds were filled to the brim with water of eight properties, making them excellent for the birds to quench their thirst.
Also, you must always display the four means of magnetizing,
They will bow their heads to their feet, And will perceive them to be a tathāgata.
with regard to the inner mind, the outer mind, and the combined inner and outer mind, continue to observe the mind, without generating any apperceptions dependent on the mind.
Oṁ, run, run! Move, move! Go, go! Become like Mount Meru, become! Homage to the Kailāsakūṭa­putra! Svāhā!
and on this day the Bhagavān has turned the highest Dharma wheel.
They do as they say.
How should one view this explanation on the three bodies of the Blessed One?
“In the past you made the aspiration:
Consciousness is empty by itself.
Ultimately, however, there is nothing apprehended with respect to which I would attain manifestly perfect buddhahood, or nothing by which I would attain manifestly perfect buddhahood, or nothing on the basis of which I would attain manifestly perfect buddhahood.
“Noble son, the ocean is the universal source of jewels and,
There, in a country not his own, lived a brahmin named Tiṣya who was learned in Lokāyata philosophy,
how are all these things, commencing from the five psycho-physical aggregates and extending as far as the eighty minor marks, reduced, in the end, to mere names?”
“Venerable Lord! When those individuals who follow the vehicle of the bodhisattvas have heard this transcendent perfection of wisdom,
“Venerable Lord, how do great bodhisattva beings engage in union with the transcendent perfection of wisdom without fixation?”
I could teach the many kinds of benefits through many aspects of the Dharma for many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of eons;
likewise, they do not consider whether feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are calm or not calm.
owing to the emptiness of ultimate reality,
Some displayed their earrings anointed with perfume.
As soon as the Bhagavān looked at them, those bodhisattva mahāsattvas rose from their seats.
Mañjuśrī­kumāra­bhūta, in answer to the god’s request, said,
sounding the thunder of the magnificent teaching.
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya was then satisfied and delighted.
And then he thinks that in the past He had spoken out of ignorance.
and the modality of the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of essential nature with respect to non-entities;
“Mañjuśrī, bodhisattva mahāsattvas should expound this Dharma teaching in the later times, in a later era, by maintaining their practice and field of activity.
In those places there should be built Various beautiful stūpas of the highest being, For the Guide, the Buddha, the Bhagavān, And a variety of offerings should be made to it.
For many billions of eons,
With palms joined, they should make prostrations with the five limbs in all the cardinal and secondary directions and recite the words of this mantra:
“They come before the guides of the worlds And for the highest peace they ask about the Dharma.
[3] It is the knowledge of continuation. [4] It is putting down the burden.
Once Upatiṣya had explained this aspect of the Dharma,
Monks, the gods and bodhisattvas then asked one another,
Should be understood in terms of what was taught above.
may we also play, enjoy, and amuse ourselves in the Palace of Victory, just like Śakra, lord of the gods.’
He was dressed in stained clothes.
Similarly, their minds precisely know the minds of other beings and the minds of other realized individuals, up to and including the minds of unsurpassed beings.
The wisdom of the hour of death is as follows:
And he is filled with love for sentient beings.
I am deprived of the shining color of gold. I am devoid of all the strengths and the liberations. {5}
“What is the understanding of sounds? It is knowing them to be like echoes.
Beware, through indiscretion he will come to suffering.”
analyzing things by means of genuine insight,
They may speak of the earth element, yet ultimately no earth element is observed and they cannot be attached to it.
And with that he allowed his going forth and ordination.
Being without outflows, Mañjuśrī, is explained as the absence of the four outflows.
“In order to ripen beings for the supreme wisdom of a buddha,
There will be an aggregation of merit The extent of which can never be measured.
“You, who benefit beings and possess many qualities, Have made the virtues of the victorious ones your own as you traveled the paths.
Moreover, it offers the prospects of rebirth among the royal class, standing out like a tall sāl tree;
Concepts of empty, not empty, and so forth, Are destroyed, leaving the mind like the sky.
and they have not trained in the correct exertions, the supports for miraculous ability, the faculties, the powers, the branches of enlightenment, the noble [eightfold] path, the eight aspects of liberation, the nine serial steps of meditative absorption, the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, and so forth.
“Sir, why have you fallen ill upon going forth?”
They do not approach enlightenment as being other than consciousness.
The ones who had lost their minds regained their composure;
“ ‘One cannot have this restraint while pursuing desires Through yearning for forms and enjoyments.
I have skinned my own body and dried it to make paper.
“Blessed One, Thus-Gone One, Great Vajra Holder, please explain the great tantra called The All-Subjugating Vajra that subjugates all bhūtas and that tames the evil ones that dwell beneath the earth.
perceiving wishlessness is an obscuration,
to have the conviction that the mind is like an illusion; and
There is neither existence nor nonexistence here.
owing to their undauntedness concerning the understanding of the aspects of the path!
you should see that the transcendent perfection of wisdom is emptiness.
He thinks, ‘Where have I arrived today? This must be the home of a king or a minister.
Senior Su­bhūti, is it only the transcendent perfection of wisdom which is non-conceptual, or are the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, and in the same vein, [all the other transcendent perfections], down to and including the transcendent perfection of generosity, non-conceptual?
He perfectly set out countless millions Of extremely precious, beautiful seats
And in an iron pot placed over fire Pour a little through the method of pulverization.
This sacred doctrine is compatible with the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth.
In this way we will protect the dharmabhāṇakas.
‘Noble children, look at the young prince.
the twelve sense fields, the eighteen sensory elements,
“If, upon hearing the name of the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha, those beings wish to see him, and if, fearful of falling to the lower realms,
It is called the path that leads to the cessation of suffering—a noble truth.
Why do some persevere in many austerities? They wear deerskin and let their hair, beard, and nails grow long; They cover themselves in tree bark. Adhering to their practices of austerities, many have emaciated bodies.
“Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha, the King of the Dharma, the Lord of the Dharma, teaches hundreds of thousands of sūtras to those battling ārya warriors.
“Noble ones, if you are uncertain, unsure, or undecided, thinking that the two boys at that time, on that occasion were someone else, do not have such a view.
(59) The lord buddhas have an abdomen [lit. body] that is unwrinkled. (60) Their joints are elegant.
And with crystal insight will expand.
When that became clear, the Śākya Daṇḍapāṇi decided to give away his daughter, the Śākya girl Gopā, to the Bodhisattva.
They all take refuge fully in the Blissful One.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness as entities or non-entities constitute a bodhisattva?”
the light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Indrajālin, who resided in the Campakavarṇā world of the Thus-Gone One Puṣpāvali Vanarāji Kusumitābhijña’s buddha realm.
and seeing them were frightened and terrified, knowing that they had no protection, and the caravan leader said to the caravan,
Just like a fruit growing on a creeper Is endowed with a flower.
“Ānanda, they have gathered here from different buddha realms.
When a pregnant woman’s birth canal is anointed with incanted sesame oil, she will give birth with ease.
It is entirely burning everywhere With hundreds of births, old age, and illness.
He is the one who is unharmed by the gaze of the lord of the garuḍas.
Young man, that is the restraint of speech.
The precious horse of the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class appears just as before.
Such will be the result of their bad karma.
Similarly, they totally cultivate the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, but always without apprehending anything.”
Vary according to one’s place of birth,
Sisters, a single lamp may light hundreds of thousands of lamps without itself being diminished.
Ānanda, I treated all sentient beings equally, and so
They circumambulated the Supreme Being, who was immutable like a majestic mountain.
“When not acting in conflict with what should be done, they are free from evil.
Bhagavat, just like those who are not satisfied by just a taste of amṛta,
Su­bhūti, the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, are also neither fettered nor liberated.
“Sensual objects are not alluring to me,
to follow one’s words with actions;
In each of those realms Countless millions of beings
Maitreya and the other bodhisattva mahāsattvas bowed their heads to the Bhagavān’s feet,
Su­bhūti, such is the refined eye of clairvoyance, possessed by great bodhisattva beings.
Caṇḍālī, who is located at the navel,
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of pertinent speech concerning the composite,
I was attached to desires and clung to my kingdom, And thought he would deprive me of my kingdom. {83}
and constantly dedicated to seeking the Buddha’s Dharma;
To some of the poorer brethren, the nāga proceeded to offer ceremonial robes, to some upper robes, to some lower robes,
the yakṣa Vajrapāṇi will always follow behind irreversible great bodhisattva beings without interruption, in order to guard and protect them,
High in the sky they heard the innumerable verses on the benefits of the qualities that come from the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
It was also pleasant to touch, like silk from Kaliṅga.
“Young man, the body of the Tathāgata is not easily known through attributes or actions.
Noble son, bodhisattvas personally give up sticks and weapons, and instruct others in that practice.
Do not criticize those who are wise, And they are always without fear. {1}
Next the god Sunirmita, surrounded and escorted by an assembly of gods from the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations,
At that point two hundred monks from that retinue heard this teaching by Mañjuśrī
“While Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara was in the sky he thought, ‘It has been a long time since I’ve seen Tathāgata Viśvabhū,’ and so he next went to Jetavana Monastery.
“For example, Su­bhūti, space has neither decrease nor increase, and diminutions are non-apprehensible.
generate loving kindness for all sentient beings,
Similarly, that which is termed ‘feelings,’ ‘perceptions,’ and ‘formative predispositions,’ and that which is termed ‘consciousness’ are to be counted as imperishable.
For his part, your preceptor will think of you as his son.
some are on the fourth bhūmi;
those who practice in order that they might grasp or reject
Bhagavān, you are our father, our progenitor, our refuge, our support, and our protector.
These thoughts arising in your mind, as well as your earlier question, are also the sovereign power of the Tathāgata.”
correct knowledge of desirous sentient beings,
Those bodhisattvas who had previously come desiring the Dharma Bowed before his feet and said, “Are you not tired?
Tell us who this man is! We will bind him with the lasso of desire And lead him like an elephant.
Always Insane, Further Insane, Bloated with Power, Bamboo Stick, and Wealthy.
Thus, bodhisattvas burn the garbage pit of affliction.
Moreover, Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who practice this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom will never develop thoughts of miserliness.
Materiality is the root of good and evil.
She pervades all of this
“They give away all material things. They follow the king of the Dharma.
When asked, they reply that because they understand the fleeting, momentary, and hollow nature of reality, they reveal their patience by not being moved.
Some foolish persons
he says, ‘It has not been long since I attained the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.’
May the roots of virtue, accumulated through living the holy life for my entire lifetime,
Ānanda, those beings are not just companions who befriend me for a few lifetimes only.
no-effort,
yet they do not become tainted by the odor.
I praise again and again The limitless aggregation of merit Of those who maintain this sūtra When the Protector of Humans is in nirvāṇa.
He lauds the friends of the world, Saying, ‘I am the son of the Tathāgata!’
And all dharmas resemble the Sugata.
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is without sign or reference point.
‘With aspirations that are in harmony with those of the thus-gone ones, through this offering of seats may I cause all beings to attain the vajra throne at the seat of awakening in all the worlds of the great trichiliocosms!’
They always analyze the three gateways to liberation.
Then at that time the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Prabhūtaratna created this cause to invoke the bodhisattva mahāsattva Gadgadasvara:
This is the animal world.
Noble son, bodhisattvas will not physically act in pretentious ways for the sake of acquiring things.
Enjoining him to acquire what is needed.
“What is called proper application is to neither remove nor add.
Joy is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Su­bhūti, the transcendent perfection of wisdom is absolutely pure owing to the absolute purity of physical forms.
At that moment both the bhagavān, tathāgata Śākyamuni and the bhagavān who had passed into nirvāṇa,
Lift great mountaintops in their hands,
“The jewel had such power That when the man saw it he became supremely happy;
“Oṃ vajrakrodha ahicaṇḍa phaṭ. “With ten thousand repetitions, one will certainly be freed from the grahas.
having faith or trust in them.
“On the other hand, just as those with eyesight Also have capabilities,
he can rise up through buddhafields as numerous as the sands of the Ganges and place it on high, just as a strong man may pick up a jujube leaf on the point of a needle.
“I prophesy that, remaining in wisdom, Candraprabha’s conduct will be exceptional.
In those who conceive of self and other there arise a virtuous and unvirtuous mind and the mental states that arise from it;
“The Blessed One looked in all directions with his broad eyes, which resembled the petals of a lotus flower.
They will hear them saying, ‘O, in such and such a world system,
They will be seated at the foot of the supreme tree. They will attain wisdom and become buddhas.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty as with signs or signless constitute a bodhisattva?”
Monks, as I now began living on just a single juniper berry, never taking a second, my body became extremely weak and emaciated.
Were we to disregard the seal,
“That wise bodhisattva with sharp wisdom At that moment attained the five higher cognitions.
“Mañjuśrī, is there a method by which a bodhisattva great being who is ill behaved can complete the perfection of discipline, yet those who are disciplined cannot?”
The Hot Season Palace was very cool,
Awakening is the essence of the lack of a self, a sentient being, a life force, a soul, a being, and a person. Therefore, it is not in any way something that can be fully realized.
O gods, this doctrine is profound owing to the profundity of the sensory element of the body, the sensory element of tangibles, and the sensory element of tactile consciousness.
It is the absence of hoarding.
‘Please give me this land with its cities and villages,’ You gave it away with a happy and undisturbed mind.
Obtain the supreme offerings of devas and humans, And obtain the happiness of dhyāna, the supreme, noble happiness. {2}
Su­bhūti, if, for example, an illusionist or the apprentice of an illusionist had conjured up a large gathering of people, and established them in the transcendent perfection of tolerance, do you think,
“Young man, what is purity of action?
Generate compassion and kindness for the entire world;
the Tathāgata’s love that understands reality;
and therefore he casts no shadow in the midst of all phenomena.
who proclaim the non-existence of causality,
There the cows were milked and yielded clarified butter,
the mother of Rāhula, and her followers.
one should meditate that everything animate and inanimate, as well as oneself, is pure by nature.
a shed, a wooden hut, an earthen cave, a rock cave, a mountain cave,
“ ‘Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, the ocean is 84,000 yojanas deep
Why are the sentient beings for whom great bodhisattva beings seek the great armor uncreated and unconditioned?
And an erupting volcano were to drop on my head,
that those who listen to my sacred doctrine also resemble a magical display.
Ask whatever question you wish to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha.”
or commissions it to be written,
then, noble son, what do you think?
Similarly, Su­bhūti, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are neither fettered by nor liberated from their future limits
you should know that great bodhisattva beings endowed with such attributes, indications, and signs are irreversible.
“Your stainless and virtuous discipline has never been broken;
the non-specific five psycho-physical aggregates,
This was the first prophecy made By the Victorious One, the Guide of the World.
He was a vessel fit for awakening who continuously realized the Dharma.
Monk, all phenomena arise from distorted perceptions.
are consecrated as the element of space.
“In correctly seeing the countering, the undermining, and the debunking thus done,
It is better to be an ill-behaved bodhisattva great being
should hear this king of samādhis, in which the equality of the nature of all phenomena is revealed
Investigating suffering is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
wheat, lentils, unhusked rice, [other] grains [such as millet], and mustard—
He replied, “This is owing to indefatigability with respect to all things!”
Because it brings the accomplishment of all bliss, joyful bliss, and a one-pointed mind.
“As an analogy, a face—either attractive or ugly—becomes visible by the power of a mirror,
“What is giving away material wealth? It is giving away whatever has been accumulated and benefiting others through material things.
Perfectly amuse yourself with them, enjoy them, and delight in them.
Some had repulsive expressions, while the eyes of others were crossed.
This will cure diseases of the spleen.
“given that this is the way that bodhisattvas abide within the absence of marks,
“When ten million gods of Śakra’s realm See my mansion, they marvel.
They have become poor without any wealth. In order to have a livelihood they become mendicants. {54}
Su­bhūti, in any event, once sentient beings have been reborn in these buddhafields,
and likewise, the understanding of all phenomena,
For their heads would burst asunder or their lives be lost.
This is the perfection of aspirations.
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is impermanent.”
Lord, and thus it may be known that in that future time those who believe in this teaching and who enter deeply into it will be sustained by the supernatural blessing of the bodhisattva Maitreya.”
They developed faith in supreme, sublime enlightenment And held a parasol for the guide of the world. {7}
That brings beings out from the hells And also inspires them toward enlightenment. {30}
How much would the merit of this person increase, Blessed One?”
which dispel all sins, eliminate all offenses, make all effects stainless, gather and increase wealth and grains, eradicate poverty,
“Alas! All constructed things are impermanent.” Thereby, thirty-two thousand living beings purified their immaculate, undistorted Dharma-eye in regard to all things.
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti came there, and, having saluted me, said,
The god realms will be filled.
to be tolerant of the unpleasant;
At the time, the area surrounding Gayā­śīrṣa Hill in the Gayā region
Assembling from far and near, They converged, summoned by the incantation.
Sometimes I am a god, sometimes a demigod,
“Noble son, understand therefore that merely by listening or reflecting, one will not be able to comprehend the Dharma in one’s personal experience.
they liberate sentient beings and inspire them with faith through perfecting means and insight,
belong to an inferior household, such as the households of outcastes or the households of refuse scavengers, or else
Similarly, it is instructive because feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are unseen.
‘Young brahmin, in the future, when the lifespan of beings is one hundred years,
One should then make love to Envy Vajrī,
The vase initiation is secret for beginners.
he is called the One Who Is Able to Bless the Countless Sounds of Sentient Beings and Transform Them into the Dharma Language of the Buddha.
Then the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Śākyamuni rose from his Dharma seat and
why is that tathāgata called ‘Amitāyus’ (Immeasurable Life)?
Then, inside, the celestial palace appears.
Then the gods from the Heaven Free from Strife, led by the god Suyāma, went to where the Thus-Gone One was seated.
“Similarly, they do not consider whether or not they engage in union with the sensory element of the eyes;
perfect the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline,
“What is the transcendence of matter? It is the understanding of immateriality.
to the one who has compassion for the inferior and desolate;
part from them,
This is a special quality of the Buddha. “Although the Lord speaks with but one voice,
Then, as for the seats inside the palace, They are lotuses born from vowels as seed-syllables.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that is liberated by perceiving the eyes as a non-entity?”
This transcendent perfection of wisdom which the bodhisattvas have is the great transcendent perfection,
and similarly, ‘This is the giver, and this is the recipient. Gifts should be offered to this recipient.’
‘You have attained this supreme enlightenment Through goodness, bliss, happiness, and harmlessness.
“Eighty thousand beings who were there
What is indestructible is instantaneous,
“What, O Blessed One, is the name of the absorption in which the Thus-Gone One remained for seven days without moving from the cross-legged position?”
Right now the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha resides there, flourishes there, lives there, and teaches the Dharma.
“The water that is a mirage cannot be found. Foolish beings want to drink it,
Therefore, Śāriputra, listen carefully and remember, for I will give you the teaching.”
Trees of perfume, trees of incense, jewel trees, wish-fulfilling trees, flowering trees, and fruit-bearing trees they offer without any sense of ownership or possession three times during the day and three times at night to the buddhas and bodhisattvas,
in the same way does consciousness, controlled by circumstances, bring about forms.
“Noble ones, I am without avarice, I have no clinging,
the Thus-Gone One gazed at the seat of awakening without blinking and thought, “Here I awakened to unsurpassable, perfect and complete buddhahood, bringing an end to the sufferings of beginningless birth, old age, and death.”
“As the king of doctors, he dispenses divine nectar, Conquering the evil hordes with his courageous eloquence.
plays a Dharma sound that addresses all the gods in the heaven of the Thirty-Three,
“Thus who could get their fill of making merit?
“From the company of my brethren.”
Self-arisen one, through all your qualities, you are without equal.” {39}
“Su­bhūti, in the same way, one who wishes to attain emancipation in things without defining characteristics merely wishes to be born as an arhat whose contaminants have ceased.
“Having accomplished the orb of supreme great wisdom,
dispense generosity, maintain ethical discipline, cultivate tolerance, undertake perseverance, and are equipoised in meditative concentration, without being separated from the mental cultivation of omniscience,
They themselves abandon it, and they also separate many sentient beings from it.
then, at midnight, in complete darkness, he will affix it to the tip of a victory banner and
in that case not even an atom is transferred from this world to the world beyond.
When the Supreme Guide awoke, glowing like the full moon, The king took that blazing being, whose light outshone the sun, onto his lap.
Take as an analogy the earth that neither becomes angered by harm that is done to it, nor develops any attachment when it is benefited.
cut off all their limbs and appendages, and
“The Buddha’s Dharma is stated To have no location and no direction.
“Through my miraculous power I purified Many thousands of millions of world realms And transferred the beings there elsewhere, In order that these buddhas could be seated.
They will see ten thousand million buddhas And even more, as numerous as the Ganges sands. {10}
“In my sleep I saw this trichiliocosm illuminated, its darkness gone, While ten million gods were praising me.
As an analogy, the seeds of saffron or poppy are naturally white,
These childish beings are caught, like fish snarled in a net.
Through this transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, they do not strive for the world system of desire,
some are completely filled with flowers, and some are completely filled with blue lotuses, red lotuses, night lotuses, white lotuses, fragrant water lilies, tiger claw flowers, and great tiger claw flowers.
The Bodhisattva took his seat there and, while he was thinking fondly of the village girl Sujātā, he drank what he needed of the milk porridge made with honey.
“Blessed One, the fine, prosperous looks of Bhadrapāla surpass even the splendor of a king.
Is there no imputation of the ten powers of the tathāgatas, and
May the soles of others’ feet, marked by wheels, Step firmly on the excellent throne At the seat of awakening!
recognition of dislike for all worlds, recognition of drawbacks, recognition of abandonment,
which transcended the divine power of the devas.
make offerings to them of incense and flowers.
“All of those who maintain those views Should be known to be māras.
unguents,
Offering in this way, he would give this gift for as many eons as there are atomic particles of dust in a great trichiliocosm.
Feeling joy, with thousands of verses, They praise the king who is the Lord of Jinas. {25}
the emptiness of all things,
The younger sister, the niece, Or any other female relative,
Doing so will wither away the act, exhaust it, and finally put it to rest.’“
Like a deep abyss, they are abandoned entirely by wise people.
“Ajita, from the first of those twenty thousand tathāgatas until the last of those tathāgatas they
Neither do the light rays of Indra, Brahmā, or the demigods shine through.
It entails the completion of the six transcendent perfections
“The Lord elevated with hundreds of merits Mounted the horse and resembled a red lotus and a jasmine flower.
They praise generosity and rejoice in the generosity of others.
Kolita saw the Dharma, heard the Dharma, knew the Dharma, plumbed the depths of the Dharma,
When the outer skin of an utpala stalk Is washed with milk and drunk by a woman
Previously his complexion was so beautiful, but now it has all changed.”
“Blessed One, how are bodhisattvas similar to the earth? How are they similar to water? How are they similar to fire? How are they similar to wind? How are they similar to space?
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is skill in liberative art.
“Alternatively one should prepare a maṇḍala In the form of a canvas-picture, nicely painted.
This same refrain should also be extensively applied to [the fruitional attributes], including the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four assurances, and the four modes of analytical knowledge, and so on, up to the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, just as has been indicated in the context of the noble eightfold path.
is not an experiencer, and is not something exhaustible, something destructible, or something that ceases
“With evil minds they will say, ‘We dwell in solitude,
between one’s eyebrows, it will come within a day.
the poor man has no anxiety about coming in and out of the householder’s residence,
What is it?
Others fast for a fortnight or a month, according to the moon.
Recollection of discipline is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
But four are too many for me.
He replied, “Noble one, as I have no hands, no one will allow me to go forth.
Do you not see them, my Lord? Where will you go?
the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas emerge in the world!”
and in the same vein, this mind [of the bodhisattvas] is unattached to [the other sensory elements], up to and including the sensory element of mental consciousness.
It shows the power of the place where he was born to a noble family, and how he surpassed others through all the superior special qualities that he demonstrated through his actions as a youth.
Since those striving with firm resolve Who enter Gautama’s teaching Gain access to ambrosia, Remove darkness, and attain nirvāṇa, They are called the most precious gem of the Saṅgha.
She is disciplined and devoted to her husband,
“He did so in order to summon Mañjuśrī Kumārabhuta.
“At last, I shall look on the face of the son I have wanted for so long!
Canopies, parasols, and flags were erected. The sound of music was perfectly played,
One should take the the water with which she washes her anus And rinse one’s mouth with it, and so on.
Although one becomes a little agitated, one immediately relies on a remedy in that very moment.
The petition is acted upon thus: ‘Reverend saṅgha, please heed me.
wherein ultimately there is neither merit, nor sin, nor non-movement, nor action itself.
know that there are four beneficial qualities possessed by
Then Senior Śāradvatī­putra, Senior Mahā­maudgalyāyana, Senior Su­bhūti, Senior Mahākāśyapa, Senior Pūrṇa­maitrāyaṇī­putra,
All the bodhisattvas also arrived together with the 840 million mansions.
In that process a pleasant scent infuses—that is, passes through and goes into—the sesame seeds even though the scent neither ruptures the seed nor affects the flavor of the oil.
while equanimity and mindfulness are utterly pure.
The Bhagavān was dwelling in the Grove of Twin Sāl-Trees in the vicinity of the Malla town of Kuśinagara, together with a retinue of śrāvakas.
“When will thoughts cease for those Who think of being alone in solitude?
They rest in equanimity with respect to the forms that are objects of the eye consciousness.
This concludes the eighth chapter, on going to the temple.
Yet when one is old, suffering from disease, and all wealth is spent, One becomes as disagreeable as death.
‘This small store of qualities I have attained, I have attained with the help of the prince.
there is a world known as Realm of Lotuses.
which takes those who have become animals to a higher existence;
His retinue of disciples numbered thirty-six million billion,
They are hung all over, here and there, With garlands made of golden flowers.
latent impulses, and obsessions
the objects of the six sense organs,
inspiring all beings.
They let out cries that reached the king’s quarters: “Alas, we have been deceived! Where did the Bodhisattva go?”
Hanging from it were many hundreds of thousands of silk streamers,
Then found unsurpassed peace and happiness.
the samādhi named Drop of Amṛta,
After he passed into nirvāṇa, his Dharma remained for hundreds of thousands of quintillions of eons, as numerous as the atoms in Jambudvīpa.
At that time an evil king cut off your limbs in anger,
In that way he rebukes him at that time, And then the wise one increases their bond,
May I too in a future time Become like this And liberate millions of beings.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ expertise with respect to the Great Vehicle.
Then as a bodhisattva transmigrates from the Heaven of Joy, he remains seated in a cross-legged position in that tiered chamber.
“This level of the bodhisattvas
Those who honor and serve the adepts of this doctrine will be the true protectors of the Dharma.
Varuṇadatta, Indradatta, Uttaramati,
I thought, ‘Everyone enters the nature of the Dharma equally, but we are being liberated by the Bhagavān through the Hīnayāna.’
Venerable Lord! How does the illusion-like mind attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment?
Then Senior Pūrṇa addressed Senior Su­bhūti as follows:
to the one who is a teacher of the six perfections; and to the one whose thoughts are good.
It is not rebuking the poor. It is having compassion for those with wrong conduct.
The merchant or householder loves all of them equally, and he treats them all equally.
Ānanda, those deluded persons abandon this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom in four ways.
This was the tenth chapter on protection from “The Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld.”
these are conditioned phenomena, these are unconditioned phenomena,
They practiced the highest conduct, enlightenment’s cause. They possessed supreme merit and wisdom.
He is supreme among them, For he does not harm any living being.
Consequently, the Venerable Lord, when he was formerly a bodhisattva,
“Bhagavān, someone who writes out this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma, transmits it, reads it aloud, meditates on it, and keeps it in mind will have countless qualities.
Therefore, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom
In the past they served the victorious ones, and as a result they are born among those who have the genuine view.
Once, when not occupied with their studies, they went to collect wood for fire pūjas.
Today everyone should wear all their ornaments!
Prologues, hundreds of different analogies, Prose put into verse, and similarly elucidations. {45}
Filled with the water of concentration,
One should remain with one’s mind focused solely on pleasure,
May they become truly enlightened buddhas, Overcoming negative influences of every kind, And then, to benefit living beings, May they turn the wheel of the Dharma.
explain, analyze, elucidate, and genuinely demonstrate this transcendent perfection of wisdom,
Monks, when at that point I tried touching my belly with my hand, I actually ended up touching my spine.
I am the Tathāgata, the unsurpassable Bhagavān! I have been born into this world to bring liberation.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of engagement. What are the four kinds of engagement?
As the retinue of women wake up the Lord of Men,
“Good! Good, Mañjuśrī! This is indeed well spoken! This is right!
One should scratch her thighs with fingernails And rub her feet like a slave.
These benefits of possessing diligence. {12}
“What is indifference to respect? It is understanding the ripening of karma.
Bodhisattvas are not afflicted. With their dependable character they bring joy to sentient beings.
Then there were some divine princes among the assembly who thought,
“For these reasons, Su­bhūti, you
He had a bow that is now being honored in the temple with incense and flower garlands.
Bhikṣus, then those Mahābrahmās each offered to the Bhagavān their own airborne palace, and
and he is distressed by his previous poor man’s way of thinking—he is disgusted by it, ashamed of it, and loathes it.
When it has been digested, one should drink some milk.
It is higher knowledge for those who wish to perform miracles.
These are verbal misdeeds,
like a forbearing person, like a diligent person,
Has left the Heaven of Joy for the womb of Queen Māyā in order to become your son.”
With a purified mind, she will become accomplished in the same fashion.
“These ladies are well trained in offering pleasures, In combination with song and the melodious sounds of lutes and reed pipes.
with raised umbrellas, standards, and flags,
“Space is without edge or center,
Bodhisattvas will not be patient during the day yet not at night, nor will bodhisattvas be patient at night but not during the day.
he taught them a Dharma teaching and instructed them, inspired them, and delighted them.
were to gain the result of becoming stream entrants, once-returners, non-returners, arhats, and pratyekabuddhas,
The preceptor again asks the postulant whether he is utterly free of impediments,
Some are frightened by the five obscurations and so relish the taste of the five faculties.
some mansions were made of combinations of gold, silver, beryl, crystal, red pearl, and coral;
as well as correct knowledge of aggressive, deluded, inferior, middling, attached, virtuous, steadfast, committed, and vicious sentient beings.
Compared to the merit he would produce, the production of merit in the first instance, consisting of the bodhisattvas’ acts of giving, would not even amount to a hundredth part.
And within the teachings of that jina There will be beings as numerous as the sands of the Ganges
You may wonder, noble son, how bodhisattvas remain in the application of mindfulness with respect to villages, cities, towns, regions, districts, and royal courts.
They will see the monastery as their home.
there are also countless benefits in nirvāṇa, and the tathāgata, too, has that many countless appellations.
‘Bhagavān, what kind of wisdom does the Tathāgata possess,
With a diligence as if their hair had caught fire, they strive and persist for the benefit of sentient beings.
the rainy season lasts one month, the short rainy season lasts a day,
This Dharma, with its excellent meanings and excellent words, is unadulterated, complete, pure, refined, stainless, luminous, pleasant, agreeable, fulfilling, elating, inspiring, delightful, and mentally enriching.
For nine hundred and fifty billion years He repented all his misdeeds,
and said to the multitudes, great multitudes, and masters of the multitudes of bodhisattva mahāsattvas,
Yet this teaching of the Buddha is the refuge for those who have none. Protector of those without a refuge, protector of the world,
hovering in midsky, they sang these verses to one another:
It was through relying upon Devadatta that I perfected great love, great compassion, great rejoicing, great equanimity, the thirty-two signs and eighty features of a great being, a fathom-wide aura, a golden color, the ten strengths, the four fearlessnesses, the four methods of attracting disciples, the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha, the great miraculous powers, and the liberating of beings in the ten directions.
Those who discern the truth—arhats who have realized the depths of the sacred doctrine and fulfilled their intentions,
Therefore, noble son, I will answer you, so listen well and keep what I say in mind.”
Thus, bodhisattvas bring terror.
non-effort is stainless;
One should drink it and rub it on, exposing the body to strong sunshine;
“Śāradvatī­putra, the ‘understanding of all phenomena, the understanding of the aspects of the path, and the understanding of omniscience’ are merely conceptualized.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara came to Bhagavat Śikhin. He was holding lotus flowers, each with a thousand petals and a golden stem.
human, non-human, yakṣa, rākṣasa, asura, gandharva, nāga, garuḍa, guhyaka, preta, piśāca, vetāla, kākhorda, kṛtya, pūtana, kaṭapūtana, unmāda, or apasmāra— who, seeking an opportunity to hurt and looking for conflict,
Who has made offerings to you, supreme among men? For what reason did you smile? {54}
They take pleasure in torturing their bodies and go through various difficult torments.
They will be unsurpassable in merit, they will be undefeatable by opponents,
“This is the master, Your Majesty.”
Whether the Thus-Gone One remains or passes entirely into nirvāṇa,
Then the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Śākyamuni said to the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Prabhūtaratna, who had passed into nirvāṇa,
It torments and overheats the body.
And I shall build a beautiful stūpa. {108}
in the absence of birth there cannot be any old age and death.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of designations. What are the four kinds of designations?
causing them to remain without perishing.
“Monks, this is the old path, the old route, the old trail which seers of old have traveled and traversed.
It is not to let discipline deteriorate and not to give up the training.
Speak briefly, without elaborating too much.
Winds are the vajra ḍākinī,
Bodhisattvas should accept worldly things cheerfully.
guiding many hundreds of thousands of bodhisattvas and hundreds of thousands of śrāvakas.
Bhagavān, the beings in this Sahā world realm will be arrogant, with few roots of merit, constantly malicious, deceitful, and dishonest.”
Absorbed in the sign-less,
Through enjoying the pleasure with one’s mind arrested,
Noble one, my body is sixty-eight hundred thousand yojanas high.
In the same vein as before, they teach the sacred doctrine that [all attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, have the modality of space.
denies the existence of future lives,
This is not the emancipation associated with limited vehicles, that is to say, with the vehicle of the śrāvakas or the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas.
That is to say, they liberate those sentient beings who perceive that non-sentient beings are sentient, and
“Noble son, from their dispelling of the darkness of ignorance up to their being the joy of the virtuous, this is how bodhisattvas are.
Thinking like this, they remain in the application of mindfulness with respect to objects and they are, therefore, neither hurt nor harmed by objects.
one should write with a paint of liquid lac, blood from one’s left ring finger, camphor, kunkuma, and musk.
These are called the four supports for miraculous ability.
you can unhesitatingly ask me for it
May this entire earth shake With its oceans and mountains.
A person who had been caught by many strangers
Doing so with great understanding, for the sake of beings, And so that the lineage of enlightenment will remain. {i}
Finally, there was the fourfold community, consisting of bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, laymen, and laywomen.
When the wise and courageous Bodhisattva departed from his home,
that noble man or noble woman does not need to build a stūpa for me, does not need to build a temple, nor do they need to give utensils to the saṅgha of bhikṣus, or medicine when they are ill.
“Space is without abode;
May I complete the perfection of meditation.
Even the names of the assurances do not exist internally, nor do they exist externally, and nor do they abide between these two.
and similarly, that the four meditative concentrations, the four immeasurable aspirations,
All these beautiful, melodious sounds Cannot equal a fraction of the Buddha’s speech. {30}
But, let alone throwing a flower in the sky,
(1) Prince Sarvārthasiddha’s fingernails are rounded, (2) copper colored, and (3) glossy.
“You may have instilled some fear but the fear I instill today shall be like none ever seen before.”
Similarly, they will not be emancipated from the world system of form or the world system of formlessness.
he perceived that he had, in that very life, actualized the unsurpassed aim of the holy life for which the sons of noble families,
The citizens make the gesture of homage to him As do the villagers who live in the villages.
“Noble son, the wilderness is a reference to the wilderness of cyclic existence.
and that are hung with divine ornaments;
It is giving up all possessions. It is welcoming others with a higher motivation.
May the constellations in that direction Protect you! “Maghā and also The two Phālgunī, Hasta, And Citrā, the fifth. Along with Svātiś and Viśākhā, are in the south.
such as the embers of the saṅgha’s fire, the smoke of the saṅgha, the vajras of the saṅgha, or the baggage of the saṅgha, should not be used.
and so it will be that the thus-gone one, the worthy one, the perfect buddha Ratnavyūha will appear in the world.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ expertise concerning the ripening of karma.
Since [unconditioned phenomena], up to an including the finality of existence, are non-apprehensible, it follows that the so-called ‘real nature, expanse of reality, maturity, and finality of existence’ are all nothing but mere names or conventional terms.
they will enter upon the maturity of the bodhisattvas.
he stood with the deportment of a monk who had been ordained for one hundred years.
Friends, go and quickly bring that man to me.’
We should go to him.’
“Monks, I acquiesced by not responding to Brahmā, master of the Sahā world.
After the monk had had his pleasure from dallying with the prostitute, he collected his alms,
Then Senior Śāradvatī­putra asked the Blessed One,
Through the disengagement of sentient beings they understand the disengagement of awakening.
And goes forth as a monk, unattached, full of compassion and love for the world,
the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha named Brahmadhvaja.
He will remain as beneficial and compassionate to the world.
In a memorial containing his relics, or in front of the venerable Buddha, one should recite the mantra 10,000 times as preliminary practice.
Always dressed in red,
Gods, this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom has the defining characteristic of signlessness,
Even if one practices generosity, discipline, perfect restraint,
Clouds of benzoin resin and sandalwood formed,
If one were to ask why, it is because the extrasensory powers are empty of the extrasensory powers.
“Yes, divine son, there is a method by which a miserly bodhisattva great being can complete the perfection of generosity, yet those who are generous cannot.
He is a venerable teacher of the Dharma who never mistakes any words or syllables.
“Once all the bhūtas have arrived On the mountain that destroys bhūtas
“Merit is acquired through passionate affection;
When he said the letter u, out came the statement: ‘The world is rife with misfortune (upa­drava­bahulaṃ jagat).’
In the past I was unable to train them as their master, so now I shall accept to be their disciple.’
“Bhagavān, those beings will have their heads stroked by the hand of the Tathāgata.
The secret is the means tantra;
He gave them the shining elixir of amrita, But because of my desires I had him slain. {i}
at that time, in the presence of the Bhagavān, they fittingly praised him with these verses:
and the gods inhabiting the world system of form proceeding to the world system of form.
Upananda then asked him, “Retired devotee, where have you come from?”
And drink wine, being focused.
He attains a human birth, He will be destroyed in that birth by a bolt of lightning.
“Blessed One, in order to attain what achievements is acceptance attained?”
Similarly, they do not engage with the notion that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are afflicted, or that they are purified.
and thus not engage in the conceptual applications of generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, concentration, and knowledge of the hearers and solitary buddhas who rely on reference points.
“Gentlemen, give the brahmin Tiṣya a victor’s prize.”
Venerable Lord! This transcendent perfection of wisdom is equal to the unequaled transcendent perfection of great bodhisattva beings!
Noble son, bodhisattvas are endowed with undefiled wisdom that transcends the entire world.
and instructs the worlds [of sentient beings].
“Just as the heavy snow during winter Steals all life from grass, trees, and herbs,
What kind of sublime display shall we prepare to honor him with?
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of speaking. What are the four kinds of speaking?
To the monks, he said, “Venerables, the Tāthagata will travel the realm.
This is the way phenomena are throughout time. This is what is called the field of activity of the wise.
Śakra, Brahmā, and millions of others are present as well, Waiting to receive you when you take birth.
similarly, they have conviction in feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness.
Senior Su­bhūti replied,
Also, when any great bodhisattva beings become absorbed in the aspects of those meditative concentrations, immeasurable aspirations, and formless absorptions, replete with the [appropriat‌e] signs and indications [of success in practice], and then
and in the same vein, [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas are free from contaminants and not included within the three world systems, owing to the emptiness of inherent existence.
they have been perfectly practicing proper conduct, they have been encouraging beings to receive the wisdom of the buddhas,
For many eons he increased the accumulations of merit, absorption, and wisdom;
Gods and humans will be attracted to him, And he will give those beings the supreme wealth. {33}
They were very learned and skilled in composing poetry and texts,
“One should put her knees, joined together, Against one’s chest,
Similarly, they do not apprehend [all the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path.
do you think, Su­bhūti, that this illusionist or this apprentice of an illusionist would have established any sentient beings in perseverance?
It is because of the roots of virtue that it stored that I have been reborn among the gods.
to Candraprabha, such as the heroic, the treasury of space, the vajra-like, the speed of the mind, the revealing of all forms,
An indescribable sight, huge and vast— Were set up and arranged on the left and right of the road. {xiv}
I carried the skirt, the offering bowl, and the monk’s robes in a very beautiful manner.
“Just like a terrifying fire pit, So the noble ones understand desire.
This is because all things are themselves non-existent, because they themselves are calm, because they themselves are void, because they themselves are non-arising, and because they themselves are unceasing.
“May you teach the path to peace—
fter water incanted with it has been drunk, blisters will not appear.
Others hold the view and argue that no self endures,
“Young man,
The fifth aspect of liberation ensues when the sense field of infinite space has been completely transcended in all respects, and when one achieves and abides in the sense field of infinite consciousness, thinking, ‘Consciousness is infinite.’
“Excellent, Blessed One!” replied the bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkam­bhin, and he listened as instructed.
Thus I will remain silent and keep this truth in my heart.”
Once they have bathed and put on clean clothes, they should take refuge in the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha during the watch of dawn and pray to him, uttering these words:
His teeth are without gaps between them.
“What is avoiding bad beings? It is avoiding those who are fixated on perceptions and those who are lazy.
Entering through the fontanel of the future mother, one falls into the vagina,
They will claim, ‘This is not a sūtra taught by the Thus-Gone One,’
“Su­bhūti, all things are confined by these delimiting phenomena, comprising the limits of the past and the limits of the future.
They are Gayākāśyapa, Nadīkāśyapa, Uru­vilvā­kāśyapa, Kāla, Kālodāyin, Aniruddha, Revata, Kapphiṇa, Bakkula, Cunda, Svāgata, and the rest of the five hundred who have gained mastery over themselves.”
But there are other inconceivable offerings.
They were bewildered about what was here and what was there, and in their confusion they were not able to perceive one another.
Each being beholds the Victor, as if just before him.
However, Su­bhūti, it is because sentient beings do not know that all things are empty
‘Are you free from harm, free from distress, and in good health? Do you remain strong and happy?’
It is the negation of attributes. It is rejecting identification. It is knowledge of the characteristics of things.
He calls to them, ‘Listen, children! I have three different kinds of carts,
“In the same way that the poison is transferred, so, too, the element of consciousness gives up the body, leaves the sense faculties behind, and abandons the elements.
We have gained a great benefit from having heard such teaching of the Dharma, whether the Tathāgata himself still actually exists or whether he has already attained ultimate liberation.
And in unison, gods, humans, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, Śakra, Brahmā, and the world protectors, all spoke these words:
(4) The Blessed One has long toes and fingers.
Together with Delusion Vajrī,
‘Venerables, do not fight in the food queue like Kāśyapa’s monks.
Nor will there be to your life.” {39}
The Blessed One and the venerable Śāriputra have entrusted him to us,
Follow it, and you will all become jinas.
“Though one is born and though one dies, There is no birth and there is no death
It would be good if you were you to explain our plight at length.”
Senior Pūrṇa, physical forms of the past are neither fettered nor liberated;
catch a whiff of its smell.
Having spoken thus, the earth goddess Sthāvarā rebuked Māra, the evil one, in many ways, and praised the Bodhisattva again and again.
Oh! Oh! You have attained the perfection of liberation through wisdom And you bestow the medicine that is the good Dharma.
Best of men, give your answer to my questions.” {10}
who are skillful in disposition, restrained in their physical actions, and similarly restrained in their verbal and mental actions
And delight in the peace of the forests, Will never know the arising of doubts. {20}
They had obtained supreme perfection in mastering all mental states.
Being all in mutual dependence, One thing follows after another,
I utterly transcended Through the force and commitment of my perseverance.
Yaśovatī and the retinue of consorts are in their beds, lulled to sleep by the gods.
In this lifetime their grasping is the basis for experiencing in their next life many kinds of sufferings in the hells, as animals, and in the realm of Yama.
“Whatever is the same as purification on the ultimate level is also ultimately the same as all phenomena.
Also present were Brahmā, the lord of the Sahā world realm, with a retinue of twelve hundred Brahmakāyika devas:
let alone bodhisattva mahāsattvas with one bodhisattva follower.
Will they be stable in the community of the śrāvakas, or will they be stable in the community of pratyekabuddhas?
“Nārāyaṇa, even if we had one hundred thousand eons to try, using analogies, to demonstrate how many world systems there are in all ten directions, it would not be easy.
And rejecting the creation of any view: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {100}
flew in their airborne palaces into the four directions.
similarly, it has not been produced by [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
Bodhisattvas who possess this diligence create the power of diligence within each mind state.
“To all the buddhas Of present, future, and past I pay homage!
There arose in me the thought, “That is no ordinary wise man.” {4}
To obliterate the yantra of an enemy,
born in Agnighaṭa, born in Vajraśaila, and born in the city of the pretas. Those beings have the greatest suffering.’
Śāntottara, Śānta­śriya­jvalanta, Śānta, Praśānteśvara, Śāntiśūra, {24}
the inconceivably numerous words of immeasurability concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous words of immeasurability concerning purification. Those are the four.
Venerable Lord, if the notion of physical forms as entities or non-entities is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of physical forms as such become a bodhisattva?
That nature of the qualities of a buddha is also the nature of the tathāgatas,
With that aroma, gods and humans will become very content;
"རིགས་ཀྱི་བུ་གསུམ་པོ་འདི་དག་ནི་བསོད་ནམས་ཉེ་བར་རྟོན་པ་དང་། བསོད་ནམས་ཀྱི་ཚོགས་དང་། བསོད་<t“Son of noble family, there are three things that constitute the foundation of merit, the accumulation of merit, the gathering of merit, the expansion of merit, the inexhaustibility of merit, inconceivable merit, and ocean-like merit.
And so you are free of error. {11}
the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty.
to be attached to temporary projects; to be distracted by negative activity; to give up vast factors of virtue;
Royal Son, today the time for renunciation has come.
In just the same way, should a bodhisattva, who knows full well that all things are like empty space, wish to build a buddhafield in order to develop living beings,
great bodhisattva beings would not demonstrate to sentient beings [the sacred] doctrine that all things are empty of inherent existence,
the being, the good being,
“This refrain should also be applied, in the same vein, to all phenomena, up to and including things that are contaminated and things that are uncontaminated.
If you ask why, it is because ultimately they do not consider anything which actualizes, anything by which actualization takes place, or anything that is to be actualized.
“God, if you know it is the right time, then express your inspiration.”
Their intrinsic nature is not being perceived.
each singing its own melody.
As he was sleeping, King Śuddhodana dreamed that
“Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings train accordingly, they do not train in anything at all.
“Then the princesses, too, inspired by their previous roots of goodness,
Enlightened body is the action ḍākinī.
All phenomena he realizes To be like an illusion, a visual distortion, and a reflection of the moon in water
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of families of wisdom. What are the four kinds of families of wisdom?
“After Tejeśvara there was a buddha, A jina who was named Matīśvara.
“Revered saṅgha, please listen.
Will you commit yourself to subsisting on such resources? The newly ordained monk responds: “I will so commit myself.”
They will be fearlessly careless in following their desires And their recklessness will cause them to fall into lower existences.
Ānanda, as soon as he smeared it on him, the man’s illness was cured.
nor do they become pleasure, nor do they become pain, nor do they become both pleasure and pain.
He is nothing whatsoever.
The fire should be obtained from the home of an actor. The offerings are to be smeared with the three sweets and presented together with the root mantra.
It is an inconceivable yoga and therefore difficult to obtain.
This accomplishes all desired aims.
So it is that the purity of the past, the purity of the future, and the purity of the present are indivisible:
serum, odors, urine, brain tissue, and cerebral secretions.
If the wine is broken, and then it is taken out, That one will become truly excellent.
When the Jina placed his foot on the gateway’s threshold, Thousands of musical instruments sounded without being played;
presence before returning to remain among the gods.
The buddhas are of the same body within the dharmadhātu
when a householder living in Śrāvastī took a wife of equal caste
The methods of those possessing the self-arisen five wisdoms are to be praised
So, likewise, I whose name is …, do also generate the thought of enlightenment from this time until the essence of enlightenment is reached.
He had no fewer than five hundred sons, All endowed with mindfulness and realization. {7}
may I cause all beings to perfect the treasury of the sacred Dharma!’
May he carry on my work and,
The domain of living by the holy Dharma, without even perceiving any evil paths, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
Took four vessels from the four directions And offered them to the Bliss-Gone One.
When not involved in flawed discipline, they are irreproachable.
He shall be protected from kings, ministers, robbers, fire, water, enemies, and adversaries, and when traveling, lost, asleep, drunk, or careless!
die among spirits only to be reborn among spirits,
Similarly, they accept the offerings because they are the repositories of the transcendent perfections, in whom afflicted mental states and all involuntary reincarnation through propensities have been abandoned, and who likewise are without affliction or purification, without arising or ceasing, without acceptance or rejection, and without standing, sitting, going, coming, or abiding.
Similarly, owing to the utter purity of all things, they do not apprehend the psycho-physical aggregates.
32,000 children gave rise to thoughts aimed at unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening.
If you ask why, it is because they do not consider the nature of the eyes.
He controlled his senses, was caring, had a peaceful mind, But because of my desires I had him slain. {97}
“Death devours beings by the hundreds, Like a sea monster devouring numerous beings,
Any thought of miserliness, any thought of degenerate morality,
the hero among men,
At this, the robbers and bandits of Magadha and Kosala all moved to the borderlands.
Now Mañjuśrī Kumārabhuta emerged from his absorption.
for it leads to the absence of mindlessness and mental engagements.
Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta said to the bodhisattva Prajñākūṭa,
“By relying on you, one of utter purity, I have today gained flawless, pure vision,
Whoever speaks ill of them Will become silent, their mouths closed.
“Rare is the human condition and the arising of a buddha,
‘Elders, though that is so, since going forth, I have done all that needed to be done.
manifested herself in a material body and showered the great spiritual heroes, the bodhisattvas, and the great disciples with heavenly flowers.
Once I attained the absorption of signlessness.
Similarly, other bodhisattvas were touched and inspired by the light,
Projected light into all directions, And then taught the method for destroying all grahas:
They will not deviate whatsoever from the Dharma, which they have learned and mastered.
Then the bodhisattvas who had arrived from other world realms, who were as numerous as the grains of sand in eight Ganges Rivers,
Never abandoning the mendicant’s discipline, and begging for alms: That is the Dharma that the supreme human teaches. {80}
Yet when these conditions are present and the seed is ceasing, the sprout forms.
Through the name, power, sovereignty, and might of the great king Dhṛtarāṣṭra, may I be free of all grahas and misfortunes!
and teach it to others.
The gods showered a cooling rain of flowers.
“Why should the bodhisattvas meditate on it? Because it brings the attainment of omniscient wisdom.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds cause all beings to put down their loads.
And its outer form will remain for the same length of time.
Just like the dharmas, so are sentient beings.
But within the nature of the realm of phenomena there is no affliction,
I accurately understood the precise identity of suffering, the source of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the path leading to its cessation.
Acting in perfect accordance with his words, his unerring statements were always genuine.
“The cloud satiates them all.
will cure aches and pains.
Nakṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña, it is like the way that the stream entrants, the once-returners, the nonreturners, the arhats, and pratyeka­buddhas have transcended all ordinary, foolish beings.
Bhagavat, when you teach what I request, the devas gain unwavering faith.
“The planets, the moon, the stars, and the sun may fall from the sky to the ground,
So with shame and embarrassment, they now bowed to the feet of the Sage;
Great King, Prince Sarvārthasiddha’s eyelashes are like those of a bull.
The monk patricide then told his wards, “Venerables, construct a sweat-chamber for the saṅgha and for me.”
Venerable Lord! This transcendent perfection of wisdom is profound, hard to discern, and hard to realize!
They act for the welfare of all realms of sentient beings
“This is the common mantra of the oblation offering:
“For immeasurable hundreds of thousands of eons,
Ānanda, it is even said that I am a nihilist, or that I am an eternalist.
As soon as the Bhagavān placed his right hand upon Candraprabha’s head, in that very instant,
Even the darkest regions of the world, filled with negativity and obscurity, where even the renowned great power and magical ability of the sun and the moon are unable to produce light, colors, or heat, were bathed in light. In those realms, the unfortunate beings normally cannot even see their own hands. But even there, the dazzling light shone.
Without understanding that the wrathful dances And the seals are merely an illusory display,
As King Śuddhodana had such love for the Bodhisattva and wanted to please him,
If you ask why, these phenomena, up to and including unconditioned phenomena, are neither fettered nor liberated because they are themselves non-existent, because they are themselves void, because they are themselves non-arising, because they are themselves unceasing, because they are themselves not fettered, and because they are themselves not liberated.
“ ‘Consider the assembly of bodhisattvas,
If I see him now, I will beg his forgiveness.”
The brahmin Tiṣya’s time came, as did Śārikā’s.
And to those who with hands in homage upon their head Are searching for the state of omniscience,
they were skilled in the knowledge of the higher and lower capabilities of all beings;
so it is that they correctly perceive the real nature of perceptions.
said to that complete saṅgha of bhikṣus,
Mañjuśrī, when is one a beginner bodhisattva?
This occurs in an instant.
Because he is endowed with the great strength of Nārāyaṇa,
I shall name this prince Bimbisāra (Essence of Gold).”
If they are endowed with such cognition,
and so they may say,
it is inseparable from the true nature, the limit of reality, and the essence of phenomena.
Since the eyes are non-apprehensible, it follows that so-called ‘eyes’ are nothing but a mere name or conventional term.
‘When these conditions cease to exist, it also ceases.
These flowers are proper indeed!
The lord can even grant the rulership of the three worlds
When this occurred, the monks made them, too, wait seven or eight days, and so some left without having been allowed to go forth.
Having placed it in a vessel with the blood dripping kañcu, One places it in a red earthen vessel.
The aspect of awakening of complete joy is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“If your stream of being keeps samaya vows as your pledge, You will be liberated through attributes.
Although he sees the king surrounded by his court,
Ānanda, you should remain in equanimity with regard to the deeds of the bodhisattvas.
With seven, they are great.
The aggregates, elements, and sense media
Having entered the Kurukullā mountain It rouses Tārā, and as she is summoned, She is made to be present before oneself.
They see millions of buddhas As numerous as the Ganges sands. {163}
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that one is liberated by perceiving the sensory element of the mental faculty, the sensory element of mental phenomena, and the sensory element of mental consciousness as entities?”
and having even refined the buddhafields, they will swiftly attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
You outshine everyone and transcend the desirous path of the three realms.
From above the lion throne within the great lotus of gems and jewels, ten innumerable quintillions of light rays now issued forth
“Those gandharva maidens remember the name of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara. Whenever in the three periods they remember it, all valuable things appear for them.”
Such, Mañjuśrī, is the great love of a bodhisattva.”
Although fire, controlled by circumstances, is produced through the sticks, without those circumstances it would not arise.
Go and summon Those fifteen ferocious grahas!
Bliss-Gone One, it is indeed marvelous.”
They will perfect the brave progression.
Peerless in your conduct,
I ask that any who cannot allow it speak up.”
The body is outer form,
practice celibacy, have entered the homeless life, and have become fully ordained bhikṣus—they will go into decline.
When the Blessed One decreed, “Measure the length of a shadow,” the monks measured the length of a shadow using a long stick,
“Many other beings, following his example, Also honored the Tathāgata
sound of a drum arises based on wood, hide and a stick, and also on a person’s effort to make it arise.
it can be said that the follower does not have a sense of reverence.
This is my first time in the presence of a noble being, so I ask you, please, introduce me to a monk.”
wouldn’t this cause them to engage in or identify with erroneous views?
Similarly, when these are dedicated toward omniscience in an uncreated manner and without apprehending anything,
“What is meant by its being realized by those who have the ten strengths? It means that it is an arduous practice.
They do not preoccupy themselves with the talk of towns, cities, villages, markets, and palace circles.
The Bhagavān was dwelling in Anāthapiṇḍada’s park, in the Jeta Grove in Śrāvastī, along with a large monastic assembly.
“Young man, at that time, King Śrīghoṣa made a request to that great assembly of bodhisattvas.
Su­bhūti, the Bodhisattva Maitreya, having attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment,
Their voice is deep [like the trumpet of an elephant or the rolling of thunder].
Homage to you, Buddha powerful!
The face of the Bodhisattva, however, remained as pure and stainless as the orb of the full moon when it escapes the mouth of Rāhu,
but they do not apprehend any of those things.
Kauśika, great bodhisattva beings should train accordingly in the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
he will nevertheless teach the Dharma in accordance with his previous prayers.
Chanda’s eyes filled with tears as he spoke to his master‌:
That is called the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end.
“When he acquires grass and travels to the seat of awakening, And as he conquers the demons and gains awakening,
With many eyes and half a body, With one eye and twelve stomachs,
In the same vein, he will not teach the sacred doctrine according to the notions that [all other attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, are utterly pure or that they are not utterly pure.
Let him follow the learned one who masters disciplined conduct.”
in the same vein, they do not apprehend [all the other designations concerning physical forms] up to and including the designation of physical forms as non-entities.
Great King, Prince Sarvārthasiddha’s hair is deep blue like the neck of a peacock or kohl powder, and curls to the right.
Likewise, wherever the element of consciousness is transferred to and migrates,
you have crushed the assault of the enemy.
Also, the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas who will emerge in the future, along with their monastic assemblies of śrāvakas,
Venerable Lord! Great bodhisattva beings of the present who are limitless in number, [residing] in the innumerable, countless, and limitless world systems of the ten directions, having trained in this supreme vehicle, the Great Vehicle, currently acquire omniscience.
some mansions were made of combinations of gold, silver, beryl, crystal, red pearl, coral, and emerald;
Ratnavara at that time thought to himself,
"དེ་དག་ཐམས་ཅད་བུད་མེད་ཀྱི་དངོས་པོ་དང་། སྡུག་བསྔལ་དང་། ཡིད་མི་བདེ་བ་དང་། འཁྲུག་པ་ཐམས་<tthey will all dispel that condition of being a woman, suffering, unhappiness, and afflictions.
Monks, while the god in this way was encouraging the Bodhisattva, a dream occurred to King Śuddhodana.
“ ‘In the presence of the protector of the world,
have led to his abandoning all disturbing emotions, actualizing arhatship, and inspiring such a massive conversion.
Contemplating repulsiveness serves as the remedy for desire
“They will always be mindful and gentle And have the patience of a sugata’s child.
Then the gods of the sky approached the Thus-Gone One.
Ah! You have divine vision, and are wise and adept in wisdom.
They do not seek buddhahood that has great power; They do not search for the Dharma that ends suffering. {111}
The aspect-less is explained as the gate to liberation of the samādhi of no-sign.
"བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ཀྱིས་གསུངས་པའི་དོན་བདག་ཅག་གིས་འཚལ་བ་ལྟར་ན་སེམས་ཅན་གང་སུ་དག་བླ་ན་མེད་པ་ཡང་དག་པར་རྫོགས་པའི་བྱང་ཆུབ་ལ་མ་ཞུགས་པ་དེ་དག་ནི་བསོད་ནམས་<tAccording to our understanding of what the Blessed One has said, anyone who does not set out toward unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening will not manifest out of the absorption that encapsulates all merit,
They will know that even though such individuals abide therein, they will continue to bring sentient beings to maturity; to honor sentient beings with everything that actualizes their happiness;
the court scribe said. “You should go and look for him.”
In a similar way, the entire retinue present could see the buddha realms in all ten directions,
Bhadrapāla then said to Mahauṣadhi,
In his mind, the Blessed One knew the bodhisattvas’ wish, and so spoke to the bodhisattva Vyūharāja, saying,
Whoever has brought this ignorance to a halt Has exhausted all forms of existence for good.
This was the seventh chapter on the wheel of expulsion from “The Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld.”
‘This girl that I offer you Grants all the pleasures of love;
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of apprehensions concerning purification. Those are the four.
neither involved in concentration nor free of concentration,
Will be beloved in the midst of their followers, And their speech will be like the lion’s roar. {89}
It goes nowhere and it does not come from anywhere.
Bowing down to that good man, they made the wish: ‘May all living beings attain eloquence such as this!’
die among humans and are reborn among humans.”
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings should be equipoised in the attitude of loving kindness,
Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings who have cultivated the mind endowed with omniscience give inner or outer objects to those who desire them,
When the Guide came to that supreme city And placed his supreme foot upon the gateway’s threshold,
“Venerable Lord! If enlightenment itself is the path and the path itself is enlightenment,
And will spend his time happily at ease Until awakening to the state of cool repose.”
Śāradvatī­putra, just as the utter purity of the applications of mindfulness is without foundation
Having here relinquished pleasure, and having earlier already abandoned pain, mental pleasure and mental displeasure now fade away.
(31) There is the meditative stability named Unseeking. (32) There is the meditative stability named No Fixed Abode.
After two or three days of teaching him how Dharma practitioners conduct themselves,
“The wise do not argue with fools, They politely avoid them;
and similarly, that the designations of the ears, the nose, the tongue, the body, and the mental faculty do not constitute a bodhisattva?
They cannot cultivate the transcendent perfection of generosity, and similarly, they cannot cultivate the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, and the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
We are going outside the town.
“Their bearers are the six superknowledges,
does space abide in the eye?
“His body is unshakable and indestructible like Nārāyaṇa’s;
They discern that physical forms are void, and do not focus on them.
“Quick, get up! You must depart without delay!
Arranged in different places were dancers and performers skilled in performing divine songs, dance, and music.
“Those humans who are indifferent To their bodies, which are like lumps of foam,
“Young man, on hearing this, King Mahābala was pleased, delighted, joyful, inspired, and happy.
Whenever they teach the Dharma to anyone, the devas, hearing the beautiful, delightful sound, will come to them so as to see them, pay homage to them, honor them, and listen to the Dharma.
creating a brightness that transcended the lights of devas and the lights of humans.
In all those times he possessed pure eyes.
“Similarly, the gods who are present in the world systems of the ten directions, numerous as the sands of the River Ganges,
The monks replied, “Venerable one, youthful Mañjuśrī declared that nobody ever achieves anything,
Moreover, all demons become unable to inflict any harm.
It is immaterial and invisible.
seven states of great increase, seven hundred states of increase,
These are good mental actions.
They are the position of a merchant, a householder, a universal monarch, a world protector, Śakra, Vaśavartin, Brahmā, a nonreturning bodhisattva who has reached the supreme essence of awakening, sits on a lion throne, and vanquishes the attacks of demons, and a buddha who has reached perfect and unsurpassable awakening and sits on the throne of turning the wheel of Dharma.
Who can believe that the daughter of Sāgara could attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood in an instant?”
In the single union of wisdom and means, Which is the meeting of the vajra and the lotus.
not being weary of the welfare of sentient beings;
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva Gadgadasvara teaches beings this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma sometimes in the form of a bhikṣu, sometimes in the form of a bhikṣunī, sometimes in the form of an upāsaka, sometimes in the form of an upāsikā, sometimes in the form of the wife of a head merchant, sometimes in the form of the wife of a householder, sometimes in the form of the wife of a townsman, sometimes in the form of a boy, and sometimes in the form of a girl.
When you reach the right place on the earth,
He will be one who sees the truth!”
The bodhisattvas there will enjoy various Dharma delights, Dharma liberations, concentrations, absorptions, attainments, and miraculous manifestations.
and likewise, when they engage in union with the emptiness of sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena, they are said to engage in union with the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
I pay homage to you, a loving friend of beings who benefits others.
He is endowed with all supreme aspects and therefore is known as the one who has purified the surface of the mirror of wisdom.
After the preceptor had allowed the nāga’s going forth and ordained him, the preceptor said to the monk,
Dharma practice is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
perfect Buddha Ratnaketu and the Jewel World.
They do not perceive the phenomena toward which they would have attachment or aversion.
knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization arose. “Monks, as I focused my mind correctly on the things that I had not hitherto heard, thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I should relinquish the origin of suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose; knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization arose.
Are the winds blowing toward Ratnadvīpa, or are the winds blowing toward Yavanadvīpa, or are the winds blowing toward the island of the rākṣasīs?’
It is to be uninvolved in the phenomena of ordinary beings; the qualities of training and of nontraining; or the qualities of solitary buddhas, of bodhisattvas, or of buddhas.
‘Noble son, he is coming here.’“
When they arrived, they worshiped the Thus-Gone One sitting at the seat of awakening with a plethora of flowers, incense, garlands, perfumes, and unguents,
for conduct like his captivated gods and men.
the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
and is not involved with mistaken practices.
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, the Great Vehicle of great bodhisattva beings does not cause one to know that ‘this is permanent’ or ‘this is impermanent.’
Here I fastened down The horse of the six sense fields, Engorged with the five sense objects and ever careless with intoxication,
along with Senior Su­bhūti, Senior Śāradvatī­putra, Senior Maudgalyāyana, Senior Pūrṇa­maitrāyaṇī­putra, Senior Mahākāśyapa, Senior Mahākauṣṭhila, Senior Kātyāyana, Senior Ānanda,
This Dharma that I teach in order to benefit the world Has all the requisites for bringing happiness.’
I should maintain ethical discipline,
He then saw that it was patricide.
It is the knowledge that perceives those who have correct conduct to be difficult to find.
They will remember past lives and, supremely intelligent and learned, Retain on hearing it whatever excellent teachings they study.
“Bodhisattvas will likewise practice pure conduct near non-Buddhists who possess the five superknowledges.
That marks the end of the novice investiture rite.
“Go, Ajita, you who have conquered the māras, To the king of mountains where jinas reside.
Those that dwell on Sumeru, the king of mountains, And likewise on the surrounding mountain range, Those that dwell on Vulture Peak, Iśādhāra, Gandhamādana, and Himavat, “Those that dwell on Pāṇḍava, Citrakūṭa, And on the twin peaks of Nārada, Those on the peak of Śrīparvata, Risen to lofty summits, “All the gods and sages Dwelling on all those mountains Are displeased And cry out with anguish.
It is we who trounce our adversaries and it is we who spread the fame of our order.”
“If you ask, Su­bhūti, how great bodhisattva beings become a sanctuary for the worlds,
It is through such a mind that one performs enthrallment.
Namely, conditional dependent arising is to be seen as due to the coming together of the elements of earth, water, fire, wind, space, and season.
And your realization is like earth, water, and fire.
He is neither with wisdom nor without wisdom.
and patiently accept them without any ill will.
They should also encourage others to acquire the cultivation of the emptiness of internal phenomena.
while still burning, could encounter, be provided with, delight in, enjoy, and indulge in the five sensory pleasures.
not so in the case of those explained by the gods,
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya and the many hundred thousands of quintillions of bodhisattvas were then astonished and amazed.
What wise ones on seeing this Would hold fast to their body? {10}
Merely through a mental wish.
If someone should request a teaching, they will not respond with deceptive statements.
His head is all gray, his teeth are few and far between, and his body is so skinny.
“Homage to Tathāgata Śrīghana.
Or will there not be any sorrow when one circles in saṃsāra?
He thinks, ‘Oh, I shall teach the Dharma To all of these afflicted beings!’
As such, they were disciplined and gentle.
he inspires them to enter into this very Bodhisattva­yāna.
“I will go to the parks, so quick, go and prepare my chariot.”
He accomplishes all the activities of the bodhisattvas.
It must accomplish all of its aims.
They do not consider whether sights are with signs or signless, and the same goes for [the other sense objects], up to and including mental phenomena.
“There was a man who was ill and suffering physically. For many years he could not attain freedom from his illness.
recalled your past lives,
they are intent on perfect enlightenment and
When the Blessed One had spoken, the bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkam­bhin rejoiced, as did the other bodhisattvas, the great hearers, Śakra, Brahmā, the guardians of the world, Mahe­śvara, the gods of the pure abodes, and the other millions of gods.
Again, he sat for a bit before saying, “Father, open the door.”
He prostrated, touching his head to the Bodhisattva’s feet,
“To benefit beings, for six years you underwent hardship,
and henceforth not remain in either nihilism or eternalism.
Similarly, they should cultivate the four correct exertions, the four supports for miraculous ability, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven branches of enlightenment, the noble eightfold path, the three gateways to liberation, the ten powers of the tathāgatas, and so on, up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas,
“Those who have representations of the sugatas made From lead, from iron, or from clay, Or beautifully painted on cloth:
Monk, as all phenomena are not truly afflicted, they are free from afflictions.
“Bhaiṣajyarāja, I state that if someone speaks badly to dharmabhāṇakas who hold this sūtra, be they laypeople or renunciants, and whether what is said be true or not, the bad karma will be much more dreadful than if a being with an angry mind, an evil mind, and a wrathful mind were to speak badly to the Tathāgata to his face for an entire eon.
some have four clairvoyances;
Following the Bodhisattva were eighty thousand chariots beautifully outfitted with lattices of golden bells, and with parasols, victory banners, and flags hoisted.
When both are seen to resemble an illusory spirit, there is no bodhisattva spirit, nor any disciple spirit.
Out of concept and thought appears mistaken conceptual activity.
and it can even cover his whole face, as far as the hairline.
a pūtana,
The natural transcendence of suffering— Protector, such are the qualities that you reveal.
Therefore, Ānanda, have trust and understand it to be so.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of fundamental ignorance and, in the same vein, of [all the other links of dependent origination], up to and including aging and death, as arising or ceasing, constitute a bodhisattva?”
They cannot be harmed in any way, and attain unwavering strength.
it is the termination of concepts from analysis;
He repeats this a second and a third time, but the third time he says “preceptor” in place of “master.”
The Bhagavān was residing at Vulture Peak Mountain in Rājagṛha together with a great bhikṣu saṅgha of a full hundred thousand bhikṣus,
Monks, King Śuddhodana both saw and heard that the Bodhisattva had been inspired in these ways.
Since sentient beings are non-apprehensible, nothing is designated as a sentient being.
Venerable Lord! Why is the purity of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness due to the purity of the self?
Śāradvatī­putra, just as [the notion of] a tathāgata, arhat, and completely perfect buddha engaging in the emptiness of internal phenomena is without foundation
who brings freedom from fear;
He overcame his opponents’ attacks;
Śāriputra, those sons and daughters of good family who have heard, now hear, or will hear this Dharma discourse and the names of those bhagavān buddhas will all be embraced completely by the bhagavān buddhas.
They are like a crowd of people who assemble And then go their own separate ways.
the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration,’
physical forms are pure, and [all other phenomena, attributes, and attainments], up to and including omniscience, are pure, owing to the purity of [the other causal attributes], up to and including the [noble eightfold] path.
Like a sage, he is very pure in his conduct.
they are without fixation in that respect.
Their understanding is completely assured. It has a stability like that of space. {12}
There is the meditative stability named Engaging in Conduct.
Bhagavān, we should practice that samādhi.
“The king of mountains, Mount Meru, may move and all beings may cease to be;
Valerian and agarwood, And many kinds of flowers and fruits.
They possess the radiant halo that illumines infinitely many worlds in the ten directions,
There are many hundreds of thousands of many-storied palaces made of divine gold and jewels.
Divine being, tell me, how is benefit differentiated?
In the pure and stainless saffron, you are bound by your pledge. The god rains raindrops, raindrops, as he pleases. He sends lightning and thunder. O amazing great king! May he bring prosperity and growth! Hūṁ! O god of comets and planets, I now offer an oblation to gods, humans, and gandharvas, for the seizing, the coming, and the traversing of happiness, svāhā!
‘Venerables, I declared I knew something I did not know.
and compassion will ripen limitless beings through his diligence beyond focus and the great wealth of the accumulations of merit and wisdom, gathered over limitless trillions of great eons.
they attained the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
some of whom engage in generosity, some in ethical discipline, some in tolerance, some in perseverance, some in meditative concentration, and some in wisdom,
Then there was a certain monk present within the assembly who thought,
I would of course also bear with ordinary types of suffering.’
Infuriated, some hurled iron balls the size of Mount Meru, As well as blazing mountain peaks.
Being free from such fears, they will also not have any fears, anxieties, or qualms about staying in the wilderness, and so they will turn toward complete solitude.
or the sun rising in the early dawn, or a golden pillar, or a blooming thousand-petaled lotus, or a sacrificial fire sprinkled with oil.
they may traverse the world systems of the ten directions,
and moreover the earth element,
and is aware of the fields of virtuous and non-virtuous conduct, that it is called consciousness.
they don the armor of great compassion.
Mañjuśrī, let us take these many living beings into the presence of the Lord, so that they may see the Tathāgata and bow down to him!
“The bodhisattva, knowing emptiness, Has no attachment to saṃsāra.
The body’s awareness, and its elements of taste,
Similarly, the real nature of the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty is one and the same real nature as the real nature of omniscience. They are not two but indivisible.
This will remove all diseases.
please give your aid to the bodhisattva great beings,
On this day, my wishes have been fulfilled,
Each of these rivers has five hundred tributaries.
The awareness is explained as engaging in the sameness of the three times with respect to all dharmas.
The flowers scattered by humans for the Jina Formed a parasol of flowers in the sky.
he is ungraspable.
“With the assembly of yakṣas and rākṣasas in attendance, The four guardians of the world, who possess great magical power,
With the welfare of sentient beings comes the accumulation of merit, And from that accumulation, complete enlightenment.
Where did the previous thus-gone ones sit when they attained unsurpassed, genuine and perfect awakening?
They will be reborn therein,
Always make offerings to the Sugata And this supreme samādhi will soon be attained. {49}
Just as the real nature of the Tathā­gata is undifferentiated, non-particular, and without duality,
Holding great numbers of perfect, precious flowers, And bowed down at the Sugata’s feet. {i}
“It is the pleasure grove of bodhisattvas. It is that which terrifies the māras.
“ ‘Then the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Amitābha said to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara with a voice as beautiful as a cuckoo’s song,
owing to the emptiness of all intrinsic defining characteristics,
As he was before, so he is afterward. Know that all phenomena are like that. {4}
like the sound of an echo;
and causes entry into the path to the vision of the tathāgatas’ wisdom.
the limit of the future and the intervening [present] are non-apprehensible,
but those deities do not bring liberation;
"དེ་ནས་བཅོམ་ལྡན་<tThe Blessed One said to the venerable great Maudgalyāyana,
May you ferry across all those wallowing in the ocean of existence!
Endowed with mindfulness concerning subsidiary afflictions, thorough afflictions, and complete afflictions,
They enjoyed all the superknowledges of the bodhisattvas and had attained all the dhāraṇīs and all the confidence of the bodhisattvas.
there were to exist an indication of phenomena, even for only the duration of a finger-snap,
Oṁ, Green Acala, hūṁ, phaṭ!”
and likewise, the gods of the Brahmakāyika, Brahma­pari­ṣadya, Mahā­brahmā, Parī­ttābha, A­pramāṇābha, Ābhāsvara, Parītta­śubha, A­pramāṇa­śubha, Śubha­kṛtsna, An­abhraka, Puṇya­prasava, and Bṛhat­phala realms
Without any attachment to joy, he remained in equanimity with mindfulness and introspection and experienced physical pleasure. Aware and cognizant, he felt physically at ease.
So long will all virtuous attributes that should be cultivated be perfected.
‘These are contaminated phenomena.
They must not hold grudges.
“Life is better for the living;
I shall command the Four Great Kings and the host of yakṣas, together with their retinues, to guard, protect, and shield this teaching.
They teach this peace, this samādhi, And are invincible and irreproachable. {34}
‘Noble one! Have you found such a store of qualities?’“
Thus, without any doubts or reservations, they trust in the secret of the thus-gone ones’ mind.
and their vanishing that he praised, esteemed, honored, and extolled.
The crowns of gods brush your feet;
“ ‘Abandoning home, aspiring to mendicancy, Finding no joy in the three realms, having no grasping,
“Similarly, they do not consider whether or not they engage in union with suffering;
It is like the head of a viper or a fire pit—that much I have realized.
It is finding no joy in the three realms. It is having a motivation that is not discouraged.
May all sentient beings, animate and inanimate, be well here! May they pay homage to the Saṅgha, The supreme assembly venerated by gods and men! May there be well-being here today!
“If we are to do such a thing, then you should determine which girl would be a suitable match for the prince.”
it is because emptiness does not set in motion or reverse anything at all.
Similarly, if they engage with the notion that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness arise, or that these are non-arising, then they are merely engaging with mental images.
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is to be at peace, utterly at peace.
Therefore one who wishes for the peace of enlightenment Should abandon every kind of bad action. {65}
“He is called the source of the precious Dharma because he has perfected all the precious teachings that lead to awakening.
to perceive the elements as though they were poisonous snakes;
“This person in saffron-colored robes is a renunciant, so he is no threat to us.”
The substances, absorptions, and meditations—
At that time, there was a temple called Snow Temple.
kinnaras,
whenever the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-Three are being defeated,
yet relatively they consciously take up existence.
pūtanas, kaṭapūtanas, and pāṃśukūla piśācas also see me.
the same goes for the other transcendent perfections, up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Inside the bow, one should draw a jewel-shaped lotus-bud.
And he then spoke to the vast gathering:
as well as those who wish to meditate on the ten powers of the tathāgatas and [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, should all train exclusively in the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
‘Those who have a nonmaterialistic motivation And teach the nonmaterial Dharma,
It is likewise that the element of consciousness takes on attention and assumes feeling.
he will not be stained by the faults of existence
Having put in the mouth the transformed mustard fruit,
They were dedicated to the practices of a bodhisattva, which means they were dedicated to the perfection of generosity, the perfection of good conduct, the perfection of patience, the perfection of diligence, the perfection of meditation, the perfection of wisdom, and the perfection of skillful method, love, compassion, rejoicing, equanimity, and the thirty-seven factors for enlightenment.
Parasols were carried by the buddhas of one hundred billion realms,
Within six months one will become, in reality, Equal to Vāgīśvara.
Nor does the wind element think, ‘I perform the function of the body’s inhalation and exhalation.’
they do not apprehend and do not consider physical forms.
he felt satisfied, delighted, and elated.
This concludes the chapter on dependent origination, sixteenth in the glorious tantra of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa called “The Sole Hero.”
Having overcome the demons, they bring down a rain of wealth;
“Father, Mother, it is not good for me to live at home. It is good for me to go forth.”
Manifestly perfect buddhahood has not been attained by anyone.
Self-Originated Blissful One in infinite places, we prostrate to you.
When the seed element is given off to develop into another tree,
They abide by not abiding within any abodes.
Along with her army and retinue she had been present in the gathered assembly, but now she rose up to leave for her home.
From the four of right, left, above and below, Emerges space, the fifth.
All those beautiful and delightful sounds Cannot equal a hundredth of the Buddha’s voice. {34}
Thus, bodhisattvas are vessels of jewels.
Why are they called so?
and I will repeat the Dharma teaching correctly.
what then, Blessed One, is consciousness?
“Since the time has now come for the Blessed One to pass into parinirvāṇa, may the Blessed One pass into parinirvāṇa! May the Bliss-Gone One pass into parinirvāṇa!”
Then in their last lives, in the same instant, the same moment, the same second, they will attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, each in their own buddha realm among the worlds in the ten directions.
Similarly, ‘They can see sentient beings in the world systems of all the ten directions, numerous as the sands of the River Ganges, according to the past deeds they have accumulated,’
“Divine son, if bodhisattva great beings did not apply themselves to the truths of the noble ones,
The fourth Dharma gate that he manifested is called the great array. It accomplishes the unique strength of the accumulation of wisdom, which ascertains the meaning of the different categories related to all the factors of awakening.
Therefore in this Sahā world realm he is known as ‘He Who Gives Freedom From Fear.’”
So it is.
“If you ask what is the ‘emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities,’ it [too] is the absence of any essential nature in anything originating from combinations [of causes and conditions].
Make offerings always to the Jina’s stūpas And this supreme samādhi will soon be attained. {50}
you also taught the queens and your son.
Siṁha­vi­krī­ḍita
“On the relative level, the applications of mindfulness are a gateway to not letting any roots of virtue diminish.
That is it! That is it, Su­bhūti! It is just as you have said.
Thus, they do not practice with a mind that is confined to duality, but with a mind that is equally there for all sentient beings, a mind that practices by taking all sentient beings into account.
“If a man is being attacked by bandits And, wishing to save his life, he tries to run away
Lord, this sexual union Can increase and vitalize The semen, menstrual blood, penis, vagina, and breasts,
The gods in all directions, together with the nāgas, yakṣas, and gandharvas, said to each other,
“Venerable Lord! This transcendent perfection of wisdom is profound.
Vajra-fierce, very angry,
There are some monks and priests who are unable to separate their mind and body from the objects of their desire.
These are not humans; I think they must be gods.
“Noble son, this is an essence, like rice.
Once I do so, I will proceed to the seat of awakening.”
“Then they contemplated human existence. They thought about saṃsāric existence in this way:
Should we take hold of all the lands of the trichiliocosm— All the myriad hundreds of thousands of subterranean bodies of water, And all the myriad livelihoods of beings in those places—
Thereafter, [through the unfolding of the links of dependent origination], they should be attentive to the origination of the entire great mass of suffering.
Ignoble desires are condemned by the wise ones;
Some mansions were made of gold;
I will do so no matter what.
Venerable Śāradvatīputra, if there were a mind to be observed inside, outside, or in between, then there could also be a liberated mind.
He should find a companion bhikṣuOr otherwise should recollect the Buddha.
And do not act with deception toward the guru, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {83}
Then Akṣayamati said to the Bhagavān,
“ ‘These phenomena, optical illusions:
The nature of the mental faculty is emptiness. Emptiness is the mental faculty.
coral,
Sukhakarī (She Who Causes Happiness)
‘You are not able to go even one krośa Without having to take a step.
Some placed their ten fingers together in homage, And they cried, “Oh, the Jina, compassionate one!” {12}
“Divine son, ultimately all phenomena are utter wishlessness.
holding a white lotus in her left hand.
Whoever has discipline also has insight.
[3] from the ordinary wealth of the populace they obtain what is essential;
living in a celestial mansion, with a retinue of hundreds of thousands apsaras gracing him.
This concludes the chapter on deity practice, twenty-fifth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called “The Sole Hero.”
Then the Bhagavān, with the fingers of his right hand, opened the center of the great precious stūpa that was floating in the air.
What are these four? Suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the path that leads to the cessation of suffering.
these sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage will have been totally consecrated in [the understanding] that [all things], up to and including omniscience, are emptiness.
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess ten such qualities are engaged in yogic practice.
“ ‘This is the excellent doorway of the way of logic, The subtle, difficult-to-see realm of experience of the jinas.
In the northeast, draw dark-green Envy Vajrī. So one should draw the canvas-maṇḍala.
And eight thousand living beings purified their eyes of Dharma regarding phenomena so that they became cleared of dust and immaculate.
He is known as the glory of the world because he possesses all the qualities of the world.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sāgaramati,
Some of them were vomiting poisonous snakes,
Divine being, childish and ordinary beings are the ones who have extensive experience, because the beginning of their cyclic existence cannot be observed.
Brother Mahākauṣṭhila, Brother Bharadvāja,
If this is likewise unsuccessful, one should do it for the third time.
one will oneself behold the lord in a dream and show him to others, too.
should commit this transcendent perfection of wisdom to writing, or have it committed to writing,
They liberate these beings from rebirths as hell beings, animals, and beings born in Yama’s world, and from existences deprived of the eight freedoms, as well as from negative rebirths and negative forms of existence, and so forth, and
When a child is seized by Mañjuka, The eyes roll back.
With these pleasing words and with calm mind and senses, he took his seat.
Who has gained that excellent conduct? Sage, for what reason did you smile? {49}
He would pick up the precious, wish-fulfilling jewel and then conjure up celestial realms, pleasure groves and parks, fields, courtyards, and gatehouses surrounded by many-branched trees and various kinds of vines, houses bedecked with flowers, as well as goods and chattels.
they covered the whole earth of this billion-world galactic universe with fragrant powder, incense, perfumes, and flowers up to the height of the knees.
“They then asked him, ‘What is “joy in the pleasures of the Dharma”?’
nor non-recollection,
His father made him study all fields of knowledge,
Thinking in this way, they wonder how such beings emerge.
so that it was free of grass, tree stumps, thorns, stones, pebbles, and gravel, and spread pure sand over it,
They are undeterred and cannot be stopped, nonconceptual, steadfast, and without attachment or anger.
Bhagavān, we are old, aged, and decrepit.
His saṅgha of bodhisattvas was also of comparable size.
and omniscience is the mental faculty [and the aforementioned sense organs].
Eight divided into eight parts, with right, left, top, bottom, And four intermediate directions, Is concealed in the amount of sixty-four.
To the west of the lord Is the goddess Parṇaśāvarī.
“One may be able to know the languages of all beings, The beings in the buddha realms in the ten directions,
Saṅgharakṣita sprinkled water on, swept, and applied fresh cow dung to the dirt floor of the thatched hut.
‘Just as this needle pokes finer and finer holes,
“Why is that? Young man, when bodhisattva mahāsattvas become skilled in the differences between the three kinds of patience
Just as a precious jewel rests within a fine vessel,
Extremely wise and endowed with brilliant merit,
a great Dharma drum for making sounds of Dharma, which come about through the force of merit of the gods of the Thirty-Three,
Su­bhūti, this vehicle of the bodhisattvas comprises the six transcendent perfections.
Bodhisattva great beings who endeavor to gain expertise in the accumulation of learning will attain such extraordinary qualities as these—or even greater and better than these.
And some scattered clothing and jewels. They developed the supreme, unequaled aspiration to enlightenment. {13}
its ground made of divine beryl, which was adorned by precious sandalwood trees.
“Seeking the supreme, highest enlightenment, You, the Teacher, gave away your arms and legs.
and was utterly free from any ill will.
those who have attained arhatship,
As for non-violence, all dharmas spring from the ground of non-violence.
He considers peacefulness but does not seek extreme peace.
the goddess Vasudharā, who is of golden color, has two arms, and is adorned with all adornments.
Su­bhūti, this transcendent perfection of wisdom is the teacher of great bodhisattva beings.
Thoroughly understanding that the body is empty,
Varuṇa­datta,
The Blessed One then showed the jeweled structure to venerable Ānanda as well as to Śakra, lord of the gods; the four guardians of the world; and many other gods and humans.
“Similarly, they do not consider whether fundamental ignorance is permanent or impermanent,
You realize the meaning, you expand wisdom, And you have purified for quintillions of eons. {76}
Then, the goddess said to the venerable Śāriputra,
The translation was made, edited, and approved by the Indian preceptors Jinamitra and Dānaśīla and the chief editor and translator Bandé Yeshé Dé.
They themselves will have renounced the killing of living creatures, and
“Nirvāṇa is not to be found In saying ‘passed into nirvāṇa.’
The domain of the Victorious One cannot be understood by sentient beings.
and all their aspirations will be completely fulfilled.
and are never separated from the mind that knows all things,
the four meditative concentrations, the four immeasurable aspirations, the four formless meditative absorptions,
The manifestation of the wisdom of liberation: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {98}
They sent rains consisting of masses of arrows,
Then the eldest of the elders of the Śākya clan gathered to discuss
They reject that which is not the field of that conduct and remain in that which is. Those are the benefits of endeavoring in samādhi. {21}
One should eat dry ginger with barley potash.
“I can, Your Majesty,” responded the Bodhisattva. “Then calculate away!” commanded the king.
When a monk is like this, he does not harbor any excessive pride.
Venerable Lord, for these reasons great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom should not abide in the real nature of phenomena.
nor develop higher knowledge, or attain the perfect awakening of nirvāṇa.
When it is applied To kettledrums, conch shells, Clay drums, and small kettledrums, Then, wherever their sounds are heard, The circles of bhūtas will be frightened.
Alas, the assembly of consorts with fine jewelry!
they then think that they should subsequently attain omniscience.
he taught the higher, middling, and lower Dharma.
but their real nature does not conceive of the real nature of phenomena.
to exert oneself in the path of accumulations;
Today, Lord, we who are arhats
All beings were filled with perfect joy.
“Su­bhūti, one who wishes to attain emancipation in things without defining characteristics merely wishes to attain emancipation in the emptiness of the eyes,
how much more so will yakṣas, rākṣasas, and other ordinary beings?
who lack contentment in their accumulation of wealth,
seated on the throne of Indra. With him were great hearers such as the venerable Aśvajit;
Throughout an immeasurable number of quintillions of eons they perfect all the various meditations contained in the Great Vehicle.
Procure brimming vases.
The Three Jewels, which are so rare in this world, Have now appeared.
You know previous motivations and merit And the aspirations of all beings. Turn the supreme, unsurpassable wheel!’
They have intelligence. They have realization.
the emptiness of internal phenomena is subsumed within it; the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, are subsumed within it;
and (6) perception of disinterest in all mundane things.
They had eliminated the bondages of existence and, thanks to their correct knowledge, their minds were perfectly liberated.
Similarly, they discern that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are non-arising, and do not focus on them.
has been rejoiced in by all the bodhisattvas, and has been upheld and protected by all the gods.
And why? Because at that time, at that point, the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara was the being called Perfect Wealth, and
felt love for each other, wished each other well,
that you have heard this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma, and
At that time, venerable Śāriputra went to the place frequented by the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya and,
The accumulation of insight fulfills two functions as well.
Nourished by faith, they will recall the words and embrace their meanings, reciting while staying clear of sleep.
perceive excellent qualities in such rags, thinking
No being had any painful emotion, such as anger, delusion, envy, jealousy, pride, hypocrisy, arrogance, wrath, malice, or burning anguish.
“Venerable Lord! In that case, will the bodhisattvas who have newly embarked upon the [Great] Vehicle not be afraid and terrified when they hear this teaching on the transcendent perfection of wisdom?”
A gaze that rests on the forehead— The killing one—should be combined with recaka.
They perceive them to be like apparitions, mirages, hallucinations, and illusions,
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech attain the four great brahmavihāras.
“Blessed One, from which thus-gone one did these two holy beings develop the mind set on unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening?
Su­bhūti, the real nature neither arises nor ceases, and its modifications are non-apprehensible.
The Bliss-Gone One spoke to the hordes of yakṣas and rākṣasas:
‘Ah! This sublime being—with his mind purified through learning, diligence, and insight—will be able to achieve the ten powers!
It is born of love, compassion, joy, and impartiality.
They know them without any impediment. {54}
You whose speech is exceedingly melodious and whose cadence is captivating,
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is a field of generosity.
They will wish to see and to revere the bala­cakra­vartin king, the cakravartin who possesses the seven jewels, with his princes, his ministers, his harem, and his attendants.
This is my virtuous friend.
Early the next morning, a great many monks put on their lower robes, took up their begging bowls and Dharma robes
how then, Venerable Lord, do great bodhisattva beings abide in emptiness and realize emptiness?
The element of consciousness,
You should earnestly apply this transcendent perfection of wisdom, as it has been taught!’
Because it is an advancement in the training of the noble Dharma to understand a fault to be a fault, to confess it, and to vow to abstain from it henceforth.”
When they heard it, they all gathered and, in a single voice, dedicated the roots of virtue toward unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.
“They should not associate with arrogant bhikṣus,
ill-colored cloth, woolen cloth, hempen cloth, linen, cotton cloth,
The strength of your diligence could overcome even the most powerful demon.
When he gave, his generosity was not involved with subject, object, and action.
He has no single nature nor any diversity of natures.
However, the karma that has been created will not disappear, But will give corresponding black or white results. {3}
those who hold their lives dear Should not kill any living being.
All creatures are subdued
Householder, where should emptiness be sought?
and said, “Your Majesty, these are the bandits and these are the stolen goods.”
“He who is wise and who is skilled Would think of a method by which he might lead them:
Just as they will be equal in fortune to those who are born within the animal realms,
“You, the skilled physician,
I am someone who still marvels that it is thoughts of placing hope in certain things, searching for the Dharma, or being afflicted by the ills of saṃsāra that predominate; as such a person, please instruct me.
You know the right time and moment, and this is not the time to practice the Dharma.
Now, to bring women fortune, another method shall be explained:
and all other beings, regardless of their form of existence. All beings now witnessed the Bodhisattva sitting on the lion throne at the root of the Bodhi tree.
“Trees made of jewels Are manifested in this realm.
The light illuminated all demonic abodes in the entire great trichiliocosm, making them dark by comparison and causing them to shake.
Prostrations to the category of melodic verses;
“ ‘The senses are pacified in this state of enlightenment. There is the revelation of infinite blessings,
In time, the king’s palace prospers and thrives, crops are bountiful and the land teems with animals and people.
and that ground to stand upon the imagination of what is not there.
and do everything in their power to prevent attachment, craving, and desire.
Mañjuśrī asked, “Venerable Ānanda, are all phenomena essentially like emanations?” “Yes, Mañjuśrī, they are,” replied Ānanda.
by many guides of the world.
For those beings who are wounded by the thorn of disturbing emotions, he will pull out that thorn.
One should make her extend them one at a time.
Ānanda, when I formerly engaged in the conduct of a bodhisattva,
Came before the great leader And respectfully bowed to the Sugata. {ii}
The vajra of the halāhala poison, the good vajra, break forth, break! Disperse, disperse! Stop all the rain and wind, stop! Rent asunder, rent! Yaḥ, yaḥ, yaḥ, dry up all the water, dry! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
Similarly, the nāga king Mucilinda, With great happiness and filled with joy,
Lion-Like One, with your elephant-like gait, You advance like an elephant in rut.
and he then leads them to the attainment of enlightenment.
But the Thus-Gone One replied:
Could something non-arising arise or cease?
the Blessed One addressed Senior Śāradvatī­putra as follows:
Bhaiṣajyarāja, it is because that noble man or noble woman should be known to be an adornment that adorns the Tathāgata.
place it inside a new jar filled with scented water,
They do not reach enlightenment, Let alone the wisdom of the tathāgatas. {36}
as they circumambulated Gayā­śīrṣa Hill and the trichiliocosm.
“I shall not uncross my legs Until I have achieved the undefiled state.”
“Whatever sound they hear, They know its past.
and calves like an antelope’s.
Everyone was amazed at the sight of this great miraculous display and wondered,
Śāradvatī­putra! The purity of the transcendent perfection of wisdom does not appropriate anything at all due to the absolute purity of all things.
for with it covetousness, malice, and misguided views are abandoned.
The light of that light ray pervaded all those buddha realms.
Some were drooling, and others were snoring.
He sends this incarnated bodhisattva here in order to celebrate my name, in order to show the advantages of this universe, and in order to increase the roots of virtue of those bodhisattvas.”
whether living or passed into nirvāṇa,
“If a person who wishes for merit,
Kauśika, in the same vein as before, [anyone wishing to do so] would not succeed and would simply tire themselves out!
‘You with the signs of a hundred merits,
Inside this second temple hovered an identical third structure, which also did not touch the second structure.
“Venerable Lord! When you say that great bodhisattva beings who continue to engage in union with the transcendent perfection of wisdom deserve respect
Therefore, relatively, one speaks of ‘possessing knowledge,’ even though that knowledge is ultimately utterly unborn.
“Without attachment they teach Countless millions of teachings from within one sūtra.
“Similarly, they should not dwell on the pristine cognition which is the understanding of the aspects of the path.
superhuman potency for sensual gratification,
By means of physical and mental disengagement they gain expertise with respect to the mind.
so that the teaching on relying on both the relative and ultimate truth was heard, without being heard.
“ ‘Vast retention and the accumulation of wisdom Come from a hundred thousand trillion sūtras.
“Young man, what is the discernment of phenomena?
Here we have arrived at this most excellent mountain To worship the treasure of immutable merit.
He is like a treasure of all the roots of virtue.
That buddha had a body that possessed all thirty-two signs and the excellent features, and shone with a light that pervaded the ten directions as he gave the teaching of the Dharma.
carriages to those who required transportation,
they are skilled in the patience of profound Dharma.
Homage to the Saṅgha!
“Consider, noble son, the analogy of a lion, resting in a hillside cave.
Listen then, Bhadrapāla, to my explanation of how consciousness comes and goes, undergoes transfer, and ceases.
Abiding in these aspects of emptiness,
speaking the Dharma and reproaching non-Dharma;
All unfortunate states came to a halt,
In the same way, Su­bhūti, when individual followers of the vehicle of the bodhisattvas who are endowed with faith, tolerance,
Here we have arrived at this most excellent mountain To worship the one who benefits beyond compare.
Delights, kingdoms, and enjoyments are impermanent, so leave this perfect city.
He frees them completely of the disease of mental afflictions,
Hovering in space, the gods bathed the body of the leader of men.
“Go to the palace and make our arrival known to the king.”
“Padmaśrīgarbha, the being who had appeared on King Glorious Splendor’s right replied with these verses to King Glorious Splendor:
Similarly, they discern that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are void, and do not focus on them.
If you wish to accomplish nāgas, use the shoots of hardwood trees and nectar.
nor do they respect their superiors, elders, leaders, or those in between.
And for someone who sees in this way, no distorted mind and mental states come about;
the crown prince Mañjuśrī,
‘Oṁ, knife, cut, cut the flesh of all the māras! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
When not transcending suffering because of seeing sentient beings, they are irreproachable.
he thought, ‘I have entered the Mahāyāna, and because I now long for this samādhi I shall make an offering to the Tathāgata.
it is the field of activity of all tathāgatas;
Omniscience has the defining characteristic of being unobscured with respect to the definitive nature of all things,
The real nature of all things is also the real nature of the Tathā­gata
Noble one, that is the kind of power that the bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has.
That monk was handsome and lovely to behold.
Formation does not pertain to the thus-gone ones.
“Therefore, having heard this supreme benefit, And having seen bhikṣus who have excellent correct conduct,
Venerable Lord, if the notion of sights as with signs is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of sights as signless become a bodhisattva?
He will have innumerable, countless hundred thousand quintillions of bodhisattvas.
Moreover, he already has many sons. It is not proper for the Bodhisattva to be conceived in this family.”
Please, quickly establish in the happiness of nirvāṇa The beings touched by diseases, who have suffered for so long, By dispensing the medicine of Dharma.
“In the terrifying age of destruction They will undergo hardship,
“Mahauṣadhi,” replied the Blessed One, “it is as follows. Suppose a hunter went into a dense forest and drew his bow
“Venerable Lord! If all things are signless, free from recollection, and free from attention,
or it enables one to accomplish one’s endeavors.
Bhikṣus, then those fifty hundred thousand quintillion Mahābrahmās, speaking as one voice, recited these verses to the Bhagavān:
They bow gracefully and wear fine shawls.
everyone was sitting and wondering, “How can we be freed from the peril of such a calamity?”
The millions of beings who have heard the Dharma, As numerous as the atoms in eight realms, Whose numbers are incalculable, Have developed the aspiration for supreme enlightenment.
the mother’s body is taken over by the baby.
“In that case, I shall go forth.”
Just as this pair spread great poison far and wide, so too did Vāsuki and Takṣaka.
We should go into the four directions
Great King, it is therefore certain that the Bodhisattva will awaken to unexcelled, perfect, and complete buddhahood.”
“He should avoid association With those who will kill various creatures
Empowered through the arrow and the other three The disciple has been made a vessel for the Dharma,
“Great bodhisattva beings who practice accordingly should perfect omniscience, and having perfected that, they will abandon all involuntary reincarnation through propensities.
not perceiving sounds, the ear-consciousness has no ground to stand upon.
they may indeed experience the fruit of this generosity,
One should add the mantra: ‘Destroy all the fevers!’
Everyone was as joyful as the beings in the pleasure grove atop Mount Meru.
He is kind and handsome, neither too old nor too young. He has a fine body and every excellent quality.
like the myriad subtleties of divine cymbals when played by a skilled musician.
and similarly, when they establish, cognize, and become fixated on the notion that [the aggregates] from physical forms to consciousness are signless;
Is the restraint of speech through which the wise
With an endless confidence of speech, Teaching the enlightenment of buddhahood. {146}
so every day you must come to this very place and take your meal before returning.’
has no attachment to any entity, and despite designating conventional things with all sorts of terms
Śāradvatī­putra, is called the transcendent perfection of mundane generosity.
The Bodhisattva accepted these meals, but he also gradually began to go on alms rounds in the local village. In this way he regained his previous luster, appearance, and strength.
wobbled, rocked, and swayed; vibrated, shuddered, and reeled;
It is so, Great Brahmā!
Only one who is himself a bodhisattva can harass another bodhisattva, and
Now you should keep this teaching with you and teach it elaborately to others.”
Although they may be revealed according to the conventional ways of the world,
You are neither pompous nor timid,
‘In your seven incarnations as a man,
I will answer your questions and bring satisfaction to your mind.”
The Bhagavān previously turned the wheel of Dharma in the Ṛṣipatana deer forest in the land of Vārāṇasī,
If the saṅgha were to permit this action, I would ask the venerables who can allow it to please remain silent.
and others, who are as numerous as the sands of the river Ganges, pervade their own buddha realms with the power of their speech and proclaim, ‘You should place your trust in this Dharma discourse called “Complete Embrace by all Buddhas,” which praises inconceivable qualities.’
Then King Śuddhodana went to his home and spoke to Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī, saying,
“if a follower of another tīrthika order wishing to go forth approaches any one of you,
If someone were thrown by a murderer Off the summit of Meru, in order to be killed,
All the area was decorated by the clothing of Tuṣita devas,
yet those who are generous cannot?”
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the southwest, Sūrya­prabha;
"སེམས་ཅན་གྱི་ཁམས་དང་། བསམ་པ་དང་། སྦྱོར་བ་སྣ་ཚོགས་<tHe is well versed in the various conditions of beings, their intentions, and their conduct. Thus he seeks to free from taking rebirth in hell or as animals, hungry ghosts, or in the world of Yama all those beings who are tormented by the diseases of desire, hatred, and bewilderment and by the sicknesses of the fundamental and secondary defilements, as well as those obscured by pride, vanity, and arrogance or by attachment, suffering, fear, and anger. To this end, by using various skillful means, various practices, various states of concentration, and supernatural powers, he brings beings to all stages of liberation
On seeing it, he thinks, “I shall go and speak to the king!”
undiminished insight; undiminished liberation;
One should also eat her vomit And her excreta,
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
His saṃbhogakāya consists in the fact that he comes forth, just like a cloud
"‘Giving away crest jewels and crowns represents the bodhisattvas’ achievement of the unseen crown of the head.<tei:note xml:id=""UT22084-061-002-135""/> Therefore,"
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess ten such qualities abide within the absence of marks.
and then vanished that very instant.
There you will quickly accomplish A great unsurpassable benefit for beings.” {ii}
So it is needless to say that I cannot do so all by myself in the realm of the asuras.
They see all the buddhafields without even leaving their state of concentration and without being affected by duality.’
That is the power of smell that they will acquire, But they still will not have the divine sense of smell.
At the same time, they should not regard things as being similar or dissimilar, even in the slightest degree, since there are no such distinctions in the realm of phenomena.
He cannot be counted;
Also, when they are absorbed in compassion, they focus on the nature of mind that directs compassion and love to all those beings,
You should give me what little you have.
for as many eons as the number of grains of sand in the Ganges.
“They never give rise to an aspiration to be A pratyekabuddha or śrāvaka,
And the bodhisattvas who settle in a buddhafield of such intense hardships must have inconceivably great compassion!”
If there were no sentient beings, the bodhisattvas could not achieve complete buddhahood.
I will definitely practice generosity by offering medicine!’
the samādhi named Creating Union,
A rain of flowers, a great fragrant rain, fell.
“Someone who is classified as having Medium wisdom is said to be a pratyekajina.
What constitutes their negativity of speech, and what constitutes their negativity of mind?”
These childish beings are devoured, like merchants consumed by demonesses.”
They maintain the discipline of correct conduct And they rejoice in seedlings of the tree of the Dharma.
“Monks, before I achieved perfect awakening and became a perfect buddha, I went alone into the wild.
“Homage to you, heroic being! Homage to you, supreme being!
Having perfected an infinite wisdom, They liberate an infinity of living beings.
Therefore, quickly turn your minds to either the śrāvaka vehicle or the pratyekabuddha vehicle and you will swiftly be definitively released from saṃsāra.’
In the same vein, the abiding mode of the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline is mundane, and its non-abiding mode is supramundane.
They should not dwell on the notion that ‘I, having attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment and become a tathāgata, arhat, genuinely perfect buddha, should turn the wheel of the sacred doctrine.’
“ ‘Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, if it were to rain day and night on the four great continents for a twelve-month year, I could count each drop, but, noble son, I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
“Who are these great many young boys who cry within the monastery’s grounds at twilight?”
while the long rainy season is one day shy of three months.”
it is neither with signs nor is it signless, it is neither mundane nor supramundane,
They see that all speech is like an echo, Momentary and without substance.
Therefore, make offerings to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara!
Innate joy is clear light.
A woman who is yellow
His body was adorned with the thirty-two major marks of a great being and beautified with the excellent minor marks.
“Moreover, Ānanda, the bodies of those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who venerate and make offerings to this [book of] the transcendent perfection of wisdom will never tire.
Always being sure of one’s past conduct: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {96}
“Because there is nothing to be seen and there is no object to perceive,
That great sound of clearing their throats and the great sound of their finger snaps shook all the hundreds of thousands of quintillions of buddha realms in the ten directions.
and swiftly you will manifestly and completely awaken to unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.’
It fills the body like sesame seeds.
May the people prosper And the king be in accord with the Dharma.
Just like space it is without characteristics. That is taught to be the characteristic of the body’s restraint. {2}
they encourage others to successfully abstain from wrong views, and so forth.
Those who are on this level of peace Will always see the supreme men. {8}
One of distinctly yellow nature, to a yellow girl.
some goddesses were holding vessels of powdered aloeswood and sandalwood;
Ultimately, neither exhaustion nor arising is observed.
“Blessed One, what roots of nonvirtue led him to be lacking in the mind of awakening,
“To Dharmadhvaja you offered a robe, and to Nirodha a handful of beans.
just as I want no one to hurt me, order someone to hurt me, or rejoice in someone hurting me with harsh, cruel, insulting, or defamatory words,
This tīrthika has petitioned the saṅgha to allow him to live in robes provided by a preceptor for four months.
these two great beings and their retinue of gods, saddened and dejected, disappeared then and there.
One of the young god’s former wards, an elder in the saṅgha and an arhat, was seated in the meal row,
And the son of the king protected him From the thousands of bhikṣus who were his adversaries. {62}
all of them will have the name Samanta­prabhāsa.
He will be a jina with great miraculous powers
They will not deviate whatsoever from remembering the incalculable eons.
With a triumphant gait, he now began the walk toward the great Bodhi tree. This tree was the king of trees and was found at a place characterized by sixteen unique features.
These qualities are also trained in by means of a mind that is free of resentment, rivalry, and harm, and is expansive, immeasurable, and nondual.
Su­bhūti, if the real nature were an entity and not a non-entity, and
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Do not praise themselves And never criticize others.
“I will give up my body and my life And whatever happiness there is in the world;
They know all actions, yet they do not carry them out with pride in doing something.
and in the same vein, Su­bhūti, all things have the modality of the [other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path;
Swiftly attain that primordial wisdom, And you will be liberated from all suffering.’
This is not so with just the throat or the palate; No sound can be found in them individually.
And from all beings in the three existences, Are eclipsed by one light ray from the Sugata. {32}
“Who in the past with generosity, self-restraint, and self-control Has served well for many millions of eons?
it is because, with respect to all things which are empty of intrinsic defining characteristics,
the samādhi named Adornment of Dhyāna,
Venerable Lord! This transcendent perfection of great bodhisattva beings is supreme among the vast transcendent perfections.
Listen now, O beloved!
And Manu, Bhṛgu, Vātsyāyana, and Vaśiṣṭha, Who came to pay homage to the Buddha. {ii}
Trembling, they circumambulated the Tathāgata three times.
“Ānanda, at that time, after the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Ratna­padma­candra­viśuddhābhyud­gata­rāja
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Lord Avalokiteśvara;
Those leaders who have the ten strengths, Have no kleśas, and have bodies as invincible as vajras!’ {54}
overspread with divine canopies,
Go to the man who came here,
 they have gone to the other shore,
has not at some point been your father, mother, child, friend, relative, or kinsman.’
“Those who do so with melodious lutes, cymbals, and gongs, Mṛdaṅga drums, single-stringed lutes, and flutes,
They should also praise and rejoice in others who perfect those [fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
Su­bhūti, if, for example, the body of an aged and decrepit old man who had reached the age of two thousand were to succumb to some illness due to wind, bile, or phlegm disorder, or to a combination of these,
Mañjuśrī, what is a bodhisattva with extensive experience?
To seriously observe the teachings of the Buddha is rare.”
“Whoever knows emptiness As the characteristic of form
“Just as the wind blows in the four directions, Going in every direction without impediment,
When it is smeared on a large tree, Or on a large shrine, Then whoever sees that spot Will not be threatened by bhūtas, and Bhūtas will not dwell there, Nor will any other harm doer.
This chariot shall be led by a host of bright young women;
“The dharmabhāṇakas who wish to teach this sūtra Should completely eliminate All deception, arrogance, and similarly calumny, And also the wise ones should harbor no envy.
(1) the branch of enlightenment that entails correct recollection,
this cultivation of the transcendent perfection of wisdom is like cultivating space, and
It is without the concept of “mine,” because it is free of the habitual notion of possession.
Protector, previously in the Heaven of Joy you invited us To hear the gift of the sacred Dharma, But now where is your resolve, O Pure Being?”
“Toward such beings, while they are cutting up their body and limbs, This is what arises in their mind:
We, however, should become the best and most distinguished in the world;
Son of noble family, this is why the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha bears the precious wish-fulfilling jewel, which arises from great bravery, on his head, the holiest part of the body.
“Women who are served will, for their part, instantly grant Accomplishment to all those seeking To benefit living beings.
It also came to pass that Sunanda’s son was born handsome and good looking, athletic and in possession of auspicious marks,
Then the omniscient teacher uttered these verses:
“Son, you are our only boy, beloved, handsome, patient, and agreeable to the eye.
The eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas [and so forth] do not apprehend the sameness of the three times.
whereas the precious gemstone that exists among the god realms has immeasurable attributes.
They who are thus trained in the restraint of the body Have become liberated from all misfortune. {27}
They should praise and rejoice in others who abstain from the killing of living creatures.
he will not engender any clinging to substance, essence, or actuality.
Similarly, they have a view concerning the sensory element of sights, and in the same vein, they have a view concerning [the other sensory elements], up to and including the sensory element of mental phenomena.
Śāradvatī­putra! The purity of phenomena is due to the absolute purity of all things.
Furthermore, Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess four qualities,
You will come under the control of Māra, like the moon seized by the demigod.”
He is without deliberation or analysis. He is non-arisen and unceasing.
Forsake all happiness gained through reputation And hold the transmission of this supreme peace of samādhi. {34}
Yamarāja went to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara,
The cultivation of the transcendent perfection of wisdom is the non-cultivation of the ten powers of the tathāgatas;
Where does the perfume come from?
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that anything other than the eyes constitutes a bodhisattva?”
Daśaratha­putra, seizing the opportunity, quickly removed the seven mountains, throwing them to another place.
“You offered it quickly and the Bhagavān accepted it quickly,” the sthavira answered.
Within the state of omniscience The same is the case with the accomplished one’s mind.
then you should know that bodhisattva to be new to the Bodhisattva­yāna.
and who have become pratyekabuddhas
Furthermore, Ānanda, those verses were spoken by the Thus-Gone One to assist in the observation of pure conduct.
“Some of them similarly make gifts
Should meditate on Delusion Vajrī.
and then, through non-analytical attention, dedicate their merits toward unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, making common cause with all sentient beings,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of apprehensions concerning teaching the composite,
Moreover, within the precious structure that delighted the Bodhisattva, a set of garments appeared, known as the ornament of a hundred thousand.
The ears are the condition for sounds, but the auditory consciousness has no form.
And which was terrifying for the foolish,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of great learning concerning the kleśas,
“What? Nobles ones, do I stop them? Why do you not teach the Dharma?”
And bereft of their aspects.
“Not long after the humans, maruts, and yakṣas made offerings, The Guide of the World arose from samādhi
The bodhisattva Gambhīrabuddhi declared,
Eighty-four thousand brahmins, who were also like great sal trees, followed in their rear.
The bodhisattvas’ wisdom is not temporary in the sense of being applied in one moment, and then not in the next.
“Duality is constituted by perceptual manifestation.
They believe in their identity as truth;
“My lord, if you cannot give me these four boons— Freedom from misfortune and the terrors of sickness, old age, and dying— Then I request of you another boon. Please listen, Your Majesty:
“The world is full of extremists, Who act out of curiosity or for the sake of good luck.
“Great King, Prince Sarvārthasiddha has (60) even eyebrows that are (61) thick, (62) dark, (63) continuous, and (64) tapered.
The ambrosia of the outer sixth is bestowed In order for them to adhere well to the development stage And abandon fixation to caste.
and bowing down to the Thus-Gone One with palms joined, spoke this verse to him:
by which even wrongdoers led into such fallen states can attain such a collection of qualities!”
“However much Dharma you have learned, If you feel proud of your learning and let your proper conduct lapse,
resorting to corporal punishment,
Mañjuśrī, no cloud can be found there,
For these reasons, Senior Śāradvatī­putra, arising does not arise, nor does non-arising arise.”
Then any objective one aims for will be accomplished.
And so be a sublime eye and a final refuge in these three worlds!
Look at the millions of assembled bodhisattvas making offerings.
Self-controlled rishis with peaceful minds, With disciplined minds, bowing with palms together,
This type of discipline is unimpaired, undamaged, uncorrupted, undistorted, stable, self-reliant, perfected, well considered, unsullied, unblemished, immaculate, fragrant, extolled by the wise, praised by all buddhas, free of defect, and constitutes the essential spiritual practice in accord with the Dharma.
contemplates by what method he would be able to go to the king of mountain ranges, the Himalayas.
in a time gone by, countless, innumerable, incalculable, vast asaṃkhyeya eons ago,
He was miraculously born sitting cross-legged on his mother’s lap.
Like gold in the midst of beryls, They taught the Dharma in the midst of their followers. {67}
What is the causal condition of feeling?”
They never fail to undertake boundless efforts.
as well as assemblies of great bodhisattva beings, laymen and laywomen, all addressed the Blessed One as follows:
Seated, they know the realm of Brahmā And teach the Dharma to millions of Brahmās. {49}
Similarly, it has not been revealed so that the ten powers of the tathāgatas might be grasped or not grasped,
Similarly, in the manner of things that are dreamlike,
As Queen Māyā resided in the palace,
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, In this human world they will not have any illness, No physical pain, nor likewise mental pain, No toothache, and similarly no headache. {175}
Also the nāga king Anavatapta, With perfectly trained nāga maidens
“If you ask what is the ‘knowledge of suffering,
This family must be benevolent and industrious.
Five thousand priests also arrived and gazed at the Bodhisattva’s countenance.
Translated by the great Indian preceptor Dīpaṃkara Śrījñāna and the translator monk Géwai Lodrö,
they made the prayer, ‘May I by all means become able to bring forth emanations nonconceptually.’
This shower of celestial flowers Is the fruition of that generosity.
and you should seek alms with consideration for all living beings at all times.
And in this respect, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata is the same, neutral, without concepts, and does not make any distinctions.
“Furthermore, beginner bodhisattvas may be two-faced,
and similarly, no eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, or mental faculty,
Similarly, they do not engage with the notion that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are permanent, or the notion that these are impermanent.
“I remember how in past eons I was a Dharma king for the sake of the Dharma.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena as void or not void constitute a bodhisattva?”
“Keep each other awake And do not take rest.
the sphere of reality,
Becomes the universal sovereign of vidyādharas, does not age, and is deathless
Monks, in this manner the Bodhisattva dwelt in the supreme realm of the Heaven of Joy, where he engaged in four great examinations.
Śāradvatī­putra, in the same way, great bodhisattva beings perceive all phenomena distinctly, but do not become fixated on them.
They will not sustain themselves through any sort of wicked sustenance in order to nourish their physical bodies.
Oṁ, Calumny Vajrī, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
After that, he takes the upper robe in his hands
does not cause one to know past time.
If the saṅgha allows the petition of the preceptor [preceptor’s name], who speaks on my, [ordinand’s name], behalf,
Even the beautiful lotuses in the ponds and the pools wither and die;
Things are not apprehended because [the other levels of realization], up to and including the tenth level, are non-apprehensible, owing to their utter purity.
Desiring the Dharma is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads one to connect to the light of the Dharma.
they should develop the mind of unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
“Indeed I have. There is a monastery in the śāla forest.”
In that way the youth Candraprabha arranged his excellent home
She will not be stained by sin,
Rubies adorn the sides of each mountain.
“ ‘I was always content, with few desires. I was dedicated to mendicancy in solitary places.
They will scatter like jackals before a lion!
They had attachment to gain and honor and therefore they killed thousands of bhikṣus who possessed a sūtra like this.
“It is suffering to be with that which is unpleasant; It is suffering to be separated from that which is pleasant.
“If you ask what is the ‘knowledge that contaminants will not be regenerated,’
“Your Majesty, look! This child is practicing concentration In the shade of the rose apple tree.
If they are thinking of Avalokiteśvara They will never sink in the water.
“ ‘The wise teach using all words, But their minds are not captivated by the words.
After that, they shine on the low-lying regions of the earth here in Jambūdvīpa.
And, monks, the gods who attended upon the Bodhisattva now also tried to break Māra’s resolve in sixteen ways.
from speaking untrue words to their parents and their teachers;
it was excellent indeed.
let alone bodhisattva mahāsattvas with four hundred or three hundred or two hundred bodhisattva followers,
the four correct exertions,
You speak of your attainment of wisdom And you declare it to be profound. {24}
up to and including the narratives and the established instructions, all originate from this [transcendent perfection of wisdom].
Ajita, this is what a noble man or noble woman should know:
Is located on the right.
You are untainted by mundane concerns, Like a lotus floating on water!
When five sages were coursing through the sky,
“Even billions of māras cannot know The minds of those wise ones,
Only one can defeat Māra, With his sentinels, troops, and mounts!
Don’t you see these women with eyes like blooming lotuses, Who are adorned with garlands of many precious gems, Sparkling like a flash of lightning amid cloud banks in the sky, So beautiful as they rest on their beds?
am one who will not be reborn, and I will attain final nirvāṇa in the expanse of nirvāṇa where no residue of the psycho-physical aggregates is left behind.’
Bodhisattvas are not like those who teach sweetly while thinking differently.
He therefore addressed Rudraka with these words:
neither is it imbued with happiness, nor is it imbued with suffering;
And those who hear it are delighted and respectful.{35}
Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, if you doubt, are uncertain, are unsure, or are wondering who at that time, on that occasion, were the beings who disparaged and censured that bodhisattva mahāsattva,
They experience concentration and awakening, sentient beings and thus-gone ones, all in a nondualistic way.
and in the same vein, Senior Śāradvatī­putra, the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, are non-existent and non-apprehensible.
In the same vein, Su­bhūti,
others with palaces were made of heaps of uragasāra sandalwood.
They perceive happiness as being like a dream, perceive it as being impermanent like a dream,
they should reflect, in the same vein as before. [‘Alas! When I have attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, in this buddhafield I will practice the six transcendent perfections until] all sentient beings possess the thirty-two major marks of a superior man,’ and so on, in the same vein as before, down to ‘[they will] also approach omniscience.’
“Moreover, Ānanda, if those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage always maintain scrupulous conduct and make offerings
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities have abundant faith.
Because they heard the sacred Dharma of the Supreme Vehicle,
this is to be relinquished,
delight means purity of mind.
Ignorant, they will reject the Dharma that is taught.
Their gentle speech will be like the song of a goose And their voice will have the fifty aspects of speech. {95}
Supremely devoted to embracing the Wisdom,
“ ‘The natural mode is not in the accumulation of words. This mode, this nature, does not dwell anywhere.
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, the same also applies when great bodhisattva beings definitively cultivate in all respects the four applications of mindfulness,
They become worthy recipients of the donations of the whole world, with its gods, humans, and antigods.
“Noble son, in the world named Vivṛta, you will be the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha, perfect in wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the unsurpassable guide who tames beings, the teacher of gods and humans, the buddha, the Bhagavat Bhasmeśvara.”
and if others did not comprehend it, this would be harmful to me.
the lords of the rākṣasas, and three hundred yakṣiṇīs.
I asked it, ‘Why are you laughing?’
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designation of physical forms as entities or non-entities constitutes a bodhisattva?”
and the good name of the Tathāgata will be celebrated far and wide.’ ”
(10) recollection of death.
“If someone is chained in iron fetters Or imprisoned in wooden stocks,
Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, in the past,
Vajrapāṇi then said these well-spoken words:
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities are skilled in the means of attraction.
They will not speak unpleasant things about them, nor will they have the concept of being their opponent.
In this Sahā world realm there are my thousands of bodhisattvas who are as numerous as the grains of sand in sixty Ganges Rivers.
The gathering of yakṣas responded:
Some great bodhisattva beings are not fixated on this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom;
“Similarly, they should not dwell on the notion that the fruit of entering the stream is well distinguished by conditioned phenomena, nor should they dwell on the notion that this [fruit] is well distinguished by unconditioned phenomena.
It must not be divided.
“Quick, prepare twenty thousand elephants, Dark blue like mountains or storm clouds.
“The Jina, knowing what they intended, Taught this samādhi of peace that is difficult to see.
And find fame and fortune.
However, he had not had his meal and therefore, fasting for a fifth day,
They see that, due to such causes, such conditions, and such bases, their death due to the destruction of the body brings a passage to the joys of the higher realms where they are born among the gods.
At that time, those bhikṣus Will not even have those trainings. {28}
“Divine princes, it is so! It is just as you have spoken.
I rejoice in the virtues of wandering beings;
the pure nature is the dharmakāya
They asked him, “Blessed One, did Gautama fare happily during the unseasonable seven-day storm?”
The four mahārājas guard the four directions.
‘All these suffering beings have no protector;
One should drink two parts of the bark of ivory tree and one part of black pepper, sugar, and Indian heliotrope with buttermilk.
” On arriving, he left the king’s seat be and sat on the royal priest’s seat.
Blessed One, we shall uphold this Dharma teaching.
A jewel has come into this world!
Stop all the wind and rain!
on being shown this precious gemstone, immediately after seeing it their poison would vanish.
These childish beings are confined,
Regarding this, there are also some concluding verses:
Similarly, Su­bhūti, if individuals who have attained the level of eightfold acceptance, and individuals who have entered the stream, who are tied to one more rebirth, who are no longer subject to rebirth, who are arhats, pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, and genuinely perfect buddhas were entities and not non-entities,
With a genuine and correct realization of the meaning they see reality.
Then this moon among men Rose slowly from his seat,
They should not dwell, in an apprehending manner, on the notion that ‘The limit of my lifespan is inestimable.’
but one cannot say that he therefore knows phenomena on account of phenomena.
Whatever does not conflict with the intrinsic nature is rational.
Are not able to describe the ocean of qualities That the omniscient buddhas have. {32}
In a later time, there appeared in this world the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha, the one with wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the unsurpassable guide who tamed beings, the teacher of gods and humans, the buddha, the Bhagavat Śikhin.
Were to contemplate this without a thought of anything else, Even for them this would be beyond the scope of their knowledge. {17}
He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of malice and tolerance!”
what are the aspects of the path on which they abide and through which they then swiftly attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment?
They were beings of noble birth, great elephants, who had accomplished their tasks and completed their work.
The monks asked the Blessed One
“Thus the wise ones at that time Gave much advice to that sovereign,
“For ten million eons they will practice bodhisattva conduct And make offerings to ten thousand million buddhas.
Likewise, in the same vein, it also understands [all the other aspects of emptiness], up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, without apprehending anything.
“Go invite them all into the palace.
takes off his soft, clean, beautiful clothes, puts on dirty clothes,
His mind is peaceful and his actions are gentle;
Therefore, reverend Śāriputra, do not point to liberation by abandoning speech!
“Pāpīyān, bodhisattvas are well known and acknowledged by gods and humans throughout the great trichiliocosm. This is why bodhisattvas receive such prophecies.
So, alas, do sickness and old age rob the vitality of beings And destroy their faculties, bodies, and strength.
Is your sickness diminishing?
With his senses still, he has looked at the memorials of the thus-gone ones with unblinking eyes. He has made a firm resolve to inspire other beings to meet the Thus-Gone One, and therefore he is the One with Deep Blue Eyes.
Monks, for bodhisattvas who have reached their last existence, it is customary that the buddhas, the blessed ones, who dwell in the realms within the ten directions, always come while these bodhisattvas amuse themselves in the female quarters and encourage them through singing and music to enter the gate of Dharma.
Prostrations to all relics;
What has no sign has no wish.
They delight in those objects and feel attached to them, long for them, wish for them, strive for them, crave and thirst for them, become senseless for them, and are burned by them. This striving after the objects of desire never brings peace.
He restored the perfect tree to its former glory.
if they are not accepted by a spiritual mentor,
The Hayagrīva chakra is concealed at the throat.
there is no second or third yāna.
the postulant should don the robes and prostrate to his seniors.
The daughter of Daṇḍapāṇi Śākya, the Śākya girl named Gopā, was put forward as a trophy for the victor, and a pledge was sworn: “Whoever here is victorious in swordsmanship, archery, combat, and wrestling shall have her.
or ‘This is the mind on the basis of which the self is to be apprehended as the mind,’
the samādhi named Lamp of the Eon,
and patient without their minds being actuated externally or internally;
This sacred doctrine is compatible with the emptiness of internal phenomena.
Like drinking salty water, Following after desire only increases craving.
As soon as that bhagavān sat on the Bodhimaṇḍa,
In the same vein,
So the bhikṣus must have the three robes.
And these verses, O Brahmā, are my reply to you, time and again:
are hung with diadems, earrings, garlands, one hundred and eight-string and sixty-four-string necklaces;
When the Bhagavān had finished speaking, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya, who was seated there, in his mind recited this verse to the Bhagavān.
“The sound of conches and of paṇavas, And the sound of bherī drums and kimpalas—
When this came up in conversation,
For the sake of pleasures, with their desire as the cause and basis, they experience many forms of suffering.
Blissful One, that is amazing!
They have respectfully placed their hands together. How can we make our practice perfect?” {32}
They think of lack of perception as perception.
“Gentlemen, the ocean is full of many terrors.
The Great Śramaṇa is the one who thus proclaims.”
“If you ask what is the ‘knowledge of the cessation of suffering,’
At that point, a brahmin who loved fire paid it homage and respect.
This is compounded and that is uncompounded.
‘Venerable Gautama, these are spare seats. If you like, you may sit.’
Then, in order to discard the ordinary, The mind must once more be emptied.
and which is not shared in common with any śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas?
will teach this Dharma teaching while remaining in contact with happiness and being free of harm, and will have companions with whom to chant the Dharma.
Here, with the boat of tenacity, I crossed the great ocean of cyclic existence With its crocodiles of passion and desire, Its waves of craving, and its grasping at wrong views.
Then Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ārya Avalokiteśvara asked the Bhagavān,
“Your kinfolk, the best of people, may beat me and ask,
a non-virtuous spiritual friend,
It is like an ancient well, constantly overwhelmed by old age.
“The Buddha has come to Rājagṛha, Magadha’s premier city,
Son of noble family, bodhisattva great beings should practice generosity to establish beings in these three things.
“Five hundred thousand people,
The same refrain should be applied here, as has been indicated in the preceding [part of this] chapter.
Having given them they strive for enlightenment with diligence And through generosity are established in the highest enlightenment. {40}
When he said the letter kṣa, out came the statement: ‘Reaching the end of letters, all phenomena are ineffable (kṣara­paryantābhilāpya sarvadharma).’ ”
He had conquered Māra and all hostile forces, and
“What is the pacification of disputes? It is the avoidance of gatherings.
“In this way, as conventions are designated and connected,
All of you will also acquire excellent qualities like his, and before long become vessels like him.”
Kauśika, so it is that you should always ensure that great bodhisattva beings are honored, venerated, respected, and granted offerings by the world with its gods, humans, and antigods.
one should draw the effigy’s feet toward oneself.
“You may wonder, noble son, how bodhisattvas remain in the application of mindfulness with respect to the points of training taught by the thus-gone ones.
If the ordinand responds “No transgression occurred,” the inquirer asks him: “Have you now gone forth?”
“Arise Candraprabha, son of the jinas!
and they bring great joy.
Though weak, the master smiled, prompting Upatiṣya to ask,
They all abide in the realm of desire—
seeking knowledge in order to avoid pride;
adherence to the teachings by never breaking the thus-gone ones’ commands;
A child, whose body is pure and who has great merits, has been born to you;
The goddess then revealed her form and consoled the members of the caravan, saying, “Do not fear!”
Son, go join the festivities for the nāga kings Giri and Valguka.
He produced manifestations of divine garments, Dharma robes, golden threads, and pearl necklaces; of lotus flowers, utpala flowers, jasmine, and white lotuses; of uragasala trees, snake-heart sandalwood, tamāla tree leaves, and of white sandalwood powder scattered along the path.
offering limitless pure sacrifices to fulfill the auspicious marks and signs; adorning body, speech, and mind by refraining from all sins;
Then the Bodhisattva emanated other bodhisattvas in front of everyone.
they will subsequently attain this omniscience.
Non-apprehension is non-division.
The sun is up and the day has begun.’
along with eighty thousand gods, achieved the Dharma vision that is free from dust and stainless with regard to phenomena.
“On all those trees are hung Every kind of ornament.
“Gautama, the venerable monk and prince of the Śākyas, left the Śākya clan, shaved his head and beard,
“Mañjuśrī, is there a method that can awaken a bodhisattva great being with disturbing emotions, but not someone without disturbing emotions?”
‘Go for refuge to my feet, O child, continually.
“What is the abhorrence of bad qualities? It is restraint and not performing bad actions in the first place.
They think, ‘The Tathāgata has passed into complete nirvāṇa.’
it is because one who wishes to attain emancipation in things without defining characteristics merely wishes to attain emancipation in the expanse of reality.
“Through entering the absorption of emptiness, From bruṃ generate a beautiful vessel.
Śakra, lord of the gods, then brought down a rain of swords, arrows, spears, lances, javelins, trees, and mountains.
The vast excellent home of the youth Candraprabha Was adorned by a multitude of young people.
‘Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, enter, enter into his heart! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
They are pure conduct and celibacy going toward the ultimate goal and reaching the ultimate goal.
“Su­bhūti, from the time when they first begin to set their mind on enlightenment,
Your poison will lose its toxicity.
And afflicted with a yakṣa illness, Our bodies would contract white leprosy.
Each of the tathāgatas sat cross-legged upon one.
Brahmā upon the right of the one with ten strengths, Śakra, the king of the devas, on his left,
Oṁ, Vāgvādinī, grant me the gift of speech! Sarasvatī! Mahāśvetā! Svāhā!
Then came five thousand maidens holding fine jewels and sweeping the path.
Until now you have always been adorned by the best qualities.
“If someone were surrounded by nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, Bhūtas, and rākṣasas, who steal the vitality of beings,
For the sake of ripening those who experience all the afflictions, they engage in activities of all of the afflictions, yet they do not dwell on any of the afflictions.
and he is alone.
“ ‘At the time of death, there will be no one to protect them.
one mixes the creeper of white Indian oleander with the blood of a lizard and then
He has perfected the sacred environment of all aspects of melodious speech, and therefore
Thus creating toxic thoughts of lust and hate.
If they are reborn in a deva or human world they will have a superior status.
The food container should be a skull-cup in a single piece.
They realize the domain of the realm of phenomena.
was carried off to the top shelf of Mount Sumeru by the garūḍa Suparṇi.
As for ultimately experiencing diversity, it develops into many views involving reference points.
“Similarly, the applications of mindfulness are non-apprehensible, owing to their utter purity,
Later, if they engage in enlightenment, even if they have great learning, they will imagine that, amongst all letterless phenomena, the mind is existent.
‘Noble one! Have you found such a store of qualities?’
of the respect of noble ones, consummated by joyful and faithful service;
The aggregates consist of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness.
He was a teacher of the supreme essence of enlightenment, But because of my desires I had him slain. {99}
But the flowers and the leaves that grow on those trees turn into swords,
His voice caused all meanings to be known, produced all types of happiness, demonstrated the path to liberation, proclaimed the accumulations necessary for the path,
They are those who obtain the essentials And are reborn into a wealthy family. {1} “As soon as they are born There is generosity in their minds.
Yet when an intelligent person is elevated through the tools of insight‌ and merit,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the kleśas concerning purification. Those are the four.
they comprise the faculty of faith, the faculty of perseverance, the faculty of recollection, the faculty of meditative stability, and the faculty of wisdom, which individual trainees who have not attained actual realization acquire.
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, this Great Vehicle of great bodhisattva beings comprises the emptiness of internal phenomena, and the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature with respect to non-entities.
They have nothing. They are arhats.
Is when there are no words at all to be found. It is not conceptualizing them or being proud of them,
and ten thousand bodhisattvas attained the tolerance of the birthlessness of things.
namely other’s words, and one’s own correct mental engagement.’
“Sage, behold the Golden One, worshiped by gods and humans.”
Great sage, please tell us
One should visualize oneself embraced by her,
“If you are not free yourself, you will be unable to liberate others;
“The man answers him, ‘I speak the praises of that incense And in that way make my living, But I have never seen that incense.’ {26}
perceiving signlessness is an obscuration,
“Do you see that arrow at the outer periphery of the world system?”
“Śāradvatī­putra, emptiness neither arises nor ceases.
And if all ten directions were also filled in that same way By those who are my other śrāvakas, {10}
“In such a way, in future times There will be those who have no correct conduct, Yet they who do not engage in it Will make their living by praising it. {27}
“I then pondered what must be absent for aging and death not to occur and what must cease for aging and death to cease.
syād yathedam sāle kasine vidharaṇi varāgra sāre āmarṣaṇi amoghavati secanakāli nakāli kāśikavati bharaṇi bharakaśakhe samanta­prāpte sāraprāpte stambhani stambhana­prāpte vajradhare svāhā
What is that place like?
Homage to Tathāgata Brahmaśrī.
have no attributes, have no characteristics, have no origin, have no cessation,
Through the sameness of all sentient beings they understand the sameness of all phenomena.
grants them the five types of clairvoyance and
Yama’s guards will seize them and insert a hundred thousand needles into their tongues.
the unsurpassed guide who tames beings, the teacher to gods and men known as the Blessed Buddha Śākyamuni,’
In order to block the way to the three lower realms.
“With that kind of wisdom They will practice bodhisattva conduct.
Through the nature of awakening they understand the nature of sentient beings.
“It teaches the pacification of all phenomena and is a gateway to the concentrations that pertain to all phenomena.
acquisitiveness does not arise.
and the seventh door was made of gold.
‘Monk, why have you fallen to the ground?’“The monk replied,
As they enjoy frivolous entertainments, how will they ever become buddhas?
owing to the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end,
In the same way as before, one should recite the mantra while contemplating him as being drawn toward oneself. The target will be brought into one’s presence.
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess these ten qualities are endowed with excellent wisdom.
Take as an analogy the earth that provides beings with all the things they require.
I possess perseverance!
‘Bhagavat, why did this sign appear?’
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ consideration of danger consist in?
All beings interacted in harmony, Their minds full of loving kindness.
Since there is nothing to apprehend, there is nothing to explain.
not mixing laypeople and renunciants; not having attachment to gain, honors, or praise; rejecting craving;
What is that?
This is exactly the kind of dangerous path the wise say must be rejected.”
While passing through Rājagṛha, he accepted the offering of a bamboo grove.
to be free of remorse;
Reverend Śāriputra, the Dharma is free of compounded things and uncompounded things.
“Those who in the terrible latter times Protect this sūtra of the Sugata, this state of peace,
nor is it an object to be renounced,
Why? Because the light of the jewel of a thus-gone one’s body pervades all the infinite realms of sentient beings and throughout the boundless expanse of space.
Similarly, physical forms are pure, and [all other phenomena, attributes, and attainments], up to and including omniscience, are pure, owing to the purity of the applications of mindfulness.
But the beginner bodhisattvas were not able to transform themselves to sit upon the thrones.
Why? Lord, I remember one day,
the Tathāgata; diligence, awakening, and sentient beings, and,
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of ascension concerning purification. Those are the four.
This shows that the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha is endowed with inconceivable excellent qualities.
They completely reject the kleśas And train in the supreme quality of purification. {38}
‘In accordance with the benevolent aspirations of the thus-gone ones, through this gift of my head,
Hearing these words, the king instantly summoned the priests Who were experts in the Vedas and their treatises.
The rajobhuva, however, outside of the base line, Should be one-half of the paṭṭikā.
“What is benefiting others through the Dharma? It is bringing others correctly into the Dharma.
one will remove wrinkles and gray hair.
What are the four? As for clothes, it is preferable that you find a pile of discarded rags suitable.
When the Blessed One authorized preceptors and instructors to allow going forth and grant ordination,
The bolt of lightning, having hit the ground, sinks down. Until the Bodhisattva obtains peaceful immortality, he will not retreat.
Su­bhūti, just as a milch cow follows after her new-born calf,
When the mind is unwavering,
And suck the interior of my bhaga?’
They will not fall away from understanding of the bodhisattva vow.
One ruled the half of Jambudvīpa that had wealth, increase, happiness, excellent harvests, joy,
Bhagavān, a bodhisattva mahāsattva who understands all phenomena in this way attains acceptance that all phenomena are non-arising.
What is the enlightenment of the lord buddhas?
It was said: “Avarice is overcome. Their generosity increases.
“The tathatā is nothing else but the tathatā.
It is not relying on ordinary people.
Dharmaketu, Dīpaṃkara, Guṇaketu, Mahākara, Ṛṣideva, Śrītejas, Satyaketu, Vajrasaṃhata, Sarvābhibhū, Hemavarṇa, Atyuccagāmin, Prabālasāgara, Puṣpaketu, Vararūpa, Sulocana, Ṛṣigupta, Jinavaktra, Unnata, Puṣpita, Ūrṇatejas, Puṣkara, Suraśmi, Maṅgala, Sudarśana, Mahā­siṃha­tejas, Sthita­buddhi­datta, Vasanta­gandhin, Satya­dharma­vipula­kīrti, Tiṣya, Puṣya, Lokasundara, Vistīrṇabheda, Ratnakīrti, Ugratejas, Brahmatejas, Sughoṣa, Supuṣpa, Sumanojñaghoṣa, Suceṣṭarūpa, Prahasitanetra, Guṇarāśi, Meghasvara, Sundaravarṇa, Āyustejas, Salīlagajagāmin, Lokābhilāṣita, Jitaśatru, Sampūjita,
Noble son, the eloquence of bodhisattvas is diverse. With delightful speech they bring joy to sentient beings.
“Śāradvatī­putra, the ‘four assurances’ are merely conceptualized.
“Merely seeing Dīpaṃkara, you attained supreme forbearance, And discovered, accordingly, the five indestructible clairvoyant perceptions.
‘Reverend Aniruddha, is your divine eye compounded in nature?
Will live in inopportune existences.
All phenomena are devoid of names, And still they are described using names.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness as happiness or suffering constitute a bodhisattva?”
One must then, in the prescribed way, perform one hundred and eight offerings of red lotus flowers.
Similarly, emptiness is not something other than feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness;
“Young man, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta saw King Śrīghoṣa, and having seen him asked,
One will then engage in pure conduct with delight, and one’s complexion will glow.
One should understand that bodhisattvas who act in these ways have been trained.
then that monk incurs a defeat and thus should not remain.
Similarly, they apprehend feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness, and develop a view of them in an apprehending manner.
The devas, nāgas, yakṣas, asuras, gandharvas, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans all departed.
other great bodhisattva beings should know that, for that reason, those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage have not been favored by the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, and the transcendent perfection of generosity, and in the same vein, that those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage have not been favored by [the other causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including omniscience.
They do not consider the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
they should never be separated from the mind endowed with omniscience.
“Śāriputra, you must keep this great secret. And also all those who are my śrāvakas,
Ānanda, it was by means of ten qualities that I quickly accomplished supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
but he is not matter.
utterly perfect discipline, since discipline has been completely accomplished and the aggregate of discipline has become flawless, uncorrupted, undefiled, beyond hearers and solitary buddhas, completely pure, and purified;
They never develop thoughts of violence, miserliness, or degenerate morality, and
Kauśika, in the same way, anyone thinking to guard, protect, and offer sanctuary to great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom would not succeed and would tire themselves out!
The constellation of Puṣya appeared.
This concludes the third chapter, on the purity of the family.
Even though they are tormented by hunger, they are unable to eat in hell.
By training in wisdom,
“Well, in that case, come, we should teach everyone together.” And accordingly he installed the Bodhisattva as a teacher on the same level as himself.
Senior Śāradvatī­putra! With regard to great bodhisattva beings, skilled in means, who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
and whoever offers flowers, incense, perfume, garlands, ointments, powders, clothing, parasols, banners, divine flags, the sound of music, and so on, to the text, while bowing down and putting hands together in homage;
If they were to ask such questions, Venerable Lord, how should I respond?”
Also, when any great bodhisattva beings, through their attention endowed with omniscience,
without letting the forests and the grasses of the buddhafields be flattened.
They had all promised each other To come and see the Lord of the World. {74}
It also comprises the ten powers of the tathāgatas, and [all the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
And the lower realms dried out.
“When childish ordinary beings observe moral conduct they speak ill of those neglecting moral conduct, disparaging and treating them contemptuously.
This is called aspirationlessness as a gateway to liberation.
And thereby affords protection, Will be physically unaffected by fire, poison, or weapon.
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya and the complete assembly of bodhisattvas said to the Bhagavān,
Their names were Utkhalin, Sūtkhalin, Prajāpati, Śūrabhala, Keyūrabala, Supratiṣṭhita, Mahindhara, Avabhāsakara, Vimala, Dharmeśvara, Dharmaketu, Siddhapātra, Apratihata­netra, Mahāvyūha, Śila­viśuddha­netra, and Padmaprabha.
“Ānanda, if you wonder whether the brahmin boy Bhadraśuddha was then, at that time, someone else, or you are of two minds about it, or doubtful, do not see him so.
She said, ‘Noble son, I will do so.’
who perceive that they are imbued with happiness, who perceive that they are a self,
Though they already know, they may inquire—or, even though they know, they may not inquire.
In reciting and saying prayers, he recited and mastered the Three Piṭakas
“Bhagavān, those beings who write out this sūtra, and those who study it after having written it out,
Arranged at the foot of all those precious trees there were magnificent,
And they will search for the sacred Dharma with no regard for life or limb, and when they find it, they will practice it diligently.
“Śāriputra, all the beings who heard that Dharma from those tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas in the past
putting away the entrances is non-disturbance.
Some arrive with indestructible, vajra-like bodies;
Venerable Lord! Those great bodhisattva beings who attain unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment for the sake of sentient beings acquire the great power of perseverance.
Hearing these words, all the gods in the Heaven of Joy, along with the assembly of goddesses, gathered together in the great celestial palace.
(1) The tathāgatas are without clumsiness; (2) they are not noisy; (3) they are without false memories;
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ skill in converting non-Buddhists consist in?
‘Those who teach the Dharma for the benefit of beings, They are those who accomplish great service.
The assembled retinue said to the Tathāgata, “Excellent!”
For the sick he is like a doctor;
“Oh no, how sad that Ārāḍa Kālāma died before hearing this well-prepared teaching!” Monks, at that point the Thus-Gone One once again reflected,
The people who lived in the villages surrounding the area where I was practicing began to say,
and not the wind element.
That man listens to this order, goes to the poor man,
“Listen well, companions: for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who are beginners one must explain the six perfections with a reference point, with the notion that suchness is expressible.
the eightfold path of the noble ones: right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
And this great prince will certainly awaken to unexcelled, perfect, and complete buddhahood.
“ ‘So, too, for any feelings of anger, dullness, Jealousy, and avarice.
they discern that physical forms are empty of the emptiness of physical forms, that the nature of physical forms is emptiness, and that emptiness is indeed physical forms.
Because, Ānanda, it is the Dharma mirror of all phenomena
Then when I am there I will make offerings to the Bhagavān.
The element of space may change into something else, But you will never speak an untrue word. {9}
They become happy as Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara arrives there, and with joy in their hearts
Prostrations to the tathāgata, Buddha Ratnaśrīrāja;
while the monks’ purification takes place on the fifteenth day of the month,
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who dwell in emptiness. What are the ten benefits?
(1) the faculty of faith,
“On the relative level, holding views is a gateway to pride.
or bestowed upon those who aspire for it with faith in the Mahāyāna.
Bhikṣus, at that time the winds of karma will blow, and although they have died they will come back to life.
As the buddhas empower Tārā She becomes crowned with the Dharma.
I, [postulant’s name], will henceforth, for as long as I live, seek refuge in the Buddha, supreme among men;
“If someone had to teach the Dharma Through thousands of other sūtras While residing at the summit of existence,
he would drape his shawl over one shoulder, set his right knee on the ground, and put the palms of his hands together three times during the day and three times during the night.
sentient beings subject to birth will be completely released from being subject to birth, and
I am absorbed in meditative concentration!
with complete limbs, parts of limbs and all the sense faculties.
Śāriputra, the buddhafield of the Tathāgata is pure, but you do not see it.”
nor are the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of both internal and external phenomena, and [the other aspects of emptiness] up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, discerned.
and if a caravan leader was leading a great caravan of merchants who had obtained a great wealth in jewels,
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess ten such qualities know intentions and latent tendencies.
Assuming an elephant’s appearance,
at the home of the youth Candraprabha.
Their lord and king Is called Virūḍhaka.
Uttering their names, they disparage, abuse, and speak badly of them,
Wandering around, living in forests, Through diligence they are established in the highest enlightenment. {31}
More splendorous than ten million suns.
“That day passed, and on the second day, my provisions of good food were quickly prepared.
‘Householder, where do you come from?’ He replied,
O Bhagavān, that fire comes into being owing to the power of a collection of causes.
Even the sun and the moon, Surrounded by the stars,
And more, as many as there are sand grains in the Ganges— It would not be possible to perceive all their attributes. {23}
Venerable Lord! I do not consider illusion or illusion-like mind.
Śāradvatī­putra, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom should train as follows: They should not in any respect make assumptions on account of physical forms.
“Because he sees and surveys the entire world; brings contentment, protection, and relief;
“What is having specific attainments? It is accomplishing a buddha’s strengths, fearlessnesses, and discernments.
“Noble son, bodhisattvas who practice excellent concentration possess ten qualities.
being insatiable in incorporating all the qualities of buddhafields into one’s own realm.
Twelve hundred gods with supreme devotion, As well as five hundred Śākya boys, approached.
"གཞན་གྱི་<tto rejoice in others’ deeds;
You should not have conviction in omniscience
“Blessed One, I shall be present with my army and retinue wherever this Dharma teaching may be delivered and explained. We shall provide for those who listen and teach.”
As soon as he is born there he will possess the five higher knowledges.
perfect the five extrasensory powers which are without degeneration, and they bring sentient beings to maturity.
This bodhisattva will withstand the demonic forces, and that one will not.
among hell beings, in the form of a hell being; and
He is the one to whom the lord of the demigods bows.
(8) There is the meditative stability named Certainty in the Expanse of Reality. (9) There is the meditative stability named Crest of the Victory Banner of Certainty.
As the Bodhisattva knows that day has broken, He dons his robes, so beautiful to behold. Holding his alms bowl with a humble attitude,
It is a ship that crosses a great river, And it increases fame and garlands of praises
So they take ordination among them.
“ ‘Nandika, who was upon the king’s road, With extremely cruel actions makes people suffer;
Throughout a year, month, fortnight, A day, night, and hour,
Hundreds of thousands of girls, adorned with all kinds of jewelry, perched themselves on the balconies, turrets, arches, windows, upper stories, and roofs of the homes.
They do not engage with the notion that physical forms are empty, or that these are not empty.
Some are frightened by the six sense sources and instead relish the six super-knowledges.
which would be able to nourish uncountable, limitless beings.
In order to make offerings to the Bhagavān they filled the entire sky without leaving any space
Each of his hairs grows individually, and their tips curl to the right and upward.
one will become an intelligent person, A master of language with a beautiful voice, and full of knowledge.
So, at the close of night,
He saw the child with the strength of Nārāyaṇa, ornamented by supreme marks;
Non-development is non-division;
The one who upholds this sūtra
“And visualize oneself as the deity of activity. Then invite the wrathful wisdom.
Divine being, someone who is free from evil and irreproachable is beyond words.
Those who see all phenomena as objects of delusion will attain purification from karmic obscurations.
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Attain the supreme state of equanimity
‘Oh! We shall work as the preceptor or instructor’s sickness attendants or have another do so.’
we took up in an empty monastery.
the one who fulfills all aims, the teacher, the one who gives comfort, the hero, and the one who abandons disturbing emotions.
and thinks, ‘I shall go there.’
Not holding back even the most trifling, I avow and confess the sins and nonvirtuous actions that contradict all holy scripture and that I myself have committed in this life or while wandering in the three worlds through beginningless, endless births, or that I caused others to perform, or even that I rejoiced in when performed by others. They are: the ten nonvirtues of body, speech, and mind that were committed under the influence of desire, anger, and ignorance; the five heinous crimes; and so forth.
confusion will disappear and confusion will not arise;
Without moving from one given buddha realm, they turn the wheel of Dharma in numerous buddha realms.
Decorated and beautified by a network Of numerous jingling, precious bells. {xii}
It is without presumption of conditionality, because it does not conform to causes.
“The common retinue of ten million Are behind the eight nāgas and yakṣas.
“When my son was born, the world was lit as if by the light of lights,
She went to Śrāvastī and waited at the gate.
Indeed, this latter merit cannot be expressed as even a thousandth part, a hundred thousandth part, a billionth part, a ten billionth part, a hundred billionth part, or indeed as any other number, fraction, quantity, or material part.
Among them, Śiva became accomplished as Vajraśaṃkara;
who are malevolent, who conceal their faults, whose minds are disturbed by miserliness,
Much more splendid than the rest, they emerge as supreme masters who are venerated because of their expertise.
When the retinue of consorts did not see the young prince,
or who seek to actualize genuinely perfect enlightenment, cannot abide in it or actualize [these fruits] without relying on this tolerance or receptivity.
They all change from very strong, to strong, to weak.”
With perfect faith, he seeks to go forth from home into homelessness under the guidance of this preceptor [preceptor’s name].
the nature of knowers and [other postulated subjects], up to and including viewers, has been taught without apprehending anything.
They have but little desire, anger, or delusion.
He dwelt in a celestial palace with 32,000 floors,
Likewise, although the mental consciousness arises based upon the ear and sound, the nose and smell, the tongue and taste, the body and touch, and the mind and phenomena, the mental consciousness does not have a producer
a hero since he did not let the banner fall,
Everything fuses into a seminal drop.
The man then rises from his seat and leaves. He goes to another country and
Yet he is capable of destroying Namuci single-handedly.”
and become equipoised in meditative concentration while they lack skill in means, and who cultivate wisdom while they lack skill in means,
In this way, as the Bodhisattva proceeded on his way, they besprinkled him with showers of flowers made of various jewels and praised him with these verses:
So will be this accumulation of merit.
they will not actualize the finality of existence until they have attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
At this sight, he felt compassion and
He has forty teeth. (8) He has even teeth.
and it can liberate them from the birthplaces of animals, the world of Yama, and the impoverished states of human beings, yakṣas, and nāgas.
He then vanished along with the bodhisattvas, only to reappear at the same moment, the same instant, the same second, in his own buddhafield.
Next follows another method:
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin then said to the dharmabhāṇaka
He will create many stūpas for them.
When living by their pledges, they are irreproachable.
She will render irreversible her progress to unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
Venerable Lord! Those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who hold, maintain, master, recite aloud, and are attentive to this transcendent perfection of wisdom in the right manner will, Venerable Lord, not suffer ailments of the eyes,
However, the characteristics of their powers and qualities should be considered to be different.”
Other bodhi trees were made of odoriferous substances and were two hundred thousand leagues high.
“Noble ones, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha is going to teach the Tathāgata’s wisdom insight, the Tathāgata’s leadership, the Tathāgata’s activity, the Tathāgata’s displays, the Tathāgata’s expanding power, and the Tathāgata’s heroism.
“Just as someone with childish character,
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya assented to the Blessed One, and listened as the Blessed One had instructed.
will gain twelve hundred qualities of the tongue,
My spine appeared like a braided tuft of hair.
When he had been told what had happened, the Bhagavān asked the monk Stainless Light,
The Blessed One then turned to the goddess A­martyā.
If they engage with the notion that the self exists in physical forms, or that the self does not exist therein,
‘Offering beverages represents the elimination of all thirst associated with the afflictions.
“My friends,” continued the Blessed One, “uphold this Dharma teaching!
That person will receive the consecration of a vidyādhara cakravartin.
All will be endowed with a complete mind of enlightenment
[1] they dwell in the dwelling of the Buddha; [2] their meditation is nondwelling;
“The mother, and also the daughter,
It is just as you have said!
In this way do bodhisattvas contemplate the repulsive extensively.
“Noble son, go in the direction of the zenith and when you have crossed as many buddhafields as there are sands in forty-two Ganges rivers, you will reach a universe called Sarva­gandha­sugandhā,
together with the five hundred monks and the entire retinue, as well as the worlds of gods and men, demi-gods and gandharvas, rejoiced and praised the Blessed One’s words.
He does not think or ponder.
“Those bodhisattvas who have the power of retention Teach endless, countless sūtras.
To thus pursue the enlightenment of a buddha is to reciprocate the Tathāgata’s kindness.”
After Ānanda’s nephews went forth, Ānanda began to teach them to read,
and present these as an offering to the three precious jewels.
“Venerable Lord! What are the wonderful and marvelous attributes of great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom, which are unknown to all śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas?”
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ excellent power of miracles consist in?
A blind man cannot show the way.
and giving off the sound of strings from jeweled chimes. Delightful to behold,
I shall make excellent offeringsWith incense, flowers, and perfumes,
to do what he must do to fully understand his unspoken commitments,
to be skilled in insight;
“After Agnīśvara there was a buddha, A jina who was named Brahmānana.
“Venerable Lord, when great bodhisattva beings train accordingly, in what things do they train?
Being infinite, the mind of the bodhisattvas is, likewise, wide and vast.
“They have perfect peace, complete peace; They have no kleśas, and they have no misery.
They retain what they have heard for the sake of protecting all the teachings, and not for the sake of acquisitions.
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, even the emptiness of internal phenomena is non-existent and non-apprehensible,
Homage to you, heroic being! Homage to you, supreme being! We pay homage with palms joined! Homage to you, king of Dharma!
The Blessed One then addressed the gods inhabiting the world system of desire and those inhabiting the world system of form:
and free from mind, mentality, and consciousness.
What is that bodhisattva mahāsattva like? What is his color? What is his form? What kind of characteristics does he have? What kind of shape does he have? What kind of practice does he have?
and then in various ways they instruct sentient beings so that they will no longer wander in the three impure realms, subject to rebirth.
and those disciplined by a short period of evolution actually perceive an eon to be the passing of a week.
“I could not be his equal in appearance, And a malevolent envy arose within me.
It is acting within the scope of correct conduct. It is a perfection of correct conduct. It is rejecting incorrect conduct.
When they saw the glorious majesty of the Jina, With minds filled with joy they bowed to him. {11}
“Similarly, Su­bhūti, the transcendent perfection of generosity does not apprehend the limit of past time.
who turns toward solitude and departs from home,
With a vase and a bunch of rice twigs in her hands.
Bhagavān, it’s impossible.
“I had also noticed that sign.”
That merit would be greatly surpassed If someone were to offer a single thus-gone one A single prostration accompanied by a devoted attitude And say, ‘Homage to the Worthy One!’
it is because the physical forms that are void constitute the nature of sentient beings, who are also void.
“They who possess this samādhi Will receive the offerings of devas, Will be continually revered by humans,
having approached, they will venerate them
It does not equal a thousandth, a hundred thousandth, a ten millionth, a thousand millionth, a ten thousand millionth, a million millionth, or even a hundred thousand quintillionth.
as it pervaded and illumined the entire trichiliocosm.
From the first [bodhisattva] level up to the tenth [bodhisattva] level it is the same
“Blessed One, many gods, nāgas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, humans, carakas, and parivrājakas have gathered here.
“What is the knowledge of the processes of the mind? It is the knowledge of the absence of creation and destruction.
Once there, they worshiped the Blessed One and paid homage to him.
I possessed the seven treasures, And I lived in the midst of ladies.
Now you must free beings from their many afflictions.
the purity of [all attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, are indivisible:
It illuminated all beings without exception in the six classes of existence in those buddha realms.
“They will enter homelessness in the Sage’s teaching And obtain the peace of this stainless samādhi.
“These phenomena are declared nonexistent; They are all unproduced and unborn.
and that they will be endowed with unimpeded inspiration, uninterrupted inspiration, rational inspiration, well-connected inspiration, purposeful inspiration, and distinguished, supramundane inspiration?”
Even though they are bound to circle In saṃsāra’s ocean for countless eons, Always ensnared by afflictions.
He is endowed with a great ocean-like mind.
Nor does the seed of consciousness think, ‘I am produced by these conditions.’
As all perceptions of impediment fade away they go beyond all perception of form.
in Rājagṛha, on the southern slope of Vulture Peak Mountain in the luminous grove of jewel trees, the domain of the Buddha,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words concerning illumination. What are the four kinds of words concerning illumination?
Divine son, understanding this utterly unconditioned state is awakening.
gained mastery over all the absorptions of the bodhisattvas.
Right mindfulness is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Lion among Men, please divulge the reason for your smile.
The power of absorption is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
One should eat the root of common milk hedge with sugar.
“Reverend, if only it were otherwise and your parents could have found satisfaction in you!
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of accumulation of eloquence. What are the four kinds of accumulation of eloquence?
“You will constantly be the eldest son of those buddha bhagavāns, as you are for me.
“The blessed one Immaculately Renowned King taught these eight adamantine statements so that all phenomena may be ascertained.
Senior Pūrṇa, the real nature, the inalienable real nature, reality, the expanse of reality, the abiding nature of phenomena, the maturity [of the bodhisattvas], the finality of existence, and [other] unconditioned phenomena are also neither fettered nor liberated.
The real nature of the past is the real nature of the Tathā­gata, and
Who are addicted to their revolting homes, Will not attain unsurpassable, highest enlightenment. {5} “
Due to the realization of emptiness.
“Within that space there are divine palaces, Twelve yojanas in size and beautiful.
Many thousands of millions
will cure heart palpitations.
I had never seen or heard before of a burning, laughing lamp.
Lord of Men, like a moon reflected in water, you appear to all;
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­puṇya­lakṣaṇa­dhārin,
in the same way, Su­bhūti, the irreversible thoughts of the irreversible great bodhisattva beings
venerated and worshipped the Tathāgata for a hundred thousand divine years with all the necessities of life there might be—
“As many beings as there are to be trained, That many limitless beings I train.
They shine in all the fields of the buddhas, Just like the rising sun.
Seizing life force and body, They gravitate toward bad pathways.
and they do not objectify it, conceptualize it, become proud of it, view it, or become attached to it.
who will read, recite, and chant sūtras that contain profound emptiness. These Mahāyāna sūtras are the object of understanding of bodhisattvas who need only little effort, and who are greatly intelligent beings, adorned with dhāraṇīs, tolerance, meditative concentration, and the grounds.
Hearing the beautiful sound of music, All beings were filled with joy. {8}
Through the name, power, sovereignty, and might of the great king Virūḍhaka, may all grahas and misfortunes be pacified for me!
Likewise, why do you say that the designation of the eyes as permanent or impermanent does not constitute a bodhisattva
“Those waters have one taste.
meeting with forms, sounds, smells, tastes, tactile sensations, and the sphere of mentally cognized features.
Name and form are pure, owing to the purity of consciousness.
In the same vein, one who wishes to attain emancipation in things without defining characteristics merely wishes to attain emancipation in the element of dispassion, the element of cessation, and the emptiness of physical forms, and
Saving them from all degeneration, and shining with the light of insight,
“Yet, when hearing this very sūtra, a bodhisattva May form the wish to establish it well, Either within his body or within a book.
“Young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I will practice completely pure physical conduct in that way.’
meditate on patience,
they will not see forms with their eyes,
Venerable Lord! I do not in the slightest think that the sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who follow the vehicle of the bodhisattvas will ever regress from unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment and become śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas.
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess ten such qualities keep their smiling faces free of angry frowns.”
which is the great secret of the buddhas, which is concealed by all the buddhas,
The non-forsaking of perseverance with regard to this attention endowed with omniscience is called the transcendent perfection of perseverance of great bodhisattva beings when they practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Would be unable to move a single hair On that wise Bodhisattva.”
And to liberate beings from the ocean of existence,
From where have you come just now?”
“May you beat the kettledrum of the sublime Dharma!
“He is known as the person, the great person, the lion of a man, the one who is not subject to fear and the thrill of excitement,
If you ask why, it is because physical forms are empty of physical forms.
The word arhat and likewise the word Dharma And the word saṅgha also appeared at that time. {126}
If you ask what it is in which they are not stable,
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of inner knowledge concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of inner knowledge concerning teaching the composite,
Then Yama’s guards will again seize them.
he emerged from the capital city of Ratnāvatī and went to the stūpa that contained the fingernail of the Bhagavān;
One can break the spell by taking the splinters out.
‘Even those who entertain malicious thoughts find ill will unpleasant; they do not wish for it, do not like it, and do not enjoy it.
While being within cyclic existence, they should not train in such a way that perpetuates cyclic existence,
For the real nature of the noble eightfold path [and so forth]
One should grind the root of Indian sesbania, blending it with rice water.
they know and see who has fallen, who has flourished, who hurts,
Similarly, when a preparation Of gajapippalī and white butterfly pea Is smeared onto the penis together with freshly churned buffalo butter, The penis will become healthy and strong.
To this end, by means of relative truth, the skillful ones Manifest displays such as this one here.
and he became skilled in removing himself from the shortcomings and faults of cyclic existence.
“They should not dwell, in an apprehending manner, on the notion that ‘I should enter into the maturity of the bodhisattvas.’
They are called those who long for the Mahāyāna and they escape from the three realms.
which are like an echo,
By understanding those phenomena which are conceptualized as names and symbols, they will not become fixated on physical forms.
and although he is reborn, he does not adhere to the continuation of sin.
“How does the Buddha Śākyamuni teach the Dharma?”
Seeing this as clearly as amalaki seeds placed in the palm of their hand,
It is because such bodhisattvas are to regard all modes of birth as unreliable.
The rich man is always looking Through a round window at the man,
“This is the emptiness of inherent existence.
make offerings to the blessed Vāgīśvara and to one’s precious guru.
Because of delusion, one enters as the consciousness of a new being.
“In that way, after countless eons had passed, As numerous as the grains of sand in a hundred worlds,
are brahmins,
Invited by hundreds of thousands of living beings, All in the same country,
the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha.” The Bhagavān addressed the youth Candraprabha, saying,
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the kleśas concerning the composite,
“Teaching this samādhi, this peace Is the creation of bodhisattvas.
Craving provides the causal condition for clinging.
“Nanda and Upananda, this retired devotee is at odds with us. We will act to evict him.”
“Bhagavān, when the dharmabhāṇakas are walking while dedicated to the practice of contemplating this Dharma teaching,
You are stupid and know nothing,
So, out of the great love and compassion Śūrpī felt, like a swan spreading its wings,
the Thus-Gone One urges you thus!
When one offers 700,000 homa rituals with any type of flowers,
Having accepted it, he spoke to the great king Virūpākṣa in verse:
and they should know that they will not proceed into the animal realms or into the world of Yama.
Śāradvatī­putra, great bodhisattva beings who maintain this union never entertain thoughts of miserliness.
They will pay homage to it, bow before it, and [only] then consider departing again [for their own abodes].
(1) the total consummation of the earth element,
“He then thought of his mother and father from his previous life as a young nāga.
Śākyamuni, the most illustrious of great sages, now beautifies all places.”
Those great leaders’ minds never waver, As they give away their hands, their feet, their head, and their kingdom. {18}
for those of the Yama world, as a being of the Yama world, and so forth.
Thus they stay clear of those who live in inappropriate places, those who rely on and cultivate the spells of the Lokāyatas, and those who cherish gain, honor, worship, and veneration.
the dispenser of generosity is without defining characteristics,
Without praising themselves or blaming others, their discipline is excellent.
“Some hold up their hand outstretched; Others keep their hair in a braided knot.
And concealing their flaws, The foolish ones departed. {39}
“In the past their practice
But friends, I would be acting without gratitude, and it would be inappropriate, if I were not now to achieve unexcelled, perfect, and complete awakening.”
“They replied, ‘Noble one, our young nāga
it is not past, future, or present.
Comprehending the sameness of all phenomena they gain an exact understanding of the way all phenomena are characterized by illusion.
and others, who are numerous as the sands of the river Ganges, pervade their own buddha realms with the power of their speech
“Blessed One, this marvelous doctrine of the bodhisattva great beings is not to be found among the śrāvakas and solitary buddhas; how wonderful!”
have lauded Tathāgata Śākyamuni’s teaching of the Dharma, and have rejoiced in this Dharma teaching.
“I have taught the good qualities that there are And described hundreds of faults.
for the rains, like water;
They know perfectly emancipation from the three realms.
for it leads one to be conceived in the womb, to be born, to manifest in the world, to undergo austerities,
this refrain should be applied also to the transcendent perfection of generosity, and it should also be applied to the other transcendent perfections, up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
The lord then said:
In the world system called Perfect Light abides the Tathāgata called He Who Looks at All Beings with Love.
They do not preoccupy themselves with the talk of aggressive conflict.
doing so many times.
What are the virtues and benefits you saw in leaving the world?’
It involves tumult
Similarly, the emptiness of feelings does not generate feelings.
Likewise, from their initial engendering of the mind of awakening until they reside upon the seat of awakening, the virtuous qualities of the moon-like bodhisattvas increase and expand with every passing day until reaching complete fullness when they reside upon the seat of awakening.
When his flesh has wasted away, His mind will become yet clearer.
in order to accomplish the store of wisdom, he does not destroy the compounded.
In this way the temple that delighted the Bodhisattva was completely perfect and finely constructed both inside and outside.
This is why, Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom
Yamarāja wondered,
“Throughout time they will be Unsurpassable in merit
the four great kings, with the gods of their realm;
Many buddhas had dwelt there.
However, because there is an ultimate, the bodhisattvas are known as experts on the ultimate.
Whatever beings there are in this world realm: Humans, devas, asuras, and guhyakas, Hell beings, pretas, and those born as animals.
then this supreme Great Vehicle would not overpower and attain emancipation from the world with its gods, humans, and antigods.
He has the blossomed flowers of the secondary signs of a great being.
These buddha emanations go To thousands of millions of realms. {230}
Upon seeing them, he felt faith and thought,
and some were being melted down in boiling vats. When they saw two boiling iron vats standing there empty, they asked,
the same is the case with the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind. Name and form are not the bodhisattva, and hence name and form cannot receive any prophecy.
After this tathāgata passed into parinirvāṇa, his sacred Dharma endured for a thousand years.
May simultaneously sing their songs, but they Cannot equal a hundredth of the Buddha’s voice. {36}
the śrāvakas of the tathāgatas, and all sublime beings are all without defect.
And the thoughts that arise in those beings’ minds, But the sūtras constantly taught by such people cannot be counted. {21}
“Blessed One, have all sentient beings of that realm attained the state of irreversible progress?”
Noble son, bodhisattvas possessing ten qualities abide within the absence of marks.
Then there will be benefit for many beings, happiness for many beings, compassion for the world, and welfare, benefit, and happiness for a great multitude of beings, devas, and humans.’
Solely devoted to the four joys,
All business and shopping comes to an end; Even those in the bars stop drinking.
We prostrate to you, who are completely at peace. “
From the left side, Anivartin said:
In this way, Su­bhūti, do great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
Filled with precious jewels Both human and divine. {47}
Let me succeed in attracting such and such a person!
On the other hand,
an unsurpassable guide who tamed beings, a teacher of devas and humans, a buddha, and a bhagavān.
They will turn the wheel of the sacred doctrine that is neither fettered nor liberated.
Delight in patience and always delight in kindness, And know that all phenomena are empty. {83}
Four of them, Krakucchanda and the others, have already appeared
I was dedicated to fulfilling the six perfections.
Reverend Ānanda, the body of the Tathāgata is tough as a diamond,
in order to serve him, venerate him, honor him, make offerings to him, praise him, and respect him.
is said to be like the person in this analogy.
“ ‘Then all the great kings returned to their own cities and made preparations with many horse-drawn chariots.
Than a man spending his entire youth Without bringing enjoyment to women.
“O Kauśika, venerable, perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone ones are not requested to turn the wheel of Dharma the way you requested it.”
Even the names of the supports for miraculous ability do not exist internally, nor do they exist externally, and nor do they abide between these two.
Untainted by worldly qualities, you roam the three worlds.
He will be venerated, revered, and worshipped by kings and ministers.
Attracted to cyclic existence, they are bound by the chains of existence and so they continue appropriating further existence.
arhatship, individual enlightenment, and unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment
“They believe that they become pure by reciting oṃ, vaṣaṭ, svadhā, svāhā, the benedictions, collected praises, or invocations; by repeating mantras or dhāraṇīs; or by practicing meditation.
When they have practiced the way of enlightenment Then
That which has no ultimate reality is a false and deceptive phenomenon.
This is exactly the kind of dangerous path the wise say must be rejected.” Knowing this, they spoke in verse:
Having incanted a peacock’s feather with 108 recitations of one’s personal mantra, one should brush the place affected by a bad disease or sickness.
In each of King Śuddhodana’s lotus ponds and reservoirs, there appeared lotuses the size of cartwheels, each with many trillions of petals.
Like the king of mountains he was immutable, confident, unconfused, and untroubled. Since he had totally abandoned, all by himself, all disturbing emotions through his well-established intelligence and wisdom,
His clothes are saffron colored and his actions so peaceful;
dancing, music, garlands, perfumes, jewelry, cosmetics,
Oṁ, svāhā to Kurukullā!
Thus when they experience feelings that are pleasant, painful or neither pleasant nor painful,
the bodhisattva mahāsattvas were overjoyed and filled with happiness.
“Like the guides in other worlds I have the knowledge of it
Venerable Lord! This transcendent perfection of wisdom is the unappraisable transcendent perfection, the innumerable transcendent perfection, and the transcendent perfection that is equal to the unequaled.
he saw that
who desires beauty should cultivate patience;
“ ‘This my flesh and blood that I bestowed Upon the bhikṣu who was afflicted by illness
Yet they are without animosity toward one another;
When he attains enlightenment, the ornaments of all virtues will appear in his buddhafield.
‘The youth installed in the palace will either become king of the world, with his reign extending over the four directions,
His sides are rounded, (47) well proportioned, and (48) straight.
By the gift of sweeping, one will be free of dirt.
He has the power that comes from knowing the cause and result of all actions in the past, present, and the future. Therefore
Māra, the evil one, told them: “I am not aware of anyone in the animate or inanimate world Who can change what has been done by the Buddha’s power.
Similarly, owing to the fact that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are emptiness,
“Mañjuśrī, is there, then, never any mind that is liberated at all?”
Thus, having taken seven steps,
“The rejoicing devas sent down A great rain of sandalwood powder,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words. What are the four kinds of words?
establishing the virtues of all buddhafields in one’s own buddhafield;
The five monks prostrated to the Thus-Gone One with their heads at his feet and then sat down before him.
Would that one might not, having heard this, be pained with sorrow, or become shriveled and withered!
“When my son was born, the world was lit as if by the rising sun, so I shall name this prince Udayana (Rising).”
it is because those great bodhisattva beings should not train in anything except emptiness, signlessness, and aspirationlessness.
Su­bhūti, although great bodhisattva beings practice the sacred doctrine and its profundities,
Through their speaking words of wisdom Millions of beings attain the sight of the supreme Dharma.
Gods and humans beheld this, and none of them Felt any resentment or ill will toward one another.
Whatsoever who can harm them.
They should praise and rejoice in others who enter into the maturity of the bodhisattvas.
who was seated in the midst of hundreds of monks, teaching.
Reverend Maudgalyāyana, where there are no presumptuous words, there is no teacher of the Dharma,
Then the Bodhisattva wondered, “What is the prerequisite for clinging to occur?
cannot be shown, has no appearance, is unimpeded,
and he emitted great rivers from all his pores.
There is no other nirvāṇa Than omniscience—strive to attain it!
Arisen from the seed syllable paṁ,
Their hearts were withered by sorrow. Look upon them with your compassionate eyes! {xxvi}
You are freed from the suffering of saṃsāra, But you have still not attained nirvāṇa.
Unequaled, they surpassed all measure.
What then about old age, sickness, and death, which always occur together? Well then! Turn around—I will think about how to be liberated from this state.”
consummate,
(4) perception of unattractiveness,
Similarly, the emptiness of feelings, the emptiness of perceptions, the emptiness of formative predispositions, and the emptiness of consciousness are indivisible with this emptiness of the bodhisattvas and they cannot be bisected.
Monks, seeing the world ablaze with birth, old age, sickness, death, anguish, lamentation, suffering, discontent, and strife, the Thus-Gone One next uttered this meaningful verse:
The man replied,
These qualities can also be characterized as their signs, [marks, qualities, or benefits.]”
Śāradvatī­putra, since great bodhisattva beings apprehend no sentient beings
I was at that time Dṛdhadatta, the world-renowned Ruler over the descendants of Manu. {54}
His vases full of auspicious items fell into a hole.
‘Oṁ, summon, summon! Bewilder, bewilder! Enthrall such and such, enthrall! Svāhā!’
“Śāradvatī­putra, just as when someone perceives the moon reflected in water, but does not become fixated on the notion that these reflections are actually the moon,
“Visualize it like a silver viper, Swift, free, and clear—without vagueness.
The syllable hūṁ at the heart
in the same way in the north,
and therefore there is no such object to perceive.
and a lamp for the blind;
They become vessels for virtuous qualities and will for long enjoy success, benefit, and happiness.”
Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta had guided all of them toward the highest, complete enlightenment.
“They who are skilled in bodhisattva conduct Are not on the level of other beings, Of śrāvakas, or of pratyekabuddhas.
Stainless and of infinite glory, The Bodhisattva becomes a mendicant of his own will.
In this way, Su­bhūti, do great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, acquire the transcendent perfection of perseverance.
We will purify all this, As far as the ocean, Shaking Mount Sumeru And overturning the earth!
Their complexions become poor and pale.
“(1) One should not have sexual enjoyment even in thought, not to mention joining together the two sexual organs.
maintaining the five acquisitive psycho-physical aggregates which are dreamlike,
The father always thinks of his son who has been missing for fifty years.
I did that kind of work during the day and at night I grasped the feet of his bed.
emerge through false imagination and are conventionally designated,
Venerating, too, the many guides Who dwell in other worlds, The great sages who benefit those realms
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities have a pure livelihood.
Can anyone tell me what has happened?”
adding sugar and clarified butter.
Nor should they abide in the notion that the aggregates, from physical forms up to and including consciousness, are not entities.
in doing so, they do not at all establish them in conditioned elements and they do not at all establish them in unconditioned elements.
Because, young man, this king of samādhis, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena, is the basis and root of the entire Dharma.
they are not afflicted by the suffering of anger,
Monks, it is precisely for this reason that, in order to protect oneself, one who holds the sūtra Destroyer of the Great Trichiliocosm should also hold the Dhāraṇī of the Unblemished Gem.
Therefore, because of the gratitude and appreciation they feel for this Dharma teaching, they have come here to see the Thus-Gone One,
When seized by Kāminī, A child lies sleepless in bed.
Why is it you displayed this smile, O Blessed One?
At the final moon among the six, Recite delightedly for one night And
wept, wailed, lamented, and cried out to each other,
“We will see that country yet, Master, if only for a short while. We will bathe on the banks of the river,
They will hear sweet, melodious song, But the constant ones will have no attachment.
“O fearless Avalokiteśvara, please hearken to the names of Śrī Mahādevī. They are as follows:
Their bile and phlegm, ligaments and bones, and flesh and blood were completely consumed by fire. Nothing was left behind, save a few relics that fell to the ground.
divine princes, their utmost difficulty is that they don the armor that resolves to establish innumerable, countless, and immeasurable hundreds of thousands of sentient beings in final nirvāṇa, while those sentient beings whom they would lead to final nirvāṇa are utterly non-apprehensible.
and likewise, they do not consider whether or not they engage in union with feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness.
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ trust in awakening and the emergence of the thus-gone ones consist in?
Wanting to ask his questions, Bhadrapāla stood to one side.
“Evil one, you are on your own, Like a loser pretending to be a hero.
“It is not difficult for them to obtain kalyāṇamitras. They also see buddhas and śrāvakas.
smear it on one’s penis, and rub it in.
As he arrived, he stopped in midair and sang these verses to the Bodhisattva:
these four bowls and an offering of the main and auxiliary fruits
“Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, the bodhisattva who lives in the inconceivable liberation can pour into a single pore of his skin all the waters of the four great oceans,
We should pursue them in the sense that just as phenomena are not established, nor is the absence of phenomena established.
It is subtle and conforms to what is real and unreal.
It is excellent to see the buddhas, The lords of the worlds, the protectors, The buddhas who in these three realms Liberate beings from their bondage.
he will become free from disease.
This concludes “The Past of Bhaiṣajyarāja,” the twenty-second chapter of the Dharma teaching of “The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.”
Those who are lost and without any qualities of goodness And the many unskillful ones must all feel your compassion.
they do not perceive any true emergence of anger, nor do they perceive any true ceasing of anger.
May I lead beyond suffering all those who have not transcended suffering, and
Since his mind is like the sky, He practiced the all-pervasive concentration.
At that time my prayers were for beings And not for myself nor for my desires.
in the future will attain the highest, supreme enlightenment.
holding a mongoose and a citron,
“There is honey, gruel, and stripped sugar cane.”
Therefore, Maitreya, listen well and carefully, and retain all that I say in your mind.
Those who hear and then possess, study, promulgate, and have their minds completely focused on even one four-line verse of the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display,
it shuddered, shuddered strongly, and shuddered intensely;
without awakening to completely perfect buddhahood, I awaken to unexcelled and completely perfect buddhahood.”
“The king, the lord of humans, Reassured the countless millions of beings:
may reveal such corporeal forms at will, acting on behalf of sentient beings,
Noble ones, all those Dharma teachings were taught by the Tathāgata in order to guide beings.
in this assembly, to hear the sacred doctrine in the presence of Senior Su­bhūti.
so it is with the other transcendent perfections, up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
For the next two or three days he trained them in their appropriate conduct,
like elephants sinking in deep water.
for no element of dharmas is observed apart from consciousness,
“Take, as an analogy, the medicinal butter called ‘great virtue.’
why do you say that the designation of sights does not constitute a bodhisattva
the six aspects of perception,
the real nature of the Tathā­gata is the real nature of the future
This precious gemstone indeed exists among the human beings of Jambu­dvīpa.
“The purification of the great higher cognitions Is an incontrovertible teaching.
There is nothing, even in the slightest, the blessed buddhas do not know,
among all the classes of gods, all the scions of the gods abandon their games of pleasure, delights, and enjoyments.
Such people are blessed by all the buddhas.
We could say the same about the southern direction, the western direction, the northern direction, the direction below, above, or indeed any of the ten directions.
I will not impede their virtuous approach. Indeed, I will rejoice in it.
With this figure as the basic unit of calculation, it is possible to solve the calculation equal to the number of grains of sand in one billion Ganges rivers.
“If you ask what is ‘emptiness as a gateway to liberation,’
Neither I nor anyone else can cure you,
Therefore Śāriputra, sons and daughters of good family should completely dedicate all roots of virtue in a respectful manner to be born in that buddha realm.
their designation as calm or not calm, their designation as void or not void, their designation as afflicted or purified, their designation as arising or ceasing, and their designation as entities or non-entities [do not constitute a bodhisattva]?
Bhagavān, are your beings without strong envy? Are they without greed?
and owing to the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities,
“Noble son, such matters cannot be framed by thought,” replied the Blessed One.
“ ‘I have created the worst bad karma.
Through this, there is no doubt That a yogin will succeed by means of a consort.
They should not dwell, in an apprehending manner, on the notion that ‘As I maintain [the level of] one who has entered the stream, I will become one who will be reborn only seven more times.’
His teeth are perfectly white.
speaking the Dharma is to teach Dharma in accord with the thus-gone ones’ teachings;
And they will not delight in the Dharma of emptiness and peace. {74}
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of unhappiness concerning purification. Those are the four.
He would then attend upon each tathāgata, and the corresponding bodhisattvas and hearers, for as many eons as there are atomic particles in inexpressibly numerous, tens of quintillions of buddhafields.
Will have made an offering to all the buddhas. {138}
Those are the qualities of dedication to mendicancy. {80}
It has no location, because it transcends the scope of the words of those who aspire to the wisdom of buddhahood.
“Noble one, if a hundred thousand quintillion beings were to set out to sea in a ship, sailing to find cowries, gold, jewels, pearls, beryl, conch, crystal, emeralds, coral, white coral, red pearls, and so on,
we would do well were the noble one to teach Dharma to those of us crossing the ocean.
Like a lake, his mind was pure, clear, and pristine.
Holding various jewels and pearls, Came and scattered them for the Guide. {65}
Enjoining him to practice the equally applicable ethical code.
for a person who has killed his mother is one who will not flourish in the Dharma and Vinaya. For that reason,
The earth element functions as the support for the seed.
Monks, for eight winter nights I punished and tormented my body.
At that moment there was not a single being anywhere that felt hostile, frightened, or anxious.
and when they extend their golden right hands and place them upon my head, may I receive a prophecy.
All the buddhas are mind itself.
You should teach it, write it out, read it, explain it, meditate upon it, and make offerings to it.
“At that moment, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti entered into such a concentration that those monks were caused to remember their various former lives,
Without any harm occurring to sentient beings, they let a great fragrant rain fall on the entire trichiliocosm and on Gayā­śīrṣa Hill.
They bowed down, wondering who he was.
Noble son, [F.57.a] this is not the time to hear this great king of sūtras that is like the father and mother of the thus-gone ones and that exhausts all karma.
“Friends, in what form should I enter the womb of a mother?”
For a moment, the great Brahmā offers sight of himself to all the classes of gods.
Those four bodhisattva mahāsattvas now stood before that great gathering of bodhisattvas, that great aggregation of bodhisattvas
Similarly, Su­bhūti, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are neither fettered by nor liberated from their present circumstances.
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, the maturity of a great bodhisattva being also entails those circumstances when bodhisattvas practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom [with regard to the eighteen aspects of emptiness]:
Should project the deities in full And properly perform offerings, and so forth, Like one candle igniting another.
Then, the venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha,
Lumps of red hot iron will be squeezed into their mouths, burning them, destroying their lips and teeth, splitting their palates, burning their throats, and burning their hearts and all their entrails until there is nothing left but bones.
he gave up his body.
Similarly, what will you achieve through the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration? What will you achieve through the transcendent perfection of perseverance?
if a great minister must tame that person, then it is a great minister who will be emanated.
“Scatter jewels on those dharmabhāṇakas; Make offerings to them of divine flowers And all the perfumes of human beings, And cover them with divine clothing.
“Those who understand selflessness all day long, Who are mindful of emptiness as they walk,
Similarly, it should be applied also to all the gateways of meditative stability and to all the gateways of mnemonic incantation.
Whoever worships and venerates it, has it copied, and makes it heard, They, without doing anything else, Will perfectly worship the Buddha,
I shall then satisfy your mind with a teaching.”
They are linked to each other by chains of craving, are full of affliction, and are vile.
Great King, (12) Prince Sarvārthasiddha has markings on his hands that are even, (13) clear, (14) deep, (15) straight, and (16) well arranged.
It is the joy of renunciation of the whole world, of not being fixed in objects, of considering the five aggregates to be like murderers, of considering the elements to be like venomous serpents, and of considering the sense-media to be like an empty town.
As they hold the treasury of the Buddha,
"སེམས་ཅན་དབུལ་པོ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་<tThey dedicate it entirely so that destitute beings may achieve great prosperity.
He should also avoid families That have brides and young women.
When the merchant’s daughter saw the monk Vīradatta, lustful intentions were aroused in her
Monks, the closer the Thus-Gone One came to his five former companions, the more uncomfortable they felt in their seats and wanted to stand up.
"They also liberate beings through skillful means such as maintaining the training, the way of life, the monastic vows, fasting,<tei:note xml:id=""UT22084-061-006-223""/> and the lay pledges."
Nevertheless, since the Buddha has appeared during the time of the five corruptions, he disciplines living beings by acting lowly and humble.
They have bodhisattva conduct. They have the austerity of the disciplines of mendicancy.
In this regard, the expression ‘hairs that grow finely and distinctly, curling to the right’ means
With this mantra, one will destroy the poison of snakes, scorpions, crabs, and the like:
Pervading all the realms of sentient beings, it pervades the entire field of space.
He repeats this a second and a third time.
It does not apprehend hatred and the absence of hatred.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech have the attainment of noble words.
May you fulfill the religious aspirations of all living beings!’
“Bound to craving, the fools are like yaks; They are continually blinded by desire.
If you ask why, Su­bhūti, it is because in a modality that does not arise, going or coming is non-apprehensible.
“You may wonder how bodhisattvas bring terror.
tadyathā: huhu hehe, mati mati, mahā­mati, vajra­mati, dṛḍha­vajra­mati,
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, the essential nature of that transcendent perfection of wisdom is non-apprehensible. If you ask why,
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti, without rising from his couch, magically emanated an incarnated bodhisattva, whose body was of golden color,
Ah! Puṣpacandra, I pray to you. {xxiii}
they will accumulate the causes of all fruitional attributes.
With this view that holds that all selves endure, eager anticipation, pursuit, and excessive attachment will arise.
but are subject to consummation and disintegration, so it is that they perceive the cessation of physical forms.
“Dear boy, please listen. You are very young and have lived a life of leisure, and you do not know what it is to suffer.
And it may be that the oceans dry up.
The monk would return later from his alms round as the nāga was rising from his nap.
“What man would run away when he sees a treasure? You will be exactly like that, ignorant of the treasure, which is love,
Therefore all the buddhas, the blessed ones, in all the realms in the ten directions blessed the earth at that spot of vajra nature so that it would not be destroyed by his steps.
But then they again pretended to be shy.
These are the paths of the ten nonvirtuous actions.
If you ask why, it is because the [other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, never exist and are non-apprehensible. This being the case, how could they possibly come or go?
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who practice the six transcendent perfections accordingly will swiftly perfect the six transcendent perfections and also approach omniscience.
His kneecaps are broad, large, and well-developed.
The Bodhisattva remained sitting cross-legged for six years.
You are very young and have lived a life of leisure, and you do not know what it is to suffer.
The buddhas in the ten directions are my witnesses; My discipline, practice, and the superior branches of awakening are all my witnesses.
“From among all sūtras, This is said to be the supreme sūtra.
That sentient beings are purified has nothing to do with causes and conditions.
feeling is experience; perception is knowledge; pleasure and pain are formative predispositions; and awareness of sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch is consciousness.
These do not apprehend the emptiness of internal phenomena, nor do they apprehend the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities.
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Samantabhadra, leading a following of countless bodhisattva mahāsattvas,
“Young man, at that time and in those days, the goddess of King Jñānabala’s family since ancient times,
If a bodhisattva draws someone into spiritual practice, then both the giver and recipient receive the bodhisattva’s pure benefit.
Old women approached the Bodhisattva and called out to him,
Relying first on hearsay, The knowledge holder should look downward every day.
one billion Heavens Free from Strife,
through their sublime devotion to the Tathāgata perform rituals to him, live with superior intentions, and
In the same vein, they should not dwell on the notion that physical forms are imbued with happiness.
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva mahāsattva who truly sees all phenomena as the teachings of the Buddha will attain purification of karmic obscurations.
The rākṣasīs were no longer afflicted by the suffering of desire, there was no anger in their minds,
Some hold up a staff in their hands,
It also entails the completion of the four assurances by elucidating [the teachings], without making assumptions with respect to oneself and others.
this denotes the true nature of all conditioned and unconditioned phenomena, which is not created by the śrāvakas, not created by the pratyekabuddhas, and not fashioned by the lord buddhas. [Inherent existence is empty of inherent existence] because it does not endure and does not disintegrate. If you ask why, it is because that is its very nature.
The list also includes one type of stone cat’s eye,
When I see you, I am filled with supreme joy;
they have the one characteristic of having no characteristics, they are devoid of attributes,
And are completely skilled, with wondrous attainment in the world.
and who have been attentive to it in the correct manner, and so forth.
Non-cessation is non-division.
Similarly, they neither associate feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness with omniscience, nor do they disassociate them therefrom.
You have heard the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras,
He subsequently teaches them the Dharma, Telling them of the state of nirvāṇa:
‘All phenomena are genuinely beyond any basis and thus baseless.
Bodhisattvas do not aspire due to weariness with the three realms or because of wishing to be free from desire and to gain cessation.
Composed of all kinds of jewels. In order to venerate the Bodhisattva, All realms were well adorned.
Learned, lucid, and intelligent,
How can beings, afflicted as they are by impermanence, Take delight in desirable things like these?”
Now, all these beings are intent on unvirtuous acts and seemingly wish for the great Hell of Incessant Pain.
The one who has attained the samādhi Will know this nature of phenomena. {12}
how should they train [in the other meditative absorptions], up to and including the meditative absorption in the sense field of neither perception nor non-perception?
“It is excellent that you, Great Vajradhara, Secret One, have, for the benefit of sentient beings, requested from me the tantra called The All-Subjugating Vajra.
When their conceptualization has ceased They will see endless buddhas. {154}
They experience pleasure. Their field of conduct is practicing meditation. {18}
Have no concept of desire and no concept of no desire,
Monks, at that time the great river Ganges was swollen and flowed on the same level as its banks.
In this way, they can maintain the notion of always being without any shelter.
in doing so they do become capable of actualizing the noble wisdom vision that is much supreme to the highest human teaching.”
He possessed the Dharma and had appeared because of his perfect prayers in previous lifetimes.
This concludes the Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra on Wisdom at the Hour of Death.
Suppose milk and water have been mixed,
[5] they maintain their practice; [6] they turn away from saṃsāra; [7] they are led to attain nirvāṇa; [8] they live without faults arising;
and will have truly entered the domain of the tathāgatas.
Sitting there, those bodhisattvas said to the Blessed One,
who had grasped the essence of liberation,
Were all living beings free of sickness, the bodhisattva also would be free of sickness.
You excel, O Buddha, with your many qualities.
“This family must be renowned throughout the ten directions and have a vast retinue.
see sentient beings who are intent on killing others they respond with great compassion and think,
respected in all regards, free of all unvirtuous qualities, in possession of all virtuous qualities, and will turn into a support for the entire world.
It is being without ignorance. It is knowledge of the processes of the mind. It is the knowledge that realizes the nature of the mind.
Their senses are not restless or wild. With their senses well trained, they look only as far as the length of a yoke and thus,
The ones who possess this samādhi will see Countless quintillions of buddhas. {37}
“Instructor” if addressing the instructor, or “Reverend” if addressing a monk:
and his characteristic is to be inexhaustible.
neither placed
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, those great bodhisattva beings who wish to fulfil the aspirations of all sentient beings,
Whoever knows his name and family will be guarded, protected, looked after, pardoned, and brought peace and well-being by him.
The deva Maheśvara answered,
“Alas! I had doubts in the past. In the past I cut down an elapatra bush,
“Blessed One, how is the nature of craving?”
Give heed, give heed to me!
I have heard, my Lord, that when you were born, you were brought to the priests who are skilled in making predictions based on examining signs. They prophesied before your father, King Śuddhodana, ‘Your Majesty, your royal line will flourish.’ When King Śuddhodana inquired further,
the teacher to gods and men known as the Blessed Buddha Śākyamuni,’
(9) emptiness of the unlimited,
(2) the branch of enlightenment that entails correct doctrinal analysis,
You should think, ‘I shall develop respect for him just as I should respect the Tathāgata, because this person holds a treasure.’
Such a wheel can only belong to a king who has been properly consecrated by sprinkling his head. On the fifteenth day of the lunar month, while observing a poṣadha fast, the king will first wash his head and then go to the top terrace of the palace, surrounded by the women of the female quarters.
This is covetousness.
“Therefore, young man, understand this teaching in the following way.
nor the attributes free from desire,
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is free from desires.”
“Have your parents given you their permission?” asked the monk.
Cāturmahārājika,
he bodhisattvas with mindfulness and dhyāna Who are constantly reciting the scriptures And teaching the Dharma in the assemblies.
“That is the nature of the emergence Of the buddhas, of the lords of worlds.
“Divine son, ultimately all phenomena are utterly unseen.
Crowds of yakṣas, nāgas, and gandharvas Will constantly be honoring them. Male and female piśācas will honor them, Revere them, and make offerings to them.
A mind that is of the nature of the field of phenomena Must be brought forth through mind itself.
“However many words are spoken Whether superior, middling, or lesser,
“Within that space there are numerous mountains: Cakravāla, Meru, and Sumeru, Mucilinda and Mahāmucilinda, Vindhya, Gṛdhrakūṭa, and Himavat. {4}
Just upon seeing him, and witnessing the Blessed One’s conduct, I attained that conduct as well, and realized the fact that all phenomena are inherently unborn.
Space functions by not obstructing.
circumambulated the Blessed One three times and disappeared.
It is this, the Noble Ones’ Eightfold Path,
in the same way, Su­bhūti, this supreme vehicle, the Great Vehicle, too, accommodates countless, innumerable, and limitless sentient beings.
Thus, neither to transcend nor to be involved, neither to go nor to stop—
Ānanda, it was by means of those ten qualities that I quickly realized supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
If it is fully outfitted, it is a monastery, but if it lacks all the trappings, it is poor.”
One should then smear the ends of two sticks,
So too, in order to protect me, Please, now grant it to me, O Khavajra.
The real nature is non-existent and non-apprehensible.
“They overcome their opponents. They defeat the tīrthikas.
With their pure, clear, and unsullied wisdom, bodhisattvas observe the realms of sentient beings:
those beings will then pass away from the hells and be reborn equal in fortune to human beings.
Through intensive practice like this,
and similarly, the more they wish to teach and grant instruction in the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four assurances, the four unhindered discernments, great loving kindness, great compassion, and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas,
These are physical misdeeds,
By correctly disregarding that reason, I have found happiness and abide therein.
All of you! Wait a while
If you ask why, it is because they do not consider the nature of fundamental ignorance.
When Māyādevī arrived at the Lumbinī Grove, she stepped down from her fine chariot.
five types of actions, three types of actions,
They notice such beings who do not deprecate noble ones and who, based on their correct perceptions, commit themselves to acts and qualities that pertain to correct view.
Wherever this Dharma discourse on absorption is being propounded, we will cross as many world systems as there are grains of sand in the river Ganges in order to hear it, and we are even ready to die for the sake of hearing this teaching.” 
an ascetic since he had perfectly transcended all attachment,
beautiful peacocks, brahminy ducks, and delightful mynas;
“Mañjuśrī, if, on the ultimate level, without basing yourself on any phenomena, you teach without teaching,
At this sight, Mahauṣadhi felt faith, and asked the Blessed One,
And the many millions of deities in the middle of the sky Showed great veneration to the supreme being. {33}
showing how he manifested as a bodhisattva and destroyed the legions of Māra.
Look at these beautiful trees with fresh leaves and blooming flowers; They resound with the cries of pheasants, cuckoo birds, and the humming of bees.
The single chamber is the one-pointedness of mind.
And the thought that liberation is a place you can go to,
“Well then, why did you rob the merchants?” “We have no other means of making a living, Your Majesty.”
Today, bestow this one favor on me: I pray that you arise, shining like the sun. {ix}
went to the main temple,
This would be repeated a second and a third time. The monk’s petition.
Having understood this, they bring forth a steadfast attitude of compassion and diligently strive and endeavor for the sake of sentient beings.
The young brahmins then went off to collect wood for use in fire pūjas.
may the person named such-and-such be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon!
“Good, Mañjuśrī, that is good!
He then entered the temple in order to be alone.
After applying sulphur powder to a heated cow bone, a flame will blaze up.
He replied, “This is owing to non-fixation upon all things!”
‘I have awoken from the indolent drowsiness and obscured dullness that for so long seized me in the world. Now is the time to wake up others!’
the minds of the monks, with no further appropriation, were liberated from defilement.
who wish to become a lamp for sentient beings who are immersed in the darkness of fundamental ignorance,
“ ‘I had no pain when I cut my flesh. When the blood flowed I did not become dizzy.
“Inseparable from emptiness and compassion,
“Then Bodhisattva Gaganagañja asked Bhagavat Viśvabhū,
“Then another person asks That man this question: ‘Do you have some of the sandalwood That you have been praising?’ {25}
“Friend, this house is ill-omened, don’t go in.
At precisely that time, she should say the following words, Which bring on an intensification of pleasure:
Dharma, material things, Love, and fearlessness— You must always practice this four-fold generosity. “If you possess nothing, be generous through acts of meditation.
“They do not seek reputation, fame, or gain.
They will know that this one will be reborn among the gods of the Catur­mahā­rāja­kāyika realm,
“Those who engage in union with the transcendent perfection of wisdom through the [aforementioned aspects of] emptiness
I do not depart from Vulture Peak, And yet I have millions of other seats.
Their mouth is not too wide.
May you grant all beings happiness, rebirth in the higher realms, and peace!”
Sewing it into the hem of his upper robe,
“They never objectify the mind at all, And are without conceptualization or pride;
They will wander in that way for three eons. When they die and leave the hells, they will be reborn in Jambudvīpa as poor people, blind from birth.
“They will have Māra’s thoughts and will be beings in darkness. They will be under the power of desire and have strong attachment.
“Who made the offering to you, best of men? For whom has vast merit been created?
“ ‘There is understanding of the mind, the knowledge of words, Being established in definitions, with certainty of meanings,
Considering them to be their teachers, they will follow them and stay with them.
the bodhisattvas and bhikṣus
‘In accordance with the aspirations blessed by the thus-gone ones, through this offering of medicine may I cause all beings to perfect the well-being of the ambrosia by which which all beings are freed from old age and death!’
The prince should now worship in the temple.”
The purity of your wisdom is unstained by the three existences. Lord of men, you have the wealth of qualities, precious qualities.
nor are they taught by the śrāvakas.
Upatiṣya and Kolita then approached the Blessed One,
“Young man, in that way King Śrīghoṣa made offerings to the stūpas that contained the relics of the Tathāgata.
“There are no other beings Present in the worlds To whom this Dharma is taught And who know this teaching. {7}
Consider, noble son, the analogy of fire that ripens crops, herbs, and trees.
He practiced severe austerities for six years,
“Noble son, the thus-gone ones are firmly established in their accomplishment.
and lion thrones that were five hundred yojanas in height were also manifested.
and I too am stricken with painful suffering.
but instead benefit no sentient beings through this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom and fail to encourage sentient beings to acquire [the attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience,
Doing what is needed, they perfect their training.
“Nārāyaṇa, imagine that as many beings as there are in as many universes as there are grains of sand in the Ganges were brought together, and each of them had as much merit as a wheel-bearing monarch.
For that, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas should have perfectly pure conduct.
In that way, Great King, it is a great occasion for someone to be cared for by a kalyāṇamitra and guided to see a tathāgata.
Bodhisattvas, similarly, provide all beings with generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, concentration, insight, and other such provisions for awakening, as well as with any sort of article that beings may require.
I am also fond of the truth; I, too, cherish it, like it, and enjoy it. Therefore,
“He had eight hundred students, And he ripened all of them.
and she gives generously.
No one abides in, or regresses from, enlightenment.
So in this way, people are born into the world through ignorance and the rest.
We have carried out the teaching of the Jina.
The Blessed One is endowed with broad heels.
and likewise, the four meditative concentrations, the four immeasurable aspirations, the four formless meditative absorptions,
King Viveśacintin came with eight hundred million people into the presence of the Tathāgata.
(9) considering all elements to be present in whiteness,
extended his right hand as a farewell greeting.
It is groundless, and cannot be comprehended. There is no end to its description.
Venerable Lord! Why is the purity of physical forms due to the purity of the self?
what is the skill in means that enables great bodhisattva beings who have heard this teaching on the transcendent perfection of wisdom not to be afraid and not to be terrified?
[9] they attain samādhi; and [10] they will never be poor.
for whom space was equal to the palm of his hand,
“When someone has been taught this samādhi, In which all the teachers reside,
Giving up a world realm of a billion worlds with its forests, oceans, mountains, rivers, lakes, ponds, wells, and parks is not comparable.
“These men took the life of an arhat,” said the monks.
The Bodhisattva, who is like the great Brahmā, proceeds to the seat of awakening with the desire to awaken to unexcelled, perfect, and complete buddhahood in order to tame the armies of Māra.
for a hundred and eighty thousand million years and I built ten million monasteries made of sandalwood and precious materials.
(2) the power of perseverance,
At that time he remembered the Dharma of the many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of buddhas, and the prayer that he had made in the past.
It seems insubstantial and still it fulfills its particular function in relation to forests, houses, palaces, the central mountain, and the seas.
and do not depend on others for the transcendent perfection of generosity, or for the other transcendent perfections, up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom, and similarly for [the attributes and attainments], up to and including unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, then,
all three of them in their minds recited these verses:
At its door there is an immortal man who never ages.
of the store of knowledge which is consummated in the ability to teach the Dharma according to the thoughts and actions of all living beings;
When he said the letter jha, out came the statement: ‘Vanquishing the forces of the god of love (jhaṣa­dhvaja­bala­nigrahaṇa).’
without speech.
Not to speak of just giving them a great cart, he gave each one a cart with the same colors.
(8) recollection of respiration,
“Offer an alms bowl to the Bliss-Gone One! You will become a vessel of the Supreme Vehicle.
will also attain individual enlightenment, manifestly perfect buddhahood, dependent on this same transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Then, those living beings who aspire to inferior ways may gain the intelligence to aspire to the great Dharma of the Buddha, and
because their conduct and personal associations are excellent, they avoid any personal associations that are in discord with the way of a spiritual practitioner.
It involves reference points
“Consider, noble son, the way a lotus emerges from the water and yet it is not stuck there.
Their inharmonious perception Gives rise to a mind that is gross. {14}
or where an immoral king rules, that king will not worship this Dharma teaching.
so they refine the buddhafields and also bring sentient beings to maturity.
Therefore, Su­bhūti, there is no virtuous attribute at all which should not be perfected by great bodhisattva beings,
Su­bhūti, it is because they should not be attentive to mental images even of the roots of virtue possessed by the tathāgatas and the community of śrāvakas of the tathāgatas.
whenever they do not engage with the notions that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are void or that they are not void.
abandoned and let go of my spouse,
I should bring sentient beings to maturity in this manner,
With 400,000 homa offerings of five types of grain smeared with ghee,
Perfect Buddha, please turn the supreme wheel.
On the relative level, the perfection of knowledge is a gateway to nirvāṇa.
“Blessed One, the quantity of merit made through the gift does not match even one hundredth of the amount of merit made by Great Brahmā in engendering such love. Indeed it bears no comparison.” 
Holding that disenchantment in mind and having attained tranquility, they disapprove of all phenomena,
The parks are adorned with groves of jeweled trees that are arranged like chessboards and surrounded by jewel platforms.
‘Bhikṣus, when I have passed into nirvāṇa,
Many kinds of beings are experiencing in this fire Great sufferings, one after the other.
The Blessed One said to the bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha,
The knowledge is wisdom—so it is said.
become wise in asking questions about the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha, become wise in seeking the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha,
You are very young and have lived a life of leisure and do not know what it is to suffer.
and similarly, the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas are present in the world.
It is so because [duality] arises erroneously.
and began to confer with one another:
Life, however, ends in death.
“ ‘The bodies of the Victor fill the entire realm of phenomena And are present in all infinite realms.
They listen extensively to the vast discourses that are to be worshiped and venerated,
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the sensory element of the body, the sensory element of tangibles, and the sensory element of tactile consciousness constitute a bodhisattva?”
Devas, nāgas, and asuras with great miraculous powers, Yakṣas, rākṣasas, humans, and kiṃnaras
It is blue, or is colored blue, or is like blue, or shines with blue light;
And irreversible bodhisattvas who are here.
In doing so, he causes his own death.
Consider the analogy of the king of medicinal trees known as Excellent to Behold.
The body of the Victor is like a golden mountain,
or her caress By a mere remembrance of her When she is far away,
And likewise, right now in the present,
In the same vein, they will teach in an apprehending manner that [all the other causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, are so
This is a hero’s method That brings these sentient beings to maturity.
it is because anything that enhances or diminishes physical forms,
Such types of eloquence are, moreover, neither lacking in terms of meaning, words, proofs, nor timeliness.
A distinction is perceived between wisdom and means. “Death is said to be the dharmakāya;
noble son, I cannot calculate the accumulation of merit that comes from repeating the six-syllable mahāvidyā once.
It is a statement that is in accord with the intrinsic nature.
in an eon named Priyadarśana, in a world named Vairocana­raśmi­prati­maṇḍitā, there appeared in that world the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha, the one with perfect wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the one who knows the world’s beings, the unsurpassable guide who tamed beings, the teacher of devas and humans, the buddha, the bhagavān named Jala­dhara­garjita­ghoṣa­susvarana­kṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña­.
Sons of noble family, [the infantile do not recognize that] one who genuinely takes up the pledges and the training commitments of body, speech, and mind is endowed with many qualities and great roots of virtue.”
Similarly, Su­bhūti, this supreme vehicle, the Great Vehicle, too, is endowed neither with the level of bright insight,
‘Oṁ, hili hili, phuḥ phuḥ!’
“If you ask what are the ‘four supports for miraculous abilities,’
” He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of the dimensions of all things!”
and unable to look others in the face while begging.
and they had the postures of the tathāgatas.
“Master, please listen.
and also those who followed the Pratyeka­buddha­yāna, all thought,
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of reasoning concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of reasoning concerning teaching the composite,
And, lest those living beings of the Sahā world become jealous of you, change your bodies to hide your beauty.
The bodhisattva Śrīkūṭa declared,
“why did that blessed, thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha emit this beam of light?”
The physician Kumārabhṛta went to see the Blessed One
Through making that offering, he guided countless hundred thousands of quintillions of śrāvakas.
The gods from the desire and form realms then offered to the Thus-Gone One eight million four hundred thousand lion thrones,
The nāgas discussed the matter amongst themselves
Withdrawal of the senses is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads one to meditate on the path.
A person ordained today trains in the very same training that a monk ordained for one hundred years trains in.
The lord buddhas have a tongue that is slender and large.
You should long for and attain the wisdom of the buddhas, Who possess all the qualities of omniscience. {12}
“ ‘It is the seat of paranormal perception, because it has the six superknowledges.
the emptiness of external phenomena is revealed therein, and in the same vein,
They are all of them seen in The supreme buddha realms. {81}
Venerable [monk’s name], is this begging bowl too small, too large, or too pale?”
Bhagavat, I have perceived a great, wonderful marvel.
What point is there in my having a long life that is devoted to bad actions, deprived of the sight of Avalokiteśvara, blind, and following a path of darkness?
This I promise you. I shall give you these three yānas.
(3) perseverance, (4) delight, (5) mental and physical refinement, (6) meditative stability, and (7) equanimity.
He descends from a pure line of monarchs,
Bodhisattvas remain unmovable from that seat and that is why they are known as adopting the single seat.
Likewise he had perfected each and every quality of awakening: the applications of mindfulness, the thorough relinquishments, the bases of miraculous power, the faculties, the powers, the branches of awakening, and the path.
those who are of feeble perseverance,
As soon as he had attained those purities,
The Thus-Gone One spoke to them with these verses:
It is the elimination of attachment. “It is transcending the existences.
They all belonged solely to the Great Vehicle, longed for the Dharma day and night, and took delight in the Dharma.
“Just as, when a lion is seen amongst foxes,
Supplicating me to explain the stainless and sublime Dharma,
Or the green Tārā,
These fifteen grahas Threaten children.
How should they become equipoised in the meditative stability of signlessness?
Likewise, it applies to the noble truths and, in the same vein, [to all other phenomena], up to and including [the dependent link] of aging and death.
Have compassion, O Protector, for those on the wrong path; They are helpless, since they are not traveling on the path to nirvāṇa!
I possess wisdom!
Those tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas who will appear in the future will also be non-conceptual, and
When a bodhisattva sees that all the afflictions and all the activities of the māras are aids to the attainment of unexcelled and perfect awakening, such a bodhisattva is endowed with skillful means.
After they had departed, Brother Ānanda said to the Bhagavat,
O gods, it is so! It is just as you have said.
“Śāradvatī­putra, the ‘four unhindered discernments’ are merely conceptualized.
clouds that rained down divine fragrant herbs,
“ ‘The wise and learned dharmabhāṇaka, Powerful and renowned in all directions,
What use has he for possessions?”
but wherever she asked, no one had heard any word of him.
Likewise all the mountains that exist in this world of the great trichiliocosm, such as Mount Meru, bowed toward the seat of awakening.
In the same vein, it does not enlarge [all those other attributes], up to and including buddhahood;, nor does it contract them.
There is the meditative stability named Free from Mentation.
Bodhisattvas have a correct understanding regarding the unfounded superimpositions and negations made with respect to phenomena.
“In an enduring body In billions of realms I teach the Dharma to beings For countless millions of eons.
They are: [1] they reject that which should not be done; [2] they engage in that which should be done; [3] they follow the Dharma of a worthy person;
Chapter 21.
This will arrest the semen.
So it is, Su­bhūti, that great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
Sounds did not resonate in their ears.
the seed does not think, ‘I form the sprout.’
The Bhagavān said to those four bodhisattva mahāsattvas who were the principal figures among that great gathering of bodhisattvas, that great aggregation of bodhisattvas,
In the cardinal directions:
When the monks asked the Blessed One, “Who was this being? A god, a nāga, a yakṣa?”
the Bodhisattva at this point manifested four Dharma gates in order to mature his retinue of consorts, just as all previous bodhisattvas in their last existence had done.
and similarly, those who wish to comprehend [the other sense organs], up to and including the mental faculty;
One should grind doob grass with turmeric and apply it.
“Son of noble family, what is the difference between the qualities of ordinary beings and the qualities of buddhas?
It was a time of false views. It was a time of wrong views.
His lattices of jewels and pearls became silent, fell apart, tore, and fell down.
As much incense, garlands, parasols, Clothing, and powders as there are. {57}
that bhagavat told the deity Maheśvara,
Therefore, Bhagavān, we have been satisfied by the attainment of nirvāṇa.
do not conceive of anything that is conditioned, unconditioned, mundane, supramundane, contaminated, or uncontaminated.
‘You said to us in the house, “I will give you three kinds of carts.”
Child of enlightened heritage, you should reject those attentions!
What are those ten? They are being undaunted; being unperturbed; never giving up; proclaiming the lion’s roar; fearlessness; roaming through the forests; resting in hillside caves; being free from bringing anything along; conquering the hordes of demons through their diligence, strengths, and powers; and protecting the crops of virtue.
‘This wisdom is preeminent and marvelous. These beings are unwise and blinded by ignorance.’ {114}
“Saṅgharakṣita,” replied the Blessed One, “those being themselves performed the actions
Abiding on their own level,
who is deep like the vast ocean;
Their confidence will be eternal Through their possessing this state of peace. {4}
When practicing generosity by offering lamps,
And how is the vinaya of the bodhisattva great beings?”
It would take delight in those offerings.
one may still develop a one-pointed mind, and the thus-gone ones will then arrive before oneself at the time of death.”
May I complete the perfection of patience.
Smiling, the arhat elder gained faith in the Blessed One
“Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who are irreversible become absorbed at will in the first meditative concentration,
They will smell the scents of different flowers, namely, the scents of royal jasmine, jasmine, magnolias, and bignonia flowers.
the boundless light of exalted wisdom will arise.
Noble son, the goddess A­martyā possesses great and miraculous powers.
ask the Blessed One about the most profound subjects within his purview.
At that time, no less than five hundred people Became holders of the samādhi.
And I prophesy that they will be reborn in Sukhāvatī.
‘Even those who are used to speaking harsh words find such words unpleasant; they do not want to hear them, do not like them, and do not enjoy them.
It is so because all things are non-apprehensible.
All the yakṣas from above and below,
Young man, if bodhisattva mahāsattvas have that one quality
Beloved and adored by many beings.
will become learned in the teaching of the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha.
They previously embarked on unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, but instead they remained as śrāvakas.
In the same vein, if they have conviction, [without apprehending anything,] in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, they will have conviction in [all those other attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience.”
Then the one who has more to accomplish can go on to the great island of jewels.
Śāradvatī­putra, in the same way, great bodhisattva beings discern that this very body, from the soles of the feet upwards and from the hair and the head downwards, is full of manifold impurities.
And hurled upon them a rain of bricks and stones That killed the king’s brother and his army. {23}
It is praised by the wise,
Each person thinking, ‘The Jina is speaking to me.’ For what reason did you smile? {87}
Within that pore named Indrarāja there are eighty thousand mountains made of divine gold and jewels.
engagements with the absence of a sentient being, a life force, an individual, a person, an agent and a sensor, and a knower and a seer;
With substances such as poison, Produce the form that you wish for, Then insert the diagram at the heart center.
His calves are like those of the black antelope, the king of deer.
You should explain them.
“Today he will conquer the hordes of demons and gain immortality!”
he Protector of the World Has turned the wheel that is like An illusion, a mirage, A dream, an echo, or a moon reflected in water.
‘O Ākāśagarbha, your compassion is great indeed! I pray, please bestow good fortune upon me.
let alone by one who respectfully listens to, respectfully reads, respectfully teaches, and respectfully elucidates this Dharma teaching.
Yet they do not indulge in those sensual pleasures and they always practice chastity.
Your wisdom is immense and far-reaching, and you are good at requesting profound teachings.
Then, Bhagavān, the householder sees that his son has developed, and is capable of preserving his wealth;
Those who are called listeners and so forth.
Why not? Because, Ānanda, the thus-gone ones are immeasurable, profound, vast, and difficult to judge.
He has abandoned palaces with their oval windows and terraces, as well as conveyances, And the land adorned with exquisite flowers, with beautiful parks, springs, and ponds. He gave up his limbs, his head, and his eyes, and now he walks to the seat of awakening!
“With a feeling of joy they are giving Various different gifts such as these.
“Then they will proceed to the great hells, where they will be incinerated by an inferno;
not a sign, not a cognition, and not something that can be made known.
The bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha said to the Blessed One, “Wonderful!”
“When not retaliating when hurt by others, they are free from evil.
Just as the lotus, born of mud, is not tainted thereby, So the lotus of the Buddha preserves the realization of voidness.
This concludes the noble Great Vehicle sūtra entitled The Illusory Absorption.
May I learn every single word, And in future times be a keeper of this sūtra.” {63}
And will avoid dance, song, And ornaments, along with merriment,
drinking water, paying reverence to a stūpa in the vicinity of the monastery,
Moreover, gods, the tathāgatas do not enter parinirvāṇa, because there is no parinirvāṇa of the tathāgatas,
‘Prince,’ he replied, ‘how could I go forth if I don’t have a begging bowl or a dharma robe?’“
the four moments and the four sections;
“With a good conscience and a sense of modesty, she observes the Dharma.
“You are not situated in any dharma,
None of the realms of beings will appear. The continuum of cyclic existence will cease. Suffering will be transcended.
wind, by its changing course, diffusiveness, and its being set into motion easily.
and the one who has been freed by the wisdom of equality.
So too, through bhūtakeśa incense, The saffron robed will be healed.
The goddess in the north wields a sword, a noose, a hand drum, and a skull cup.
Su­bhūti, it is in this way that great bodhisattva beings refine the buddhafields.
One is allowed to observe the conduct of adornments and ambrosia.
They should not dwell on the notion that ‘I am one who has entered the stream, possessing the attributes of non-regression.’
“Seized by stinginess towards the novices,
failing to go before spiritual masters; not chanting in a timely way;
The nose is the condition for smell, but the olfactory consciousness has no form.
“That which is taught through verses Is inexpressible and ungraspable.
The kings, seated there, Arrived within the circle of bhūtas.
“Nirvāṇa is profound And it is taught through words,
They will not turn away or reject that dharmabhāṇaka’s teaching.
It does not enhance buddhahood; nor does it diminish it.”
a tathāgata, arhat, perfectly enlightened buddha teaches the Dharma through various accomplishments, causes, reasons, parables, supports, definitions, and skillful methods in this way.
Some said, “The city of Mithilā is extremely beautiful and prosperous. This is the land ruled by King Sumitra,
One evening during his midnight session,
Then the ārya warriors of the Tathāgata battle with Māra.
It neither bestows nor withholds the fruit of entering the stream.
Śāradvatī­putra, it is in this way that unskilled great bodhisattva beings have formerly regressed,
one will gradually, fully, and completely awaken to unsurpassable, complete, and perfect awakening.
“Furthermore, son of noble family, if beings who have heard the name of the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha,
He benefited countless beings, and afterward he passed away into perfect nirvāṇa.
The Bhagavān was dwelling on the Khalatika Mountain, in the abode of the Sage’s hermits,
Lord of the World, it would be difficult to believe That such men as those could be the youth’s sons.
Bhikṣus, the exclusive property of the Saṅgha,
“They are unshakable to adversaries. They have discovered the shallowness of the composite,
“In those many-storied palaces, there are golden stairs beautified by delightful jewels of various kinds.
“Mañjuśrī,” they said,
and their mental actions are without malice.
and similarly, they will not become fixated on [any other phenomena], up to and including [the dependent link] of aging and death.
all of these constitute the third root transgression.
“Bhaiṣajyarāja, the beings who come to that caitya of the Tathāgata in order to pay homage to it, or to see it,
There is no development of phenomena. It is afterward just as it was before. {5}
“He taught through many thousands of causes,
And they have no longing for everything and no longing for nothing. That is the uniqueness of this attainment of samādhi. {vi}
Who are endlessly praised and have an ocean of qualities, With my hands together in homage I go to them for refuge.’ {102}
Once he is surrounded by a group of women,
“Believing in karma and abandoning misguided deeds,
They will have diligence. They will have mindfulness. They will have wisdom.
They are undefiled and liberated. These qualities from attaining samādhi are measureless. {196}
They will experience that kind of suffering in that hell for hundreds of thousands of years.
Victorious One, you took on a physical appearance Of such a kind that would tame the world.
“Young brahmins,” replied the wanderer, “this is how I see it and this is my philosophy:
The rich man, sitting on his lion throne, Becomes overjoyed on seeing his son.
and his right hand is in the boon-granting gesture.
“He knows the way of the path of the transcendent four truths.
Sister, it is likewise when there are meritorious formative factors.
Just as he is now the supreme teacher of my Dharma, so he was for all of them.
I will practice the transcendent perfection of tolerance by any means until such faults arising from the malice of these sentient beings no longer occur and are non-existent, and until all sentient beings, like the gods of the Ābhāsvara realms, invariably maintain loving kindness, treating others as if they were their own parents and siblings.
Anyone whose ears have so much as caught the sound of this Dharma teaching must be endowed with merit, must have acted virtuously, and
how could one possibly apprehend the real nature of physical forms?
To someone who has entered a different maṇḍala.
All of the many kinds of Dharma that have been taught By however many buddhas there have been. {6}
offered these dhāraṇī-mantra words to the Bhagavān:
I never gave the appearance of spirituality in order to obtain food. I was content with whatever I obtained. {151}
then, having transported himself magically into the presence of the Buddha, placing it on the ground. He bowed down at the feet of the Buddha,
Some had ears like goats, demons, elephants, or pigs, or hanging ears.
He saluted Māṭhara and asked,
causes the realization of the vision of the tathāgatas’ wisdom,
Oṁ hrīḥ hūṁ.
it may be possible to count the number of grains of sand in the Ganges River. But
being neither proud in success nor bowed in failure;
the samādhi named Seeing All the Tathāgatas,
They taught the words and meaning of liberation. They had perfectly pure conduct free of kleśas. {38}
like an exalted one,
They neither cause anything to arise, nor do they cause anything to cease.
“Venerable Lord! This transcendent perfection of wisdom is the great transcendent perfection.”
When practicing generosity by offering provisions,
Supreme bodily marks, and the blossoming of qualities,
‘Wake up, friends.
This is not the teaching of the genuinely perfect buddhas!
That are more numerous than sand grains in the Ganges, And there is no interruption in their eloquence. {12}
Shocked and frightened, the members of the caravan thought, “Why have the carriages stopped here on this plain?
The Blessed One is endowed with arms that reach down to his knees when standing, without bending down.
This was the fourth chapter in the “Great Sovereign Tantra of Siddhaikavīra.”
They abandon the practices of calm abiding and special insight.
“I remember six hundred million of those who have the ten strengths,
[The causal and fruitional attributes], from the four applications of mindfulness up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, and
Or is it some mountain god,
they should not dwell, in an apprehending manner, on the [other notions pertaining to the causal attributes], up to and including the notion that ‘I… should cultivate the noble eightfold path.’
“ ‘This samādhi of peace is taught to the meditator For whom liberation is central, and is fulfilled by this teaching.
“Or another woman, as available, Well-endowed with feminine beauty—
Alas, my dear one with spotless teeth, As white as cow’s milk or snow.
Since you understand everyone in the infinite worlds,
and so that I may manifest the gandharva Pañcaśikha’s skill in singing and playing the lute.”
And say only the words ‘I rejoice in this!’ The previous merit would not be a fraction of this accumulation. {115}
A female kāpālika, also a conch worker,
The strength of ten of the kings of the gods in Supreme Emanations is the same as the strength of one god in Mastery Over Others’ Emanations.
Being without attachment, aversion, and ignorance;
the formations of the body are exhalation and inhalation,
neither a conducive way nor not a conducive way;
As soon as the ornaments were placed on the Bodhisattva’s body, the radiance of his body eclipsed their luster.
not to enjoy the wilderness; not knowing moderation with respect to food;
you have crossed the ocean of existence,
In other words, when presented more extensively, the same refrain may also be extrapolated from each of those terms and appended consecutively.
“Śāriputra, all the beings who hear that Dharma from those tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas
What are these sixty-four qualities?
Hundreds of thousands of goddesses sang, danced, and played instruments,
He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of the aspects of calmness!”
Then, one should sit on a comfortable seat and arouse the mind set upon awakening.
The prophecy declares that it is impossible to grasp any phenomena.
The Tathāgata, Mañjuśrī, is not a sign,
When noticing that the man is completely consumed by desire, the bodhisattva will then let the emanated girl die right there in the bed.
Similarly, the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline and the transcendent perfection of generosity are all essenceless.
The person who knows the way is an image for all bodhisattvas, who are experts regarding the path to omniscience, who have experience with the Dharma, and who have personal knowledge of it.
spend the summer indoors,
where he saw monks applying themselves to and abiding in meditation, recitation, yoga, and concentration.
Also, one should know that the Great Vehicle is limitless because space is limitless.
"བདག །བླ་མེད་བྱང་ཆུབ་སངས་རྒྱས་ནས། །སེམས་ཅན་ཀུན་གྱི་ཆོས་ཀྱི་མིག ། <tMay I awaken to unsurpassed buddhahood And cause all beings To purify the eye of Dharma! 
The king himself decorated the chariot, And a thousand gods prepared a divine throne.
“When land and life are threatened,
“Son of noble family,” replied the Blessed Ratnaketu,
knowing the emptiness of the powers,
“When the monk Vīradatta heard these words of reassurance he was overjoyed and happy.
Thus, bodhisattvas are vessels of powerful medicinal plants.
in the same way that a master physician, a healer learned in the field of medicine, appears in the world neither for a single kingdom, nor for a single land or being.
Alternatively one should fasten a lizard’s tail. Then one will be able to retain one’s semen.
It was square in form and had four pillars.
The preceptor then dresses the postulant, checking to ensure he is not asexual,
We, all the disciples and solitary sages, upon hearing this teaching of the Dharma, should utter a cry of regret that would shake this billion-world galactic universe!
They think to themselves, ‘The Blessed One has taught,
nor have they been conditioned by external and internal emptiness, and, in the same vein,
all the great secrets of the Buddha,
bringing darkness and causing swishing sounds as they ran toward the Bodhisattva.
“The wise ones reject doubts And develop accurate views.
The senses fade into space.
and they teach through syllables the sacred doctrine that is without syllables.
(4) the faculty of meditative stability,
“Mañjuśrī, does the utterly unarisen have any divisions?”
“The trillions of demonesses, numerous as the grains of sand in the river Ganges,
They never develop thoughts of hatred or thoughts of delusion.
Similarly, the transcendence of the applications of mindfulness is not the applications of mindfulness,
“Venerable Lord! You, O Lord, also acquired the sacred doctrine that is equal to the unequaled though practicing this transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Who, abiding therein, would teach the sacred doctrine to sentient beings?
Beings as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges will eliminate the kleśas and manifest arhathood.
In the presence of others, he will teach in the form of a brahmin, and in the presence of yet others he may manifest in any other form, including the form of a girl,
Nor were the human maidens overwhelmed by the sight of the beautiful celestial maidens.
and conducted themselves well in their minds. They did not malign the noble ones, had correct views,
having established this even-mindedness,
who travels around, who brings relief to beings, who completely illuminates the world, and who brings comfort.
Ratna­mu­kuṭa
With this view that holds that some selves endure, eager anticipation,
Pay homage to the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Śākyamuni and with my words ask him and his host of bodhisattvas, and host of śrāvakas,
With learning, one is freed of wrong views and engenders the genuine view.
and limitless.
When Śārikā challenged her husband Tiṣya, he vanquished her.
That the brahmin had no confidence to respond was damning and among the reasons he was vanquished.
He did not defecate, urinate, spit, or blow his nose.
Neither will they speak gently, with humor, or in a way that entices others.
and were then to look at that hair and think,
“If you ask, Su­bhūti, how great bodhisattva beings embark sentient beings for the happiness of the worlds,
Thereupon, Mañjuśrī, the crown prince, addressed the Licchavi Vimalakīrti:
“Oh! The Tathāgata has shown this great miraculous sign.
These are called the sense fields of total consummation.
they teach the perfection of diligence,
“Young man, listen to me as I tell you How I practiced for thousands of eons.
Free of trouble, they do not appropriate, and without appropriating, they engage themselves in bringing the defilements to exhaustion.
conditioned elements cannot be designated except in terms of unconditioned elements.
or similarly, do they engage with feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness?
or are those [irreversible bodhisattvas] in their final rebirth stable?”
whenever they do not engage with the notions that physical forms are afflicted or that they are purified.
taking pleasure in skillful dedication;
They teach the Dharma for the attainment of the results of a stream-enterer, a once-returner, and a non-returner, yet they observe neither stream-enterers, nor once-returners, nor non-returners, nor any result of no return.
When anyone abides in this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, as it has been revealed, and offers the gift of the sacred doctrine for only one day, they will generate many merits, greater than those.
or who seek to actualize individual enlightenment,
Without being offensive to anyone, any encounter with them is meaningful and fulfills all wishes.
He is red in color and wears red garlands, red clothes, jewelry, and unguents.
Meaning that all appears as one.
and the novice says: “Preceptor, heed me.
Kauśika, this is the transcendent perfection of wisdom with which great bodhisattva beings are endowed.”
An ūrṇā hair is between your eyebrows, As beautiful and bright as a conch.
He was honored as the warrior among warriors because he cultivated endurance, determination, and fortitude.
Su­bhūti, it is because the natural expression of their future limits, though without entity, is still physical form.
and so that King Śubhavyūha would be sympathetic toward them they together performed miracles that are permitted by the Buddha.
They should praise the four noble truths.
he is the destruction of bliss.
Son of a self-immolator, in this world those ascetics and brahmins who discard this view,
“It is based on the eye and form That the eye consciousness appears.
As the householder was possessed of a natural intelligence, while in the monks’ company he learned how to conduct himself.
Bowing to the Blessed One with palms joined, he said to him,
Rather, bodhisattvas are physically respectful, speak meaningfully, and achieve flexibility.
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection constitutes the unhindered discernments.”
In this sense, Su­bhūti, it should be recognized that the tathāgatas are grateful and thankful.
That is known by those dedicated to renunciation, By those engaged in the Buddha’s teachings. {6}
The whole assembly, while circumambulating the Thus-Gone One,
Completely inspired by the taste of the Dharma, they will be reborn within a lotus
he will appear in the world as the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha, the one with perfect wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the one who knows the world, the unsurpassable guide who tames beings, the teacher of devas and humans, the buddha, the bhagavān named Raśmiprabhāsa.
Translated, edited, and finalized by the Indian scholar Surendrabodhi and the translator-editor Bandé Yeshé Dé.
Recollection of the Buddha is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Ignorant, I was furious and jealous On seeing the joy of that great gathering of my wives. {39}
Those who are to be influenced by something frightening will be shown something frightening,
see those sentient beings who possess the three provisions—provisions that are definitely authentic, provisions that are definitely erroneous, and provisions that are of indefinite provenance
Venerable Lord! What is the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, owing to which this transcendent perfection of wisdom is not at all established as a doctrine to be set in motion or reversed?
They bowed down and said, “Majesty, that command should not be obeyed,” And I became at that time overcome by sadness. {41}
Nāgas are born a natural birth, they die a natural death, they sleep a natural sleep,
it is as follows: Since even those sentient beings who presently assume such [inimical forms] are ultimately non-apprehensible,
and their listeners will, in turn, experience joy, faith, and delight.
As many as there are grains of sand in the Ganges,
He placed his hands together in homage, and to the Bhagavān he expressed these thoughts in verses:
She went off in the eastern direction, but there she met only the Bodhisattva.
To the śrāvakas he taught the Dharma conjoined with the four truths of the āryas, and nirvāṇa as the ultimate goal, as well as the process of dependent origination, in order that they might transcend birth, aging, sickness, death, misery, lamentation, suffering, unhappiness, and distress.
Monks, this was indeed how, during the first station of the night, the Bodhisattva actualized knowledge, removed darkness, and lit the light.
“Cast aside all hesitation And listen to a sūtra such as this.
of soberness of mind, consummated by absence of dislike for ordinary people;
Because the latter give rise to the faults of poisonous reference points, and this must therefore be understood to be a danger on the relative level.”
Her limbs are firm and gently curved like the arch of a rainbow.
wishing, ‘Now I should stay among the gods of the Trāyastriṃśa realm, without descending to Jambu­dvīpa!
Similarly, owing to their utter purity, they do consider the non-arising of [the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path.
I completely released All the fetters of existence Through the power of my knowledge.
Bhaiṣajyarāja, those men or women, those noble men or noble women should be taught in this way:
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of poverty concerning the kleśas,
“How does it not involve transmigration? It does not involve transmigration because the sprout and the seed are different; that which is the sprout is not the seed.
The gods, who were hovering in the sky above, asked the god Dharmacārin, “Dear friend, what is this? Siddhārtha dawdles and keeps looking at the retinue of consorts.
“Eighty-four thousand kṣatriyas, who were like great sal trees, followed in the rear.
Smeared red with blood, They ran around, Seizing and devouring Human corpses.
Therefore all phenomena are unborn.
Similarly, the cultivation of the transcendent perfection of wisdom is the non-cultivation of unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.”
Should have no cherishing for the body And should study well this Dharma.” {42}
Bodhisattvas should be like springs, lakes, pools, and ponds, resolved to make the water of the sublime teachings inexhaustible.
And then heard the words, “Strike! Catch this friend of darkness.”
“How, O lord, would you explain the inverted conduct?”
Some have the heads of humans And the bodies of wild cocks, or asses.
with excellent marital unions in the past,
Like fire and like the blade of a sword.
He does so exclusively for this reason, and never because he is controlled by pride or the wish for wealth, respect, or fame.
and also act for the benefit of sentient beings.
On seeing this, the seers said, “Gentlemen, these ascetic sons of the Śākya are sanitary.”
Brother Ānanda heard from the Bhagavān the prediction of his own attainment of the highest, complete enlightenment. He heard the description of the qualities of his own buddha realm,
Monks, at that time there was a solitary buddha named Mātaṅga who dwelt on Mount Golāṅgula­parivartana in the city of Rājagṛha.
It does not apprehend the world system of form and the world system of formlessness.
other bodhisattvas should know that, alas, for this reason those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage have not been favored by the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, and similarly, by the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, and the transcendent perfection of generosity, and in the same vein, that those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage have not been favored by [all attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience.
Like the rapids of a mountain torrent, they quickly pass and are turbulent.
Because he has the heroic capacity to guide sentient beings, he is called the one who strides with unerring steps.
it is the non-apprehension of any entity, in anything whatsoever.
They have vast love and compassion for them While remaining in joy and equanimity.
They will become weak dogs and jackals, And become playthings for others.
“He follows the ways of the outsiders without ever becoming an outsider.
“The beings who follow that way, And those who depend upon them,
one who is no longer subject to rebirth, one who has attained arhatship, or individual enlightenment, will be reborn in the inferior realms?
“Just as Śakra did to the lord of the demigods, Here I destroyed with the sword of wisdom The deceptive one who, self-obsessed, Was powerful enough to rule over the three realms.
Son of noble family, bodhisattva great beings should not accept anything unless they can imagine giving it away and have an attitude of generosity toward it.
And to see this Lord who has passed into nirvāṇa.
“Therefore, young man, that is what you should understand through this Dharma teaching.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of suffering. What are the four kinds of knowledge of suffering?
They will urinate and defecate in the places the saṅgha uses,
and they do not become fixated on anything at all.
nor does the expanse of reality consider the sensory element of visual consciousness
The Blessed One then addressed Senior Su­bhūti as follows:
Ah! Arise, you who have escaped from the prison of existence. Ah! You have sacred, supreme wisdom and knowledge.
Is the supreme boundary that seals the area, All the way to the ends of the surrounding mountains.
And sees that the mountain is ablaze in glory.
Some are made of diamonds,
Where one understands liberation, yet does not enter final and complete liberation, there is the domain of the bodhisattva.
“When the sage became a buddha, a Dharma king, Who taught the nature of all phenomena,
Seven hundred and sixty million beings— All heard this sūtra. {48}
The removal of poison brings peace in the world
together with a great assembly of twenty-five thousand monks. All of them were arhats who had exhausted their outflows.
Will be free of the entire multitude of concepts, And those wise ones will constantly be in meditation. {92}
Śāriputra, in the presence of twenty hundred thousand quintillion buddhas, that I have ripened you for complete enlightenment.
Thus, you should worry little about such a thing happening in this world.”
“Therefore, young man, when you have received This Dharma teaching of the samādhi,
How, Bhadrapāla, do you think it runs, jumps, dances, or does any other number of things?
“For so long he has venerated parents, monks, priests, spiritual teachers, and worthy ones by putting his head to their feet.
It entails absorption in the four formless meditative absorptions by understanding that the three world systems are non-apprehensible.
But the only liberation in store for this mendicant is to get up and flee.”
Has come in order to listen to this Dharma.
It may be a beautiful sight for beings And a marvel for the world and its devas. {137}
And when a monk perfectly accomplishes it, he too becomes an accomplished adept, sagacious, righteous, and an agent of virtue.
Will be a supreme human Who accomplishes a far greater activity.
Even at the very top of a tree, its seed is not present.
“Noble son, you may wonder about the character of the bodhisattvas’ skill in dedication.
The maṇḍala should be drawn as before.
“Sons of noble family, with roots of virtue that focus upon diligent application, may you acquire the superior intention directed at the Three Jewels.
Su­bhūti, this is the Great Vehicle of great bodhisattva beings, designated as the sameness of the three times.
Who are all awaiting you.
The horses and elephants, even though they were being led along without riders,
and having been incinerated, they will again become sentient denizens of the great hells in other world systems.
“Noble son, from venerability through to their leading into the city of liberation, this is how bodhisattvas are.
Bhikṣus, there are the roots of merit in your beings that I have ripened in the past.
The spirits would not show up inside or even outside those people.
accompanied by eighty-four thousand other beings, they became renunciants, leaving home for homelessness within the teaching of the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Jala­dhara­garjita­ghoṣa­susvarana­kṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña­.
The god asked,
It is exactly as the Blessed One has explained, without explaining.
The mantra should then be placed in the abdomen of a Gaṇapati made of beeswax who is adorned with the double vajra.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind obtain the light rays that are called as bright as flames.
“ ‘The noble saṅgha in Samantabhadra Forest Requested you in many different ways
Khadira and jujube woods should be lit, the ground should be strewn with flower petals,
Bhagavān, why is she so poor in this way?
And were dedicated to the teaching of that Sugata Were not few, but were as numerous as the Ganges sands. {85}
Those who recite that name are rare.
The full extent of the temple-palace represents the Buddha’s abode.
One should eat, as one pleases, their feces.
Rather, they were taught by Māra and they were taught by other heretics!
In the great Avīci hell a wall encloses a ground made of burning iron,
“I shall cleanse myself of whatever bad actions I have done in the past
“Noble lady, though I have done much for this king, he has not taken care of me.
who was worshiped by everyone,
Prostrations to the tathāgata, Buddha Samantabhadra;
In distinction from hearers and solitary buddhas, it proceeds without proceeding.
Su­bhūti, you should know this indeed to be the physical purity, the verbal purity, and the mental purity of those bodhisattvas.
He, the Benefactor, will attain immortality, And bestow absorptions, higher knowledge, immortality, and happiness.
The u vowel diacritic and the rest then gradually dissolve.
A person who is about to die will, by reciting the mantra continuously, live one hundred years.
this lotus was foremost throughout the world in terms of knowledge, yet untainted by the eight worldly concerns.
and cultivate wisdom.
nor is it an object to be actualized,
Bhagavān, childish ordinary beings are neither separate from the teachings of the Buddha, nor have they realized them;
"བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་བདག་ཅག་ཀྱང་འཇམ་དཔལ་གཞོན་ནུར་གྱུར་པ་འདིས་བཤད་པ་གང་<t“Blessed One, we too will abide by what Mañjuśrī­kumāra­bhūta has explained here.”
Prostrations to the tathāgata in the “World without Dust,” Buddha Siṃha;
The oldest son of Kubera
They are inconceivable and immeasurable, vast like space.
What is the nature of feelings, perceptions, and formative predispositions?
It does not pursue gain and honor, nor does it pander to others.
“Also those, whether adults or children, Who in learning, or for their own amusement
His skin is smooth and golden.
It is the comprehension of the entire three realms. It is a raft for crossing to the other shore.
In the same way that a seed emerges from mature trees but not from immature ones, at the time of death consciousness appears from the body.
and worship it in the three periods of the day with offerings of fragrant flowers and so forth.
they will not be those who are seeking for faults in others, they will not speak ill of other bhikṣu dharmabhāṇakas, they will not say unpleasant things about them, they will not state unpleasant things about them.
With one-pointed mind,
and they turned the wheel of the sacred doctrine that is equal to the unequaled.
There will be no decline in their wisdom. {11}
After eating one pill, one can eat poison without it taking any effect.
Great King, (80) Prince Sarvārthasiddha has hair that curls into the forms of the endless knot, the mark of auspiciousness, the mark of eternal happiness, and the mark of prosperity.
Brahmā, master of the world, took five hundred divine parasols and offered them to the Blessed One on his right.
the noble man or woman will be among the company of bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have attained retention.
And why, noble son, is this so? Because the thus-gone ones are the Dharma body.
Is there no imputation of the transcendent perfection of generosity, and of the other transcendent perfections, up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom?
Guide for the entire world, I salute you.
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings teach the sacred doctrine to sentient beings in order that they might abandon their view of self,
The body of the Bodhisattva as he entered the womb of his mother was just this way.
“This is the crown empowerment:
the minds of five hundred monks were freed from defilements without further clinging.
When they witness my lion-like display, they will direct their minds toward unsurpassed and complete awakening.”
On this occasion, they then sang these verses:
So long as I uphold the Lokāyata philosophy, I will not cut my fingernails.
“Son, I can face my own death, but I couldn’t bear watching my son die.”
It is the supreme essence of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
84,000 bodhisattvas gained acceptance that phenomena are nonarising,
Noble son, listen carefully and keep in mind what I will explain to you now.
“The dwelling place of the supreme individuals, The level not that of the many kinds of tīrthika,
Yet many hundreds of gods and humans,
They bowed down their heads to the Bhagavān’s feet, circumambulated him three times,
Then Śakra, mighty lord of the gods, addressed Senior Su­bhūti as follows:
and thus ceased accepting gold and silver.
What, you may ask, are the three?
and returns to his former community of tīrthikas.”
“Listen, venerable [newly ordained monk’s name].
“Due to the absolute purity of what is this purity of phenomena illuminating?” he asked.
the sensory element of the ears, the sensory element of sounds, and the sensory element of auditory consciousness;
“I see some bodhisattvas Who forsake all delight in amusements.
Nārāyaṇa, bodhisattvas should not be intimidated by these four.
Then, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti asked those bodhisattvas,
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designation of the eyes as void or not void constitutes a bodhisattva?”
“Present here are the heart sons of the Jina Who show the greatest bodhisattva miracles.
“Noble son,” replied the Blessed One, “you should know this Dharma teaching as The Jewel Cloud,
When discerning the realm of phenomena to be empty, they are free from evil.
Then, Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, after both the Dharma and the outer form of the Dharma of the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Bhīṣma­garjita­svara­rāja, who had passed into nirvāṇa, had ceased to exist,
The five suffix endings, the palace of knowledge.
The Blessed One then said to the bodhisattva great being noble Avaloki­teśvara,
“Therefore, be agreeable without malice, And always be pleasant to everyone.
Some time later, the meal was laid out and
If anyone opposes that kind of dharmabhāṇaka, someone who upholds this sūtra,
And the length of each of their lives Were to be countless tens of thousands of millions of eons, {22}
Yakṣas and rākṣasas are vanquished By the body of The Great Trichiliocosm.
There is delight in complete peace, emptiness, and the absence of attributes. There is the sound of the lion’s roar, the sound of the compassionate ones. {82}
The body that is empty and selfless,
here are some who might ask that if all those phenomena are neither conjoined nor disjoined
The heart children of the Jina are present here, Gazing at the Jina with hands together in homage. {30}
“ ‘I too, father, had the dream That was sent by the goddess.
Then, Bhagavān, that householder calls that that poor man ‘son,’
You, compassionate one, have appeared here For the sake of all beings.
“You may wonder, noble son, how bodhisattvas remain in the application of mindfulness with respect to the body.
It is not a construct, not a concept, inconceivable, and not a mental placement.
“Noble son, bodhisattvas who wield excellent power possess ten qualities.
you will have to endure suffering as a denizen in the hell realms for a long time to come.”
providing a support for those who have none,
things are not apprehended because [the other attainments], up to and including unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, are non-apprehensible.
“Senior Śāradvatī­putra, physical forms, being empty of inherent existence, are internally without support, and also they are externally without support, and nor do they have any support in between those two.
is one and the same real nature as the real nature of omniscience. They are not two but indivisible.”
“I am the generous giver of the Dharma, the Teacher, The unexcelled Lord of the Dharma.
Noble one, you are an accepter of alms but we are seekers of merit,
bore delicious fragrances, leaves, flowers, and fruits.
“Bhagavān, we confess this offence of ours: we have been always continuously thinking, ‘This is our nirvāṇa,’ or, ‘We have attained nirvāṇa.’
Then there will be benefit for many beings, happiness for many beings, compassion for the world, and welfare, benefit, and happiness for a great multitude of beings, devas, and humans.’
they do not consider anything at all in terms of minorities and majorities.
next imagine that this is also the case with the beings who are present in all the worlds in the ten directions, as far as space extends.
The lord is surrounded by the eight great kings of the yakṣas,
Some tried to lure the Bodhisattva with offers of love.
Practicing supreme, pure, Unique bodhisattva conduct. {2}
The aspect of awakening of complete mindfulness is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“Friends, a bodhisattva is not conceived in his mother’s womb while the moon is waning.
When Gopā and the assembly of consorts awoke,
He emanated flocks of melodious, soft, and beautiful birds of many different shapes and colors,
he is the One Who Never Loses His Liberation.
In that way he adorned the city of Rājagṛha with countless displays
He enters Rājagṛha on his alms round. Like gold, he is of refined nature And bears the thirty-two marks.
likewise the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
intoxicating substances like grain alcohol and its by-products which leave one uninhibited, singing,
The Bodhisattva had come to this great celestial palace where he now addressed all the gods of the Heaven of Joy.
Having incapacitated the effigy with thorns, one should recite the mantra.
the defilement of ignorance,
When Śiva and other gods heard this,
By means of their excellent discipline they will gather the gods and receive the praise of the thus-gone ones.
If the right eye throbs, it announces something bad.
separating them from [the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path, and separating them from emptiness, signlessness, and aspirationlessness,
The pillars and the wall panels are also burning And the yakṣas and pretas are emitting cries.
(2) The Blessed One has feet that are marked with the motif of the wheel.
being impervious to all demons and demonic gods;
Bodhisattvas should be objects of veneration, never apart from the mind of awakening.
“When such an amazing pure being as this appears, Gods and humans acquire a tremendous boon.
Owing to the utter purity of all things, they do not apprehend those who are tied to one more rebirth, those who will not be reborn, and those who have attained arhatship.
With the King of Aṅga slain, Campā fell into Prince Bimbisāra’s hands, at which point he sent a message to King Mahāpadma, saying,
Just like awakening, so also the water element,
“The sick bodhisattva should tell himself:
and similarly, owing to the non-duality of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, consciousness, and [all other attributes], up to and including enlightenment.”
“Mañjuśrī, as you gave this teaching, one hundred proud monks liberated their minds from defilement with no further appropriation.
(3) consciousness, which arises contingent on formative predispositions;
Protect him, the best of men.
They perceived the Bodhisattva, who was in the womb of his mother, in the form of a child who has already taken birth, extending his hand and moving it in various positions.
Similarly, they illuminate the world systems of the other directions, up to and including the intermediate directions, numerous as the sands of the River Ganges.
one part of the potash of barley, one part of the potash of plantain,
As the Bodhisattva spoke these words, Māra, the evil one, felt very uncomfortable and sad.
It is not deliberation,
“Brahmā, did you remove the structure that delighted me in the past when I was a bodhisattva and stayed for ten months in my mother’s womb?”
“If the Blessed One would grant me the opportunity to ask them and hear his answers,
Ānanda, so it is that the sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who wish to honor, wish to venerate, wish to respect, and wish to make offerings in the presence of the tathāgatas with diverse flowers, and so forth, up to and including ribbons and diverse musical sounds,
Su­bhūti, those individuals who follow the vehicle of the bodhisattvas immediately having heard this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, form aspirations toward it,
Also, Su­bhūti, there are great bodhisattva beings who can indeed see with their eyes of flesh across an entire dichiliocosm.
For as long as disease has not struck you and you are not old and gray haired,
and in the same vein, do you think that anything other than [the other sensory elements], up to and including the sensory element of the mental faculty, constitutes a bodhisattva?
that the ripened fruit of that action has made his intellect sharper, finer, and more incisive?”
made of the wood of the aśoka tree.
it is because all things are invariably unactualized.
He would offer them robes, alms-food, bedding, seats, remedies for exhaustion, medicinal herbs, and provisions.
Beings rejoiced and played, and made offerings of food and drink;
You are not tired? You are not exhausted?
It will also chase away ghosts, spirits of the deceased, ghouls, gods, and demons.
The ingestion of the other gathered substances that bestow the result of omniscience.
It is likewise that this body, based on the strength of its merit, shows itself adorned by the affluence and wealth of the household of a head merchant.
“Some beings long for omniscient buddhahood, for the wisdom of buddhahood, for self-arising wisdom, for wisdom without a teacher.
“Bhagavān, what accumulation of good karma has that noble one created such that through that creation of an accumulation of good karma he has attained this excellence?
Although they see all the deaths, transmigrations, and rebirths of all beings so clearly with their divine eye, ultimately they see nothing whatsoever.
nor do they [come or] go.
Very beautiful, they sit there constantly, Like a fire in a great darkness.
The living beings who are disciplined through an immeasurable period of evolution actually perceive a week to be the passing of an eon,
Hooks of light rays shine forth, And immediately they arrive.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ expertise with respect to the vehicles of the hearers and solitary buddhas.
Look upon those innumerable and uncountable bodhisattvas who dwell in the ten directions, in the east, south, west, and north, above, below, and all around, and who are now in the sublime realm of the Heaven of Joy.
“Listen, goddess, lower one of your branches!”
If you are the master of sense pleasures, you should not go to the lower realms;
They did not take their minds and their mental events as “me,” or take them as “mine,” and
Bhagavān, we had no desire for it.
Reverend Mahā­maudgalyāyana, even the expression “to teach the Dharma” is presumptuous,
“Mañjuśrī, the crown prince, is coming here with numerous attendants. Now, may this house be transformed into emptiness!”
It penetrates trees and walls and casts no shadow.
At that point the Thus-Gone One addressed the divine beings, headed by Maheśvara, who had come from the pure realms,
Through the ten virtues, limitless beings are tamed.
Mañjuśrī, with what in mind do you say so?
and I will gratify you with answers for each of the questions you ask.”
And also anger—these are definitively crushed Through the perfection of this great tantra.
the concept of self;
demonstrate the dissolution of the adamantine body.
whenever they do not engage with the notions that physical forms are perfected or that they are not perfected.
do not don the great armor
It is irreproachable with respect to the actions of body, speech, and mind.
“The heroic Jina, knowing his aspiration, Gave the teaching of this samādhi.
Oṁ Vasudharā, svāhā! Oṁ, svāhā to Candrakāntī! Oṁ, svāhā to Dattā! Oṁ, svāhā to Vasudattā! Oṁ, svāhā to Āryā! Oṁ, svāhā to Subhadrā! Oṁ, svāhā to Guptā! Oṁ, svāhā to Devī! Oṁ, svāhā to Sarasvatī!
He crossed it in such a way that he does not see this shore or the other shore of tathatā.
their aspirations free from scrutiny,
The meditator on Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa?
The Blessed One said,
is the non-cultivation of the transcendent perfection of generosity, the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, and the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
I am disease and I am old age.
To be like space,
it is because they also think,
they correctly perceive that it neither arises nor ceases, that it is neither nihilistic nor eternalistic, that it is neither confined to a single meaning nor are its meanings manifold, that it neither comes nor goes, and that it is free from conceptual elaboration, and calm.
Like a precious gem beaming, Radiant on the pinnacle of a standard.
In order to worship the Buddha Śākyamuni and the bodhisattvas of the Sahā universe, as well as this teaching,
Here, joy means searching for the Dharma beyond the world;
The Dharma wheel, which revolves three times, has been set in motion, so this is why we are silent.”
I ought to run away. But leaving one’s own land behind is hard,
in order to save their lives. That would not be a reason for his being a liar. Why is that?
They should not dwell on the notion that ‘My buddhafield should equal in its extent the world systems, as many as the sands of the River Ganges, throughout the cardinal directions—east, south, west and north.’
the people of the market towns and the regions, the astrologers, ministers, and prime ministers, and the doorkeepers and attendants,
He was a blissful one who knew the world,
“Those who have heard the profound Dharma And have not been frightened by it,
Bhagavān, will you continue to remain?
“Blessed One, someone who loses his limbs could still survive.
“One should do all these assignations
This Dharma has no marks. Free of marks, it is beyond the sphere of marks.
when my śrāvakas commit any of these root transgressions,
“You girls with lances in your hands,
“Kauśika, if this world system of the great trichiliocosm were filled entirely with śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas,
When such a transgression occurs, the monks who retain the sūtras,
“When those beings you saw who were shaped like bowls
The peaceful, ageless, immortal, and unwaning state are other names by which nirvāṇa may be known.
The meaning of the realization of birthlessness, through the realization of the voidness of the five aggregates, is the meaning of “suffering.”
and one honors them by Dharma worship, and not by material worship.
“If you ask why, Śāradvatī­putra, emptiness is not something other than physical forms;
Consciousness also affects the production of a large body due to the conditioning factor of action.
Therefore one should maintain absolute secrecy
He recollected countless Dharma teachings And at that time Puṇyamatin felt great joy. {64}
He will ripen innumerable, countless beings for the highest, complete enlightenment.
the Tathāgata Merupradīpa, the Tathāgata Anaṃtavīrya, and others, who are as numerous as the sands of the river Ganges, pervade their own buddha realms with the power of their speech and proclaim,
On the doctor’s advice, her food was not to be too bitter, too sour,
Blessed One, I myself and everyone here would like that sublime being to teach the Dharma.”
The reservoir of doubt and uncertainty, Filled with the waters of views
I shall explain how a dead person’s element of consciousness undergoes transfer and migrates in a way comparable to the element of a seed.
‘O! How well trained is this man who exhibits himself [in various forms], up to and including the form of the tathāgata,
“In the case of middling anger, one will angrily engage in negative, unvirtuous acts, yet quickly, swiftly, and rapidly such acts will be followed by remorse and the application of a remedy.
the merit that would ensue could bring forth one among the first twenty-nine marks of a thus-gone one.
he says, ‘Don’t stay here, take baskets and carry the rubbish away.’
“What does not accompany their death? It is not accompanied by desire, aversion, or confusion.
who have fallen into the clutches of evil associates,
countryside, and kingdoms inhabited by like-minded yogis. “
Also present were eighty thousand bodhisattvas, all of whom were irreversible from great enlightenment;
“You are adorned by thousands of merits. You have practiced with hundreds of thousands of buddhas,
And he, through having accomplished This good karma that was adulterated, {92}
This concludes “The Introduction,” the first chapter of the Dharma teaching of “The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.”
abstain from eating meat and fish,
If your skin is so radiant, does that mean you have found ambrosia?”
The Bhagavān said to the rākṣasīs,
Son of a noble family, you should view the three bodies of the Tathāgata in the following way
“Mañjuśrī, is there a method by which a lazy bodhisattva great being can be diligent?”
They arise from detachment, with a single aim, a single principle, reduced to a single thing, remaining in a single principle, striving with a single conviction, wishing all beings to be free, with that single wish, that very wish.”
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection cannot be appropriated.
In summer, the first month after spring, When flowers were covered in buds and blooming,
Just as the conditional cause of a body gives rise to the man’s desire when he sees the woman’s form,
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is unblemished.”
“Without being indolent or disheartened, They should offer to the Buddha’s relics
“This delighted fourfold retinue Is looking at you, hero, and at me.
But that body cannot be measured, And therefore it is inconceivable. {8}
Even a householder practitioner of secret mantra May not take such a woman.
to win the falsely wise by means of true wisdom;
Similarly, owing to the fact that physical forms, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are not endowed with the powers [of the tathāgatas],
reducing his body to that of a mere skeleton, he asked his mother,
You have unimpeded knowledge of the three times. Therefore I have asked you my questions, lion of the Śākyas. {6}
And quickly attain an immaculate samādhi. Those are the benefits of pure, correct conduct.” {6}
teach this transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Similarly, the emptiness of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness is not consciousness and the [aforementioned aggregates].
“It is not possible, O goddess.”
Noble son, it is for this reason that the bodhisattvas shave off their hair and beard,
Lifted the hooves of Kaṇṭhaka with their hands That were as spotless and pure as the anthers of a lotus flower.
Knowing the nature of form and of the eye is non-attachment.
“Who are you? You cry so heart wrenchingly, With disheveled hair and your beauty impaired, Lamenting your son so intensely And throwing yourself on the ground.”
The following ten constitute the absorptions of the bodhisattvas:
He will have one thousand sons, all of them full, fierce warriors with well-built bodies that destroy the armies of the enemy.
Monks, with this purpose in mind, the Bodhisattva went to see Rudraka, the son of Rāma. When he met Rudraka,
Honor, venerate, and revere him.
They were without afflictions and controlled.
The Buddha then said to the venerable Upāli,
“Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara now radiated many blue, yellow, red, white, crystal, and silver light rays that reached Tathāgata Viśvabhū,
Goddess, I speak truthfully!
the samādhi named Sublime Gift,
From the torment of illness, misery, and aging You have no other refuge than good actions. {7}
They will see [themselves] honoring, venerating, and making offerings to those tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas, and to the stūpas of those tathāgatas, with flowers, garlands, incense, unguents, powders, religious robes, clothing, parasols, victory banners, ribbons, and diverse musical sounds.
mahoragas, humans and nonhumans, kings of regions, bala­cakra­vartins,
They will not end up in the intermediate eon of weapons.
This was the eleventh chapter on the arrangement of mantras from “The Glorious Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld.”
Look at Śakra, lord of the gods, as he is playing, enjoying, and amusing himself with the five divine objects of pleasure in his Palace of Victory.
Nirvāṇa is the basis.
Similarly, I do not hold the emptiness of the essential nature with respect to unarisen feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness to arise.
Śakra will only listen to the one with such invincible power.
Bhadrapāla, it assumes whatever scent is predominant.
“These noble ones do not delight in the activities of society, they delight in the absence of society. Their diligence does not weaken, they apply themselves with diligence.
He will also attain receptivity to the birthlessness of phenomena.
Or, imagining one’s own wife as having the form of the goddess, one should do the practice.
From a seed comes a sprout, from a sprout a leaf, from a leaf a stem, from a stem a pedicel, from a pedicel a pistil, from a pistil a flower, and from a flower comes a fruit.
Arising through conditions, and as deceptive as a dream. {69}
“If you leave, the city will become disturbed and steeped in darkness.
as well as mundane beings, including gods, humans, antigods, and gandharvas.
“If you ask what is ‘aspirationlessness as a gateway to liberation,’
Those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who cultivate unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment; who practice this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, just as it has been explained; and who, despite practicing with that goal, do not remain on the level of the śrāvakas or the level of the pratyekabuddhas because they do not actualize the finality of existence [associated with those levels], are all worthy of homage.
“Venerable Lord! This purity of phenomena is not subject to involuntary reincarnation.”
May they ensure that even food mixed with the five impure foods Is unadulterated for me!
Who have no respect toward celibates, They are unable to understand enlightenment. {19}
I see it, Lord! Here before me is a display of splendor such as I never before heard of or beheld!
Well said, well said.
there came a boy, whom they nurtured and raised until he grew into a man.
the one with the peaceful mind, the one who has perfected tranquility,
‘Oṁ, White Vulture, devour the poison and the harmful anger! Khaḥ khaḥ, ha ha, saḥ saḥ!
The joints of their bodies are well articulated.
and if you, master, have found some small measure of that ambrosia
Nārāyaṇa continued,
Lord, please give us a teaching by which we may remember you, when we have returned to Sarva­gandha­sugandhā.”
Graha­datta,
In this way, Su­bhūti, do great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of perseverance,
Even Prasenajit, King of Kosala, would regard himself as a pauper were he to see Bhadrapāla’s power, wealth, and prosperity.
Śāradvatī­putra, just as [the notion of] a tathāgata, arhat, and completely perfect buddha having the four applications of mindfulness is without foundation
Ānanda, long ago the Tathāgata, the arhat, the completely and perfectly enlightened Buddha Sukhābha lived in this world.
It is thus that they perfect the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline.
syād yathedam amṛte agrapuṣpe bahuphale nivāriṇi sarvārthasādhani aparājite varaṭe dharaṇi guhyāvarte gautame guptamati jambhani svāhā prajambhani svāha bala­prabhañjani svāhā jaye svāhā vijaye svāhā jaye vijaye svāhā |
They sit upon a seat within the assembly
I continuously honored, respected, worshiped, and venerated those who taught the Dharma,
Then he asked, “Lord, what what views might great bodhisattva beings adopt with respect to all things?”
those fruits are without essential nature, and they themselves are not satisfied merely by abiding therein.
Similarly, ‘I identify with sights, and likewise with sounds, odors, tastes, and tangibles.
[all attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, are pure.
“In what way, O lord, does Great Bliss arise in the body through the union of wisdom and means?”
due to the maturation of sentient beings’ previous karma,
They shake the entire earth With its mountains and oceans. {70}
“Mañjuśrī, how is that?”
Roṣaṇa is angry at him
“Should I join them there or participate in the purification here?”
The encounter of the seed with the flower acts as a condition for the mingling of the scent and the sesame oil.
to be tied down by deceit;
Bhaiṣajyarāja, the Tathāgata’s Dharma robe is great patience and gentleness.
in all such cases, those men, women, boys, and girls, who have the disposition of ordinary people, would think,
neither a concept, nor not a concept;
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of mantra words. What are the four kinds of mantra words?
“They dwelt in those hundreds of parks Where there were the blossoms of karnikara,
With patient acceptance they do not develop any malicious intent
It is not easy to find a Dharma teacher,
He inspired them, he filled them with joy, and he guided them. Then he rose from his seat and departed
who desires the Dharma should attend to the spiritual friend;
they will be afraid and terrified on hearing this teaching concerning the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
His buddha realm will be completely pure, level, delightful, attractive, beautiful, made of crystal, adorned by jewel trees,
And so on up to manifesting the relics of a tathāgata for beings who are to be guided by the relics of a tathāgata.
When they fail to obtain anything, they do not become sad or despondent, and they do not lose faith in their donors or benefactors.
“Having heard these words, the ten thousand Brahmās were inspired with high resolve and conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
In that state, they asked questions such as “What is this?”, “How did this come about?”, and “What is the nature of this?”, but could find nothing.
This bodhisattva has brought sentient beings to maturity, and that one has not.
One should eat the powder of emblic myrobalan and ground sesame with clarified butter and honey. Then the effect will be the same.
Ānanda then allowed the two to go forth.
they do not think that they should actualize it,
And they will not request anything from their followers.
If one were to ask why, it is because those transcendent perfections, up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom, are empty of the transcendent perfection of wisdom [and the aforementioned transcendent perfections].
It is free from elaboration and stainless.
“Śāradvatī­putra, the ‘ten aspects of knowledge’ are merely conceptualized.
And although they were your executioners, you still remained forbearing.
in your fierce form, expel, expel!
and the venerable Saṅgharakṣita, like a swan spreading its wings, flew with his miraculous powers up into the sky above.
"བདག་སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་པགས་པ་འཇམ་ཞིང་སྲབ་ལ། གསེར་གྱི་ཁ་དོག་ལྟ་བུ་<tmay I cause all beings to achieve smooth, fine, and golden skin!’
Hundreds of thousands of other beings were also present, such as gods and goddesses of the night, guardians of the world, Varuṇa, Śiva, Yama, Virūḍhaka, Kubera, Śakra, Virūpākṣa, and Dhṛtarāṣṭra, as well as asuras, garuḍas, gandharvas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas.
He would not react against the teaching of Dharma.”
Su­bhūti, the passage commencing with the words, ‘the illusionist or the skilled apprentice of an illusionist,’ as indicated above, along with the examples given in the first [part of this] chapter (le’u dang po), is similarly applicable here.
Who always practice emptiness devoid of attributes— They will soon become sugatas in the world. {278}
Like grasshoppers fallen into a forest fire.
“Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings should consider such matters at the outset by training in the bodhisattva path, thinking,
“Similarly, ‘I identify with the transcendent perfection of generosity.
When their feet are cut through on the great road of razors, as they lift that foot another foot will replace it.
there is no suitable analogy for it, and there is no suitable simile for it.
“When it comes to the time of death And their thoughts are continuing,
he and 84,000 gods were reborn together in the Totally Immaculate world system, the buddhafield of the thus-gone one, the foe-destroyer, the completely perfect buddha Immaculately Renowned King.
We have learned them from his son, the young brahmin Upatiṣya.
“Son of noble family, the extent of the Thus-Gone One Amitābha’s life is boundless. Even if you had a trillion eons to describe its limits, it would not be easy.
Because he is seeking enlightenment He will be the son of all those jinas.
They are the inconceivably numerous words of nonmovement concerning the composite,
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who sees all phenomena as arising from the ground of space will attain purification of karmic obscurations.
As the bhikṣu had been walking upon the king’s road, some dust had blown into one of his eyes.
“However, venerable Śāradvatīputra, affliction is the very nature of the realm of phenomena.
May all the merit gained thereby go to all beings So that they may reach precious, supreme, peaceful, and blissful awakening!
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess these ten qualities never separate from their spiritual teachers.
They have become trained when they carry out their activities, when they acknowledge what they have done instead of failing to acknowledge it,
ne billion realms of the Cloudless Heaven,
Owing to the utter purity of all things, they do not apprehend fundamental ignorance, and they do not apprehend [the other links of dependent origination], up to and including aging and death.
"གྲོང་ཁྱེར་དང་། གྲོང་རྡལ་དང་། ལྗོངས་དང་། ཡུལ་འཁོར་དང་། རྒྱལ་པོའི་ཕོ་བྲང་དུ་སོང་ནས་སེམས་ཅན་རྣམས་ལ་ཆོས་སྟོན་<tAnd so he traveled through various villages, cities, towns, countries, kingdoms, and palaces, teaching the Dharma to others. In this way,
Sensory contact that is visually compounded is empty of sensory contact that is visually compounded, and so [with the other compounded aspects of sensory contact], up to and including sensory contact that is mentally compounded, which is empty of sensory contact that is mentally compounded.
my illness would be assuaged.
I should establish them in individual enlightenment.
The Blessed One was staying in Śrāvastī at Jeta Grove, in the park of Anāthapiṇḍada,
“Whatever the wise bodhisattvas do, They always follow the nature of the Dharma.
Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, the one known by the fourfold assemblies as Sadāparibhūta at the time, on that occasion of the teaching of the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Bhīṣma­garjita­svara­rāja, pleased that number of tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds take delight, supreme delight, in correctly knowing the qualities of a buddha.
With this inward disengagement, without moving outwardly they move to ripen others. Through the disengagement of their diligence they understand the disengagement of sentient beings.
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the result of attaining the stream.
Finds inspiration only in the ministers’ skill And will not fully pierce the knowledge of the king.
“A lord of the world appears in the world In order to teach the wisdom of buddhahood.
Standing in front of the king, he said,
They will betray their bodhicitta, the mind of enlightenment, and go to the lower realms.
When never giving up on any sentient being, they are irreproachable.
they were in charge of begging bowls and they said to an arhat novice who had at the time been appointed keeper of the seals,
season transforms the seed.
It is therefore considered a very serious transgression that leads to rebirth in the lower realms.
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who possess those attributes, indications, and signs are revealed to be irreversible.
Enthralled and satiated With such delights,
But the sage, determined to benefit beings Through his accumulation of merit, did not turn back. {13}
“The buddhas in all directions who have passed away, And those of the future, and those who are present,
a modality that is unattractive;
with the exception of defecating, urinating, throwing away his toothbrush,
“In this way, by a mere utterance, one effects the protection from all fears.
of the store of wisdom, which is consummated in the uniform gnosis free of acceptance and rejection in regard to all things;
that noble man or noble woman will gain eight hundred qualities of the eyes,
knows neither arising, disintegration, nor remaining.
If he should ask, ‘Does an afterlife neither exist nor not exist?’
While you are bound by all bonds, I have been definitively freed from all bonds.
one should hold a sword wrought from fine iron in one’s hand,
He may show the ways of the passions, yet he is utterly dispassionate and naturally pure.
and the most prominent of all.
We could say the same about the southern direction, the western direction, the northern direction, below, above, or indeed any of the ten directions.
Even the words ‘the lower realms,’ ‘The pretas,’ ‘animal birth,’ ‘the beings of hell,’ And even the word ‘woman,’ will ever stay unheard.
Bodhisattvas, similarly, are naturally soft and speak gently.
Bhagavān, if there are not three yānas,
Have no concept of pride and no concept of no pride, No concept of ignorance and no concept of no ignorance,
They will hear even those completely pure words, And they will remember everything that has been taught.
and canopies that were all of the finest quality and produced all forms of unexcelled exuberance.
Where should the liberation of the tathāgatas be sought?
Because what is pure does not become pure; it just is pure.
In the same vein, they should meditate on [the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path, and
Then one will obtain the girl one desires.
possess it, keep it, recite it to others, promote it,
It is the knowledge of the mind’s condition.
This, divine being, is the bodhisattva’s revelation of his correct knowledge purified through diligence.
Similarly, it should be applied to the applications of mindfulness and to [the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path, and to the ten powers of the tathāgatas and [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
That these two pristine beings have come together Is just like butter and clarified butter.
Taking sixty of the bandits who had been captured alive, General Virūḍhaka returned to the king with the stolen goods
They should regard various possessions as utter encumbrances.
His lifespan and the period of his sacred Dharma will also be the same.
The bodhisattvas there are forty-two hundred thousand leagues tall and their own thrones are thirty-four hundred thousand leagues high. ‌
as oozing pustules, large pustules, small pustules, exanthema, leprosy,
May I complete the perfection of generosity.
So the four kings came back with four alms bowls made of silver, four made of beryl, four made of quartz, four made of coral, four made of emerald, and four made of every gem.
“Son, can you match the ways of calculation with the great mathematician Arjuna, an expert in the knowledge of numbers?”
If someone wishing to go forth approaches any of you,
It teaches the absence of conflict with respect to phenomena and is a gateway to special insight with regard to all phenomena.
“Lord, when Vimalakīrti had discoursed thus, eight hundred householders in the crowd conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment,
“Reverend Saṅgharakṣita, are you not thirsty? Are you not hungry?”
does not distinguish between those situations.
and if two echoes were to reverberate from the sound of the words of those two people,
Similarly, do those sentient beings resemble a phantom,
Just like sentient beings, so are the fields.
Bodhisattvas should have great compassion, striving for the aims of all beings.
those of us overcome by greed thought and even said, ‘We should not serve the food until the visiting monks have left.’
Similarly, the sensory elements are empty of notions of ‘I’ and ‘mine.’
they comprise (1) the power of faith, (2) the power of perseverance, (3) the power of recollection, (4) the power of meditative stability, and (5) the power of wisdom.
To Sarvābhibū you offered a pearl necklace, and to Sāgara a lotus flower.
the knowledge of the path,
Based on this presumption, when at the time of death they see their coming rebirth they become apprehensive, uncertain, and doubtful about the Buddha’s enlightenment.
Venerable Lord! The more great bodhisattva beings approach unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment,
for those in meditative concentration, like a fire lens;
They will have unrestrained bodies and unrestrained speech And unrestrained minds, and will descend to the lower existences. {30}
Whatever taste is unpleasant will be transformed, when it comes in contact with the tongue, into a divine flavor.
“If these do not exist and are not apprehensible, how could one be liberated by perceiving them as entities, or by perceiving them as non-entities, or by perceiving them as both entities and non-entities?
“A paṇḍaka is one who will not flourish in the Dharma and Vinaya; therefore,
As midnight arrived, the Bodhisattva spoke to Chanda In a voice captivating like Brahmā’s and sweet as a nightingale:
Now, when it is your turn, you do not answer the question.”
84,000 beings to the level of wheel-bearing monarch,
Even the names of the sense fields of total consummation do not exist internally, nor do they exist externally, and nor do they abide between these two.
but the body of the Tathāgata is without the slightest thought.
“O Buddha! O Dharma! O Saṅgha!
Su­bhūti, so it is that when great bodhisattva beings train accordingly in the real nature of these attributes, they do train in omniscience.
As due to the coming together of six elements.
divine aromatic substances appear,
the five powers,
They do not attach importance to meditative concentration.
“Lord, for the sake of all sentient beings, please explain the secret of enlightened mind.”
What do you think, Mahauṣadhi—which is greater, the poison that Nanda, Upananda, and so on have at their disposal, or a drop of aconite or hālāhala?
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarvaśūra,
“ ‘Those who know that phenomena have no self, Have an empty nature and the characteristic of clarity,
Accepting interdependence does not disturb its peace; it is infinitely peaceful. It is reality itself. Its nature is none other than that, not like that, or neither.
‘You are not able to know What malicious thoughts others have Or what kind thoughts they have,
“Great King, if you look in our scriptures, you will see that the prince Sarvārthasiddha will not stay at home.
They are tied down by envy and miserliness and suffer from an abundance of afflictions.
An attribute of bhagavān buddhas is that whenever they smile, light radiates from their mouths in myriad colors such as blue, yellow, red, white, vermillion, crystalline, and silver.
of fine physique,
without their parents’ consent, from faraway lands where their parents could not be consulted.
and so forth up to not considering the wisdom of omniscience.
Which is profound, hard to behold, and subtle.
“Because he is endowed with the Dharma body and the wisdom body, he is genuinely beyond all worldly concerns.
The real nature of those great bodhisattva beings engages with this real nature of phenomena,
“Similarly, O gods, this doctrine is profound owing to the profundity of the self,
This has not been spoken by the Tathā­gata!
The same goes also for the world system of formlessness.
They should not dwell on the notion that physical forms are empty, nor should they dwell on the notion that they are not empty.
Knowing the Dharma is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads one to apply the Dharma assiduously and in the correct manner.
“Also there were eight hundred million with the same name Of Svabhāva­dharmottara­niścita.
There the Bodhisattva blessed the surrounding area, which was as vast as the entire world with its four great continents.
Oṁ, Vāgīśvara, muḥ
the inconceivably numerous accumulations of wisdom concerning the kleśas,
When a bodhisattva considers the giver and the recipient to be the sameness of the limit of reality, such a bodhisattva will have departed by means of the perfection of insight.
That is to say, the three vehicles are indeed designated as the vehicle of the śrāvakas, the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas, and the vehicle of the genuinely perfect buddhas.”
space has no location;
and attain the ability and power to work for the benefit of all sentient beings.
It seems love cannot pacify the attachment, anger, or delusion of beings, nor any of the afflictions they have accrued over the course of infinite eons.
If he should exert himself, then all is well.
Then bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya thought,
He is unstained like a lotus, and his discipline smells sweet like a flower;
Then he flew through the air from one shore to the other.
They did not think about it and did not come out,
they bowed to the Thus-Gone One and then stood to one side.
“The maturation of the development of the aggregates formed from birth, and their disintegration, is what is meant by ‘birth causes aging and death.’
When bodhisattvas practice generosity they do not give refuse.
By the fruition of the practice of that discipline,
Practicing for enlightenment without pride, And attaining the absence of pride is the highest enlightenment. {9}
The golden lotuses have a golden hue, a golden sheen, and manifest as gold.
The Tathāgata, who has attained perfect buddhahood a long time ago, has an immeasurable lifespan.
They will always meet the Buddha, hear the Dharma, and the Saṅgha will be honored.
In this way, the main gods, as numerous as grains of sand in the Ganges, became accomplished.
King Śuddhodana then said to the Bodhisattva,
So that the beings who hear about the qualities will have faith And you cause them to aspire to the qualities of a buddha. {91}
If one were to ask why, Venerable Lord, it is because physical forms are empty of physical forms.
From the mouths of both, the organs of their tongues emerged.
One sick monk even died for lack of someone to nurse him.
they are liberated from the six existences of the three realms.
finally, all the villages, suburbs, cities, capitals, provinces, and wildernesses. All this could be clearly seen by everyone.
and with the great miraculous manifestation of leading a following of devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans
noble sons, I cannot calculate the accumulation of merit that comes from the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display.
“The born-blind man does not have faith in those people, and does not believe what they have said.
“Gentlemen, whose army is this?”
“What is having veneration and experiencing joy? It is knowledge through realization and knowledge through scripture.
What two qualities? Thoroughly applying themselves in calm abiding and developing skill in insight.
Yet our family rule is such that a girl can only be granted to someone who is skilled in the arts, and not to a man who lacks these skills.
The king gained faith in the Sugata And attended him for a thousand years. {17}
“ ‘Compared to someone who, with a pure mind, Has honored for millions of eons, as numerous as the Ganges sands,
“Free from name and form,
It is after training therein that the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas are discerned in the world.
Only beings who have created previous merit have such dreams;
and as she moves to the next life, she will take ordination.
venerable Mahākapphiṇa,
Or they see it like a great swamp, or like walking on swords, Or like the edge of a knife smeared with honey.
“They are not, noble son,” answered the Blessed One.
When you have a seed, a sprout can grow, Yet the seed is not the sprout. Still it is not different;
They spread their great love and compassion throughout all the worlds of the ten directions,
at that time they are near to the highest, complete enlightenment.
The universal monarch merely has to think of commissioning an army and it is done.
Seeing this, the thus-gone ones wish to show them the extreme impermanence of things. Thus arises their great compassion for sentient beings.
Seeing such beings, the thus-gone ones wish to teach them the Dharma so that they can muster diligence and pursue liberation. Thus arises the thus-gone ones’ great compassion for sentient beings.
Ultimately, it is not about generating wisdom; nor is it about bringing wisdom to an end.”
Those beings who had faith in the Jina’s teaching, Made offerings to him and honored him. {51}
On the relative level, non-conceptuality is a gateway to the absence of disturbing emotions.
So his time came and he died, and he was reborn among the denizens of Avīci, the Great Hell of Unrelenting Torment.
He has a distinctively erotic appearance
non-arising is non-disturbance.
“For that buddha I built Ten million monasteries Made of special sandalwood, And some of precious materials. {4}
In this way the true nature knows no permanence or impermanence.
Imagine that a man comes to experience the taste of a fruit that no other sentient being has ever tasted before.
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection constitutes the faculties.”
Free from any concerns, it does not keep anything in mind.
When manifesting the attainment of the fruition, they are irreproachable.
they practice their generosity with a mind endowed with omniscience
“Monks, these two themselves performed the actions—which have accrued a heap of karma, whose results have matured,
So-called “desire” can be understood to be imperfect.
Through that merit he created He always taught this sūtra, and finally
I left my capital city Ratnāvatī On the way to a place that was a park. {80}
They scattered to the gates of the cities, From house to house,
When the things in which those beings are engaged are examined,
Whoever wishes to venerate the guides, And likewise the solitary buddhas and the listeners, Should give steady rise to the mind of awakening And always keep this sūtra firmly in mind.
creating harmony through material things means to share food, drink, soup, beverages, snacks, clothing, and so on, equally with everyone else.
and lack of knowledge,
should be worshiped as a thus-gone one, and should be regarded as one’s own parent.
If you wish to please me, do not delay this.
Similarly, past feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are empty of past consciousness, [and so forth].
“Tadyathā: aṭṭe naṭṭe tanaṭṭe anate nāti kunaṭi svāhā.
It shows, Gopā, that soon I will illuminate with the light of knowledge The entire world, which is plagued by delusion and the darkness of ignorance.
With faces of camels, oxen, and elephants, and terrifying eyes,
Because he is born due to conditions and causes.
should hear this revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena samādhi and obtain it, understand it,
through the force of his merit, the Bodhisattva will conquer Māra’s army.”
A person who is a convert to a tīrthika order is one who will not flourish in the Dharma and Vinaya.
“ ‘He was a king of physicians for this entire world And he was always healing beings.
By living a lie, evil is incurred; And from evil, a rebirth in hell.
and they do not dedicate it to the level of the pratyekabuddhas, but,
For, since all living beings are utterly liberated, the tathāgatas see them as having the nature of ultimate liberation.
“And there are others far more numerous, With assemblies that are numerous:
‘Offering food represents the achievement of longevity, luster, power, and happiness.
The past itself is also the nature of space.
Since liberation is inexpressible, goddess, I do not know what to say.
It has equality and has no inequality. There is no desire, and there is no aversion.
“Su­bhūti, do you think that signlessness is one thing and the attributes of the pratyekabuddhas are another,
Even though they are born in the animal realms, for the sake of sentient beings,
From the left side, Bhayaṃkara said:
All these dharmas are immaculate, peaceful, And devoid of cessation and birth.
“Bhagavān, I have come here from the buddha realm of the bhagavān tathāgata Ratna­tejobhyudgata­rāja.
“Bālāha, the king of horses, was enjoying the sarvaśetāna herb. When he had finished enjoying it, he rolled back and forth on the golden sand and shook his body.
“When the best of beings has passed into nirvāṇa, I will uphold this sūtra in that very difficult time. {36}
“ ‘There is no essence here to be known whatsoever. There is no coming, no going; that is the subtle mode of phenomena.
and those who listen to it listen to presumption.
Thinking, ‘My son, with inferior aspiration, Works at clearing away rubbish heaps.’
Thereupon, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti kept his silence, saying nothing at all.
Indeed, would anything be heard or cognized by any sentient being?”
Why is that? It is because a woman has still not attained five states.
Friends, close relatives, cousins, kings, ministers,
“The skilled bodhisattvas, while seated, Grasp the sun and moon in their hands.
Who are upholders of this highest sūtra When the Guide of the World has passed into nirvāṇa,
Then five thousand celestial maidens bearing divine children’s ornaments came before the Bodhisattva’s mother and asked how the birth was and whether she was weary.
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who possess those attributes, indications, and signs are revealed to be irreversible.
and at that time, in that era, in the realm Virajā
” He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of creators!”
and also bhikṣus, bhikṣunīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās who followed the Śrāvakayāna,
Yet immovable and calm,
One of red nature should make love to a red girl;
and thus not abandon all sentient beings,
Since all these phenomena arise erroneously from dependent origination, and have been grasped through the maturation of past actions, what other cause can there be for your perception of non-entities as entities!’
Covering themselves with their upper robes, they addressed him as follows:
the requisites for happiness, pleasure, and sensual enjoyments that Bhadrapāla commands.”
“They have no longing for songs and no longing for dance, They have no longing for incense and no longing for drink,
Homage to Tathāgata Druma­rāja­vivardhita­śrī.
Having obtained honey and turmeric, One should mix it with milk, and drink it.
The past and the present are pure, owing to the purity of the future.
How marvelous! May I also, in the future, come to possess such a body, blazing like this in complexion, magnificence, splendor,
In this regard, the expression ‘delicate, soft, and lustrous skin’ means that neither water nor dust adhere to his body, or settle upon it.
It will be endured by remembering me.
“Oṃ amṛta­kuṇḍalī hana hana hūṃ phaṭ Is the mantra for dispelling obstructors.
“I have here taught The first practice and field of activity That should be maintained by the wise ones Who uphold this kind of sūtra.
and having established them in that state, he passed into nirvāṇa.
giving up body and life in order to uphold the holy Dharma;
When they arrived, they bathed the Bodhi tree and the Thus-Gone One with the scented water.
but if we die on the battlefield, we will be reborn in the higher realms.”
All those beings, having heard the Dharma Directly from that man of generosity,
Alas, those who remain in the world are bewildered by the distressful storm clouds of anger.
I will practice celibacy
I chat with them. We delight one another, and I always keep their company.
What are these five?
When the Bodhisattva, the Lord of Beings, departed,
burning so that he was a single flame, and someone else were to come up to him and say,
There is no one who takes the seed in their hands and places it into the tree-top, nor can the seed be perceived being transferred from the roots.
you will all become tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas.
they neither adopt nor do they not adopt anything at all.
They recognize that the body is fragile, perishable, held together by ligaments, foul smelling, stinking, and repulsive.
and instead develop the mind of unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
Through teaching the extent of your lifespan All these beings have attained perfect joy.
Who practiced the austerity of the disciplines of mendicancy, and who had peaceful minds. {2}
they sent down a great shower of fragrant, colorful, and delightful flowers,
“Goddess, I wish you well but did you not see I obtained this resting place by making a pact?
They do not consider whether the eyes have aspirations or are without aspirations;
“You may wonder, noble son, how bodhisattvas remain in the application of mindfulness with respect to the mind.
As another analogy, were the nāga kings Nanda, Upananda, and so on to drink but a tiny drop of poisonous aconite or hālāhala, even they would die.
They should also praise and rejoice in others who cultivate the noble eightfold path, [and so forth].
“All phenomena are always empty by nature. The heirs of the jinas have eliminated all things.
then those beings will not die in fire or in water,
Bhaiṣajyarāja, it is entering the emptiness of all phenomena.
“When fools speak about remaining in mindfulness They become proud, saying, ‘I have witnessed it in my body.’
incense, perfume, garlands, ointments, powders, parasols,
Or one should do the practice of the lord standing with his left leg outstretched and the right slightly bent, and holding a sword and a noose.
“Su­bhūti, do you think that one who is on the eighth [level],
many hundreds of thousands of nāga princes, such as Śrī­tejas; and numerous nāga ladies.
Enlightenment is without duality, since therein are no minds and no things.
The precious wife of the king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class appears just as before.
“If one were to view these as absolutely existent, and apprehend them [dualistically], define them, and engage in ideation and scrutiny with respect to them, do you think that this would not be tantamount to the [aforementioned] views that bodhisattvas might adopt, and to the deluded minds which they might have?”
“Noble son, on the southern side of Sumeru, the king of mountains, the seven samyaksaṃbuddhas examine the extent of stains and stainlessness.
He will also make offerings to all the bhagavān buddhas of the Fortunate Eon.
They do not doubt the wisdom of the tathāgatas. Those are the benefits of being dedicated to samādhi. {65}
Śrī Mahādevī generated roots of virtue in the presence of tathāgatas as numerous as the grains of sand of the River Ganges.
I possess such perseverance.
If you act according to my words, you will swiftly attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
Without hostility or pride,
There is a rain of various flowers, a rain of precious stones—jewels, pearls, diamonds, beryl, conch, crystal, and coral—and there is a rain of divine cloth.
This is the significance of vast.
He looks at them with the power of excellent wisdom And thus he is the protector of the world and its devas.
He will be a great rishi like a golden pillar,
perceiving non-arising is an obscuration,
Birth is eliminated by preventing existence.” The Bodhisattva then considered,
Just as birds tormented by a fire wish nothing more than to take off quickly and fly away, the closer the Thus-Gone One came to the five companions, the more uncomfortable they felt in their seats and wanted to get up.
Su­bhūti, there are also those great bodhisattva beings who, having transcended the levels of the śrāvakas and the pratyekabuddhas, are certain to attain unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
“ ‘This is hell.
You engender bliss and great wonder
will be unable to have faith in it, unless it is after the Tathāgata’s nirvāṇa.
causing him to flee and make his monastery disappear.”
equal in number to the atoms in Mount Meru
Monk, all phenomena are compounded;
“So Nandika the executioner thereupon took a sharp sword and severed the bhikṣu’s hands and feet,
Dancers, wrestlers, musicians, And other people of that kind.
By criticizing women In all the sūtra and Abhidharma literature,
What is the great joy of a bodhisattva?
“Reverend, if a person who caused a schism among the Tathāgata’s saṅgha disciples in a previous ordination career
with a complexion that is like excellent polished gold.
Now, because ordinary beings are swift to pay heed to miracles,
“Just like optical illusions and fata morganas, Just like dreams and just like illusions,
without attaining forbearance,
He is the one who is surrounded by his sons the bodhisattvas, the great beings.
Since he did not make assumptions about anything, he did not make assumptions even on the basis of nirvāṇa.
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas from becoming very learned. What are the ten benefits?
Ultimately, without seeing, they see that all phenomena are unreal.
devote themselves to teaching that sacred doctrine to those sentient beings who follow the vehicles of the śrāvakas and the pratyekabuddhas.
Supreme joy is the flesh-eating ḍākinī.
This absorption is likened to space, because like space—which is motionless, uncaused, and changeless—there is nowhere it cannot reach.
I spread the light of knowledge wisdom;
and it is the perfection of all good qualities.
from which flowed the smoke of black agarwood.
similarly, the non-bondage and non-liberation of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness do not constitute consciousness [and the aforementioned aggregates].
This recognition puts an end to the notions of the body as being lasting, desirable, delightful, or something that can be owned, as well as to attachments that are based on the body.
“They have no final end. It is like drinking an ocean.
n the same way, feeling, notion, co-producing factors, and consciousness are empty.’ He practices thinking in this way and also thinking that ‘they are not non-empty.’
I, having given this gift, dedicate it for the sake of unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, making common cause with all sentient beings, and without apprehending anything!
And he will liberate millions of devas and humans.
A tilaka should be drawn on the forehead. Upon sight, the tilaka will enthrall the triple world.
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess these ten qualities observe excellent discipline.
“Blessed One, will beings who have not produced roots of virtue ever even hear this Dharma teaching, let alone commit it to writing, commission it to be written, retain it, recite it, or offer flowers, incense, and incense powder to it?”
Enlightenment cannot be realized, either physically or mentally.
some mansions were made of all types of flowers;
“Śāradvatī­putra! These are all attributes with respect to which a great bodhisattva being should cultivate detachment.
Having heard this samādhi, this level of peace, Constant, they will follow whatever has been taught. {14}
Fermented coconut, Also freshly churned buffalo butter,
“Venerable Lord! Does the transcendent perfection of wisdom not attain and not apprehend even omniscience?”
One should inscribe the mantra on birch bark,
Are so by having memorized this supreme samādhi of peace. {55}
May all negativities be purified, may the accumulation of merit fully flourish,
will give away their own sons, daughters, spouse, arms, legs, eyes, and head as offerings.
From this time until the essence of enlightenment is reached, may the virtues of my body, speech, and mind continue as unceasingly as a stream.
Because the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya himself was then, at that time, the brahmin boy Bhadraśuddha,
another bodhisattva might establish a single sentient being in the result of an arhat.
“Reverend, a small number of elder monks and a large number of new monks discussed the matter during the rains retreat in Rājagṛha.
“Maitreya, how do such bodhisattva mahāsattvas have emancipation in the perfection of wisdom?
‘All phenomena are nondual and thus without gateway.
and you should know that they are not his arhats or pratyeka­buddhas.
So the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta set out from the world of Sukhāvatī, surrounded and preceded by 840 million bodhisattvas.
“Bhagavān, how should one view the four applications of mindfulness?”
This is how one escapes from the three realms:
As an analogy, Bhadrapāla, a sprout emerges from a seed;
No woman would be able to carry The supreme man of Jambudvīpa.”
is aspirationlessness as a gateway to liberation.
I do not ridicule you, brothers and sisters. You are not ridiculous.
who will go to the lower realms due to their disrespect.
“Bhagavān, in how many qualities should a bodhisattva train, just after generating the altruistic mind set on attaining awakening?”
is teaching the Dharma accompanied by an entourage of bodhisattvas and
“Noble son, you may wonder how bodhisattvas amass great rainclouds of Dharma.
At that point Kolita’s parents went to him and said, “Dear boy, please listen.
One should make an effigy using clay from an anthill, and place the mantra, enclosed in beeswax, in the effigy’s heart.
Monk, as all phenomena have the nature of false formations, they are without actual formation.
[11] It is the wish to be free from saṃsāra. “[12] It is practicing with a higher motivation.
“ ‘Reverend Upāli, this nature of the mind,
the samādhi named Endless Array,
Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who make practice essential
“By the power of craving for existence and ignorance, Beings take birth as humans, gods, or in the three lower realms.
Having obtained the black through the speech of the mantra, The yogin should place it in a bamboo vessel.
Su­bhūti, inasmuch as they are attentive to mental images, to that extent there is attachment.
That very absence of pride— That is what is called ‘samādhi.’ {3}
do you think, Su­bhūti, that those forms conjured by the illusionist or the skilled apprentice of an illusionist actually turn into an elephant, or that they turn into a horse, bull, or another living creature?
“Su­bhūti, all the attributes of the buddhas have the modality of unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment; [great bodhisattva beings, too,] do not transgress this modality.
He saw all the cities, towns, estates, kingdoms, royal cities, and lands, as well as all gods and humans.
[the fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas,
“Through offering incense to infinite wisdom
there are not, in all those hundreds of thousands of quintillions of world realms, noble sons, as many atoms as there are hundreds of thousands of quintillions of eons since I attained the highest complete enlightenment of buddhahood.
“Why say something like that?
recite it, promulgate it, and teach it extensively to others.”
From this point on, the area came to be known as Ṛṣipatana, or the Hill of the Fallen Sages.
To them I teach the path that craving Is the origin of the arising of suffering.
and (10) considering all elements to be present in consciousness,
Thus they will assist those individuals with whichever virtuous deeds they may be engaged in.
“The lords of the world who have arrived here, Who have made brilliant and beautiful the land, Will receive vast and not little offerings Through their teaching of the sūtra.
Those bodhisattvas will not be novices, but will have practiced the roots of merit for a long time,
And made this gift continuously For as many eons as there are sands of the Ganges, {5}
The signs will be seen in dreams And the accomplishments themselves will manifest.
The Blessed One is endowed with a hair ringlet that grows between his eyebrows, and which is as soft as cotton, and white as a water lily, the moon, a conch, the filament of a lotus, the milk of a cow, and hoar-frost.
Those foolish ones will maintain the view of a self And become afraid when they hear of emptiness. {25}
They will never develop thoughts of bewilderment and thoughts of carelessness.
holding flowers, incense, garlands, perfumes, scented powder, garments, parasols, victory banners, flags, earrings made of flowers, and garlands made of precious stones.
Hitting the ground, they made the earth quake And stirred up the underground masses of water.
At that time all the trees in the great trichiliocosm—whether in season or not—blossomed and bore fruit.
Then Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin reverently placed his palms together to receive it.
Monk, as all phenomena are without path, they are unattached.
You, lord of the asuras, will become the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha, perfect in wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the unsurpassable guide who tamed beings, the teacher of devas and humans, the buddha, the Bhagavat Śrī.
They are: [1] their minds are unpolluted; [2] they remain careful;
Monks, through the blessings of the Bodhisattva staying in his mother’s womb,
“ ‘I now confess my first bad action.
They ran all around.
In addition, the tathāgatas recollect many former abodes.
or who had a body belonging to the animal realm,
they achieve and maintain the other meditative concentrations, up to and including the fourth meditative concentration.
The Bhagavān now looked toward the eighty thousand bodhisattvas who had attained retention and had turned the irreversible Dharma wheel.
At that time, the bodhisattva Maitreya was present in that very retinue.
owing to inappropriate actions, simply regress from those [superior] attributes to the interim states, which comprise the level of the śrāvakas and the level of the pratyekabuddhas.
Similarly, ‘I identify with the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline,
they do not make assumptions on account of the act of generosity,
This king of mantras, placed at the feet of an effigy of Gaṇapati made of clay from an anthill and
For those dedicated to buddhahood’s enlightenment This is the domain of the yogin. {42}
She took her vase with water and sprinkled the friend of darkness.
If you ask why, Su­bhūti,
to discern illusory phenomena;
Behind the drum he set up seven palm trees, and beyond that he set up an iron image of a wild boar.
passing beyond an even further thousand worlds puts down that second smallest particle of dust.
“A magician causes forms to appear, Creating horses, elephants, chariots, and so on.
After differentiating these eight aspects of liberation and the nine serial steps of meditative equipoise,
Some stripped off all their clothes and jewelry.
That itself is the dharmatā.
when the element of consciousness abandons the body
You have heard the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display.
As they remain in equipoise in this way, they are free of regrets and very joyful.
They abide in the transcendent perfection of generosity, and in the other transcendent perfections, up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
He ripened countless beings and benefited countless beings, and afterward,
Maheśvara, Māṇibhadra, Pūrṇabhadra, Hārītī, the sun, the moon, the planets, the stars,
“They will protect correct conduct and have matchless celibacy. They will meditate on samādhi for many endless eons.
They happily amused themselves just as one does during the autumn festival at the end of the fourth month.
“Monks, Śāriputra himself discovered the store of action, mastered conditions
understanding that compassion toward all beings is the most important thing,
With a show of respect, they said to him,
“Monk, eat some of this food.
for it leads to a vast mindset.
May all obstacles be pacified and your desired disciplined conduct be accomplished!
The tathāgatas have a transcendental body that has transcended all mundane qualities.
You should not teach this to those who are proud, Who are arrogant, and who are unsuitable.
However, noble son, unlike deer, bodhisattvas who live in the wild are not constantly afraid and they do not have any of the shortcomings of deer.
It is [neither miracululous] nor magical.
having heard this teaching of the Dharma of the great heroic bodhisattvas, and being delighted, pleased, and overjoyed,
He replied, “This is owing to its transcending of all the doctrines of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas!”
One should draw a triangular maṇḍala on cotton smeared with the mark of the moon.
They also possess that which is secret, Which they do not teach to beings.
whether they are holding an outer patched robe, a waist cloth, or an alms bowl;
they understand that the fruit of entering the stream is neither with attachment, nor is it without attachment.
From the time when they first begin to set their mind on enlightenment, great bodhisattva beings should be steadfast
They have no other refuge here!
“ ‘It brings the attainment of omniscient wisdom,
who commit this transcendent perfection of wisdom to writing, and then retain, hold, master, and
How should they train in equanimity?
The Peerless Guide, Lord of the World,
“May our Śākya princess not die now! It would be too much to bear if we lost two loved ones!”
Kolita’s parents again entreated him, a second and a third time, saying each time,
If perchance a Śākya kin should come under a tīrthika banner,
‘Lord, it is wondrous that after a long time, You have somehow appeared in the world today.
If you doubt, are uncertain, are unsure, or are wondering if the bodhisattva mahāsattva Sadāparibhūta was someone else,
What is the great compassion of a bodhisattva?
They will never lack the five supramundane faculties.
Friends, all co-producing factors are suffering!
In this manner the universal monarch appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class comes to possess the precious jewel.
The gods and Brahmā, pure beings possessing the splendor of virtue,
All are angry and have their hair hanging loose.
Like autumn clouds, they appear one moment and vanish the next.
he went to him and said,
“ ‘All phenomena are void of attributes;
divine shoes, diadems, earrings, garlands, armlets, one hundred and eight-string and sixty-four-string necklaces for covering the shoulders, ear adornments, and finger rings; and also various kinds of clothing: monastic robes, clothing commanded by the vidyādharas, and Kaśika cloth;
Between phenomena there is no distinction, And through knowing that there is cessation; {108}
my insight was now free and pure. Monks, at that point I declared that I had awakened to unsurpassable, perfect and complete buddhahood.
In this way, bodhisattva great beings do not disappoint the blessed buddhas.”
recognition of ugliness, recognition of putrefaction, recognition of suppuration,
Moreover, Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who practice the six transcendent perfections should reflect, ‘Alas! This cyclic existence is long lasting. Alas! This world system is long lasting’.
Whoever’s name one should recite, one will draw that person’s blood.
On arrival, he wished King Bimbisāra success and long life then took a place off to one side.
In this transcendent perfection of wisdom, the three vehicles have been taught—
his body became motionless and his mind became motionless.
Then a rabbit’s horn would also Be subject to arising and cessation.
“Who are your brethren?”
“Even though they teach a hundred thousand sūtras, They know the finest details of the past.
The noble men or noble women who have planted roots of merit,
Therefore, O gods, as far as defining characteristics, the absence of defining characteristics, the defining characteristics of defining characteristics, and their combinations are concerned, it is impossible for any of them to know and for any of them to be known.
“What is attending upon wise beings? It is attending upon buddhas.
hen the retinue of sixty-eight hundred thousand queens,
Candraprabha perfectly, extensively adorned His vast and excellent home.
it is because sentient beings deserve to be offered sanctuary and because [the bodhisattvas] escort them to the citadel of fearlessness.
it denotes the meditative absorptions, starting from the first meditative concentration and continuing as far as the sense field of neither perception nor non-perception.
There are world realms where the bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara teaches the Dharma to beings in the form of bodhisattva mahāsattvas.
having ignorance and being without ignorance, having craving and being without craving,
They will reach a place of supreme joy and genuinely take refuge.
“ ‘Always rejecting the dharma of the foolish, Rejecting all that disgraces the family of the Buddha,
Yet your mind is liberated from all migrations.
The guide of the world, Abhi­jñā­jñānābhi­bhū Was seated upon the Bodhimaṇḍa.
the domains of the senses are transferred there;
and similarly, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are like a dream.
She should perform the worship, in reciprocity, As has been taught by the victorious ones.
“If you ask what is the tolerance that understands the profound nature of phenomena,
“Ajita, when in this teaching I saw the light ray of this kind that was the Bhagavān’s omen,
not examining one’s past and present actions; to be concerned with what is irrelevant; to examine what should not be examined;
Ānanda, whoever hears, without hearing, a little of this Dharma teaching, even if it is just a single syllable,
some mansions were made of flowers of nutmeg, jasmine, magnolia, pāṭalam, mountain ebony, aloe flower, and gotaraṇi;
“ ‘Like the flower of the fig tree, It is extremely difficult to find a jina.
and neither their sprouts nor their flowers are apparent within the body of the seed.
his is the armor of the transcendent perfection of wisdom offered by great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Giving up all such places that are in discord with the way of ordained practitioners entirely, they remain in the application of mindfulness with respect to such places.
The thirty-two goddesses,
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, what does it mean to be cut off from the three spheres?
And then one should not visualize even the light rays.
Those who possess these marks of one hundred merits do indeed outshine Śakra, Brahmā, all the world’s protectors, śrāvakas, and solitary buddhas!
With his palms joined, he stands facing the assembly.
It then occurred to him, “When there is no ignorance, formations do not form.
when a brahmin living in Śrāvastī took a wife of equal caste
To say nothing of a bit of grain!’“
and the chief editor Lotsawa Bande Dharmatāśīla, translated and revised this work. It was later modified and finalized in terms of the new translation.
the samādhi of the crest adornment of the victory banner,
Hence, the mantra, thereby established, Has indeed been taught by the buddhas.
it is devoid of arising; it is devoid of production; it is devoid of cessation;
At night, when the old and young in this city were deeply asleep,
When bodhisattvas practice diligence they do not relish the taste of diligence.
and similarly, no sensory element of the eyes, sensory element of sights or sensory element of visual consciousness,
the aspirationlessness that is a gateway to liberation,
Like a wish-fulfilling jewel, he fulfilled all aspirations.
Without overlapping or being squeezed. In that way the Buddha’s Dharma is inconceivable. {3}
Son of noble family, bodhisattva great beings who wish to achieve this absorption that encapsulates all merit should avoid everything that is not meritorious, and exert themselves in taking up everything that is meritorious.”
Since they have worshiped the shrines, teachings, and saṅghas of the thus-gone ones with abundant service, adherence, and practice,
If it is the sole that twitches, it is far away.
And those jinas have as many buddha realms, too, Each one separate and with distinct characteristics. {1}
He should then ask the disciple to recite, ‘Ah, pleasure.’
“There is no being in the ten directions Who can equal the Lord of the World, let alone be greater.
“Reverend, what is it that the venerable Koṣṭhila has done,
They do not attach importance to perseverance.
‘Bhagavat, I have never seen nor heard of tathāgatas having the kind of accumulation of merit that Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has, let alone bodhisattvas.
In response, the Blessed One expressed his approval to the Four Great Kings, saying, “Excellent, excellent, great kings!
Anything that is conceptualized neither arises nor ceases, and is only conventionally designated by names and symbols.
“Venerable Lord! This transcendent perfection of wisdom is profound.
“ ‘I have committed the sin of slaying the bhikṣu, Which was extremely wicked and will destroy my happiness.
So you, the noblest and most powerful of men,
If you ask why, Su­bhūti, it is because this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, with which great bodhisattva beings are endowed, has the great benefit of attaining unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
"སུས་ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་འབྱུང་བ་མེད་པར་<tWhoever sees all phenomena as unarisen has abandoned its origin.
The nāgas and the others replied, “Excellent, Blessed One!” They then listened appropriately.
(8) The Blessed One is endowed with calves resembling those of an antelope.
It is difficult for all śrāvakas and pratyeka­buddhas to know.
For what reason? Mother, it is because the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Jala­dhara­garjita­ghoṣa­susvarana­kṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña­ is teaching extensively the Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma to the world and its devas, and we are going to listen to it.’
“Reverend, if the Blessed One says an impostor should be excluded,
It is like when a person who is foolish
"འཇམ་དཔལ་བདག་གིས་ཀྱང་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་<t“Mañjuśrī, I, too, have been inspired to speak about the way in which bodhisattva great beings carry out the bodhisattva practices.”
Other food too, as available,
It does not move toward objects.
they were skilled in the correct knowledge of the nature of all phenomena;
Fantasizing, he gave rise to enormous longing.
It will be flat, excellent, and beautiful.
this queen of incantations, Great Upholder of the Secret Mantra, shall guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the person named such-and-such.
Lamps of perfume, sesame oil, and ghee Are completely offered to them all around.
Are [all the other aggregates], up to and including consciousness, not one thing,
The wandering mendicant Śreṇika indeed became a follower [of the Great Vehicle] endowed with faith, owing to the power of his volition, and he subsequently entered into it by understanding the emptiness of inherent existence.
and, in the same vein, there are no [causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighty minor marks.
You who know how beings engage in various good deeds, Please divulge everything, by way of a prophecy.
those who harbor thoughts of falling into the vehicles of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas,
Rather, it is the sway of these two young brahmins.”
Renunciation is itself the very absence of virtues and benefits.
This, noble son, is entitled ‘the Maheśvara episode.’ ”
Today, Guide, these various kinds Of wondrous and superior marvels have occurred.
and then honor, revere, respect,
He made three circumambulations of the Blessed One and prostrated himself. Then, kneeling on his right knee, Vajrapāṇi requested,
So it is, Su­bhūti, that great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom determine those things which are dreamlike, those things which are like a phantom, and so forth,
Śāriputra, the man then saw the great fire burning everywhere throughout his house.
For ten million eons, We shall feel compassion for beings.
Those bodhisattva great beings who seek to increase their merit will listen to this absorption that encapsulates all merit.
Consider, noble son, the analogy of the earth.
They will regard the sacred Dharma as an elixir, ambrosia, and medicine.
This profound transcendent perfection of wisdom is hard to realize,
The bodhisattva Priyadarśana declared,
“Consider, noble son, the analogy of the moon during the dark fortnight.
and thus bodhisattvas continue the pursuit of the qualities that complete the accumulations for awakening.
Similarly, bodhisattvas are constantly flowing, constantly streaming, and constantly moving toward omniscience.
Similarly, the non-arising of [all other attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, is not omniscience [and the rest]—indeed there is no arising.”
One should drink seeds of Indian sesbania with black pepper over the period of three days.
Who is open-minded and suffers because of never having heard the Dharma?
“Bhagavān, we are just like that: We are unaware of the past prayers That the Tathāgata has given us In many lifetimes in the past, a long time ago.
and with his blazing intelligence,
Venerable Lord! Those who would don this armor for the sake of sentient beings are actually seeking to buttress the sky.
Ah! You have divine hearing and possess the supreme Dharma.
Of all the Tathāgata’s śrāvakas Who are present here. {28}
The māras advocate this life of birth and death and the bodhisattva does not avoid life.
These are the thirty-two marks of a superior man.
Oṁ, Vajratīkṣṇa! You who cut through suffering! The embodiment of wisdom and knowledge! The body of knowledge, Vāgīśvara— Homage to Arapacana!
If they were thinking of Avalokiteśvara In that instant they would become friends.
“all infantile sentient beings are like the bodhisattvas’ own children, not noble beings.
Perfecting all the qualities of a buddha, it is an unequaled understanding.
They will feel content with their children, spouse, household,
When Ārāḍa Kālāma saw the Bodhisattva approaching in the distance, he was amazed and told his students,
“From the mountains he finds herbs Of four kinds such as the one called Endowed with all colors and tastes, And
The Blessed Buddha was resident at the Jetavana, Anāthapiṇḍada’s grove near Śrāvastī,
who asked, “Where is the lad? Today I struck him.” “I too struck him today,”
Moreover, Satata­samitābhiyukta, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who possess this Dharma, read it, teach it, explain it, or write it out, will attain eight hundred qualities of the body.
Ānanda, this is the last time she will be poor.
Having come into possession of this samādhi of supreme peace. {5}
Just as a Magadhan brass cauldron, when struck with a wooden log, chimes and reverberates, so did this great earth sound and reverberate when struck by the Bodhisattva with his hand.
he was in suffering and unhappy, and therupon he recited these lines of verse to that great assembly of bodhisattvas:
(32) The Blessed One is endowed with a hair ringlet that grows between his eyebrows,
will not find any such opportunity,
They listen, without listening, to the instructions beyond reference points.
consume them with a mind free of concepts and devoid of intrinsic nature.
“The bodhisattva who maintains retention Remains loving, always unwavering and unshakable,
Śāradvatī­putra, those great bodhisattva beings have embarked on unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment for immeasurable, countless, and limitless hundred billion trillion eons.
I took the road that led south, and followed it until eventually I came to an iron fortress.
Su­bhūti, because individuals who have attained the level of buddha nature are not entities,
The realization that all phenomena are empty is the attainment of the illusory absorption.
Śārisuta, Maudgalyāyana, Kāla, Kāśyapa, Subhūti, Nanda, and Kapphiṇa; {xxxviii}
to the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind.
Some danced.
we have not hoped for the display of the buddha realms, the play of bodhisattvas, or the play of tathāgatas that are in these dharmas of the Buddha.
“Because they know the subtle nature of phenomena They are always attractive and charming
They are skilled in the way of letters and words.
They circumambulated the Blessed, thus-gone, worthy, perfect Buddha Ratnaketu three times,
“ ‘Be dedicated to this my teaching, Attentively, and with deep faith;
It is unaffected by bliss or suffering. It transcends all conceptual elaboration.
while the other man praises the ocean.
Should non-Dharma arise in my dominion,
“At that time I always longed for this samādhi In order to benefit the people of the world and the devas,
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, what is purity, what is meant by stainless, and what is non-disturbance?
Until I attain the essence of awakening.’
Mindfulness of phenomena is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
‘Results come from their own specific conditions. Whether tathāgatas appear or not, this true nature of things will remain.
Remember this teaching by the Sugata And never depend on those others. {29}
the paths associated with the ten virtuous actions,
“I do not remember my body ever feeling this heavy,
Draw a jewel rosary in her left hand.
“Therefore, understanding the implied meaning taught By the buddhas, the teachers of the world, the protectors,
And gave him much to eat and drink.
One should grasp it with both hands and
“Evil one, today you will be defeated by the Bodhisattva, Like an enemy soldier by a hero.
And 240 million who formed the wish for the perfect awakening of a buddha!
And practiced the supreme bodhisattva conduct Because I was seeking this samādhi. {16}
This concludes “The Past of King Śubhavyūha,” the twenty-fifth chapter of the Dharma teaching of “The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.”
Divine son, the ultimate level is utterly unreal and therefore all phenomena are utterly unborn.”
As a gift with which to request the Dharma, Bali presented Avalokiteśvara with strings of pearls worth a hundred thousand silver coins and diadems adorned with various jewels.
Similarly,
The wine and the vessel are ruined. Washing with bakula will render it usable.
King Mahāpadma heard this letter read and was troubled. Head in hands,
In short, noble sir, the sixty-two kinds of convictions constitute the family of the tathāgatas!”
Those who engage in these ten virtuous practices do not exist in any other buddhafield.”
They are unborn, serene, free, beyond suffering, and boundless.
The anus quivers and the body hairs rise.
placed his right knee on the ground.
My diligence upon this path was unceasing And Dīpaṃkara prophesied I would become a jina. {27}
the light was utterly gratifying to the body and mind
They will see the world realm of a thousand million worlds within their purified bodies.
and I will break one of my bones to make a pen.
The passion and the hatred are sensations of pleasure and pain respectively.
He penetrates all the secret mysteries of the bodhisattvas and the buddhas.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ skill in making others withdraw from objects.
they grasped Gaurī, Lakṣmī, Śacī, Ratī, and other goddesses, and started to meditate.
Had a student who was idle and covetous And desirous of gain and the prestige of knowledge. {90}
Laziness is a stain and a flaw in relation to diligence.
and a brahmin’s six duties
The ones who fearlessly possess this sūtra Will acquire such qualities as these.
Once the saṅgha had received a supply of rich food and when a group of visiting monks turned up,
Then, at that time, the Bhagavān gave a detailed teaching by chanting the following extensive verses to the youth Candraprabha.
O child of enlightened heritage! The eyes are empty of notions of “I” and “mine.
Even the many countless millions of eons That all those dust particles represent Could not convey how many eons have come to an end Since that sugata passed into nirvāṇa.
The Blessed One then said to youthful Mañjuśrī,
It is false, being fated to be broken and destroyed, in spite of being anointed and massaged.
Su­bhūti, this is called the refinement of the extrasensory power that realizes the recollection of past lives with which great bodhisattva beings are endowed.
King, it is certain that they have come To see and worship the prince, the God of Gods.”
view devoid of conduct is also to be abandoned;
“ ‘The beauty of this bhikṣu’s arrival Is like Brahmā residing in Brahmā’s world,
The bodhisattva Akṣayamati declared,
Nor does ignorance think, ‘I sow the seed of consciousness.’
He replied, “This is owing to the absence of hatred!” “
or even two, three, four, or five hundred thousand years—
Paripelava, rasa, vīrā, Sāmaka, busā, tagara,
Thus they will examine as follows: ‘Is my mind involved in something virtuous, or something unvirtuous, or something neutral?
You have the physical marks of a buddha and reside on a lion throne!”
what is utter peace?
They acquire an inconceivable number of qualities.”
Conclusion of the eighth chapter, “Buddha Abhāva­samudgata.”
The goddess rejoiced in her heart, paid homage to and saluted the lord,
O gods! This sacred doctrine has not been revealed so that the fruit of entering the stream, the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth, the fruit of no longer being subject to rebirth, arhatship, and individual enlightenment might be grasped or not grasped.
“Did you see something?” “Noble one, we did.”
Then the man, knowing their thoughts,
the four applications of mindfulness,
“Consciousness functions as a cause by having the nature of a seed.
“Mañjuśrī, what kind of nature do they have?”
The meaning of being devoid of a person is the ineffable meaning.
It will cause even my body to flag, and the virtuous endeavors of noble beings to wane.
‘By whatever means necessary, I will place these beings’ minds in unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment, I will familiarize them with skillful means,
Su­bhūti, such great bodhisattva beings do not forsake all sentient beings and
Divine being, the buddhas appear so that the essential nature of the view of the transitory collection may be realized.
Greatly learned one, among all beings, Ākāśagarbha, son of noble family beyond imagination, you are supreme.
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, do not apprehend the emptiness of internal phenomena as the emptiness of internal phenomena.
“The trees’ buds open, and the sāl trees blossom;
Likewise five thousand celestial maidens bearing unguents came before the Bodhisattva’s mother and asked how the birth was and whether she was weary.
The secret chakra is the fourth secret.
Eating emblic myrobalan, long pepper, leadwort, and fresh ginger with old sugar, clarified butter, and honey in equal parts,
Such was the duration of my life. Such was the extent of the lifespan I could have had. Such was the extent of the particular lifespan I actually had.
and they no longer desire each other. In the same way,
When one is immersed in what is genuine, demons have no ingress.
settled into the state of concentration known as watching over and exhorting all beings.
So the greatest mathematician among the Śākyas, a man called Arjuna, an adept in knowledge of calculation, was appointed judge and told,
“The blind can see again;
Instead you should respect him with devotion.
Bodhisattva great beings who possess this component of discipline will not fall away from these ten things.
“I, as a capable man, shall do as the king pleases,”
Similarly, if they have not misconstrued the transcendent perfection of generosity,
exhales and inhales;
Remaining in the immovable, supreme mind of enlightenment
Thus spoke the Bhagavat
and installed me among gods and humans.”
Through relinquishing pleasure at that moment, and having formerly relinquished pain in the past, both mental pleasure and displeasure vanished.
They asked him, “Reverend Saṅgharakṣita, are you not thirsty? Are you not hungry?”
then, my friends, it will not be difficult to discover omniscient wisdom that is endowed with the supreme of all aspects.
to be overcome by the eruption of obscurations;
Noble son, when they contemplate the intrinsic nature of the thus-gone ones all sentient beings go mad.
“This samādhi is not difficult to attain For those who do not grasp pleasures, who have no cravings, Who have no attachment to family, and are without envy, Who are continually kind, and are without anger. {17}
using no trickery, no flattery, not being covetous, and not having the desire to acquire.
it is because even the tathāgatas have attained emancipation through it,
“ ‘My friend, all phenomena are empty, So why do you ask their names?
Next he took seven steps downhill, saying,
nor unplaced,
in the same way, Venerable Lord, to great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom, there is nothing that is pleasant or unpleasant.
He was honored as the Indra among Indras because he showed them the temporality of their lordship.
Those who smell that incense Become buddhas, guides. {242}
‘I exhort the bodhisattvas Of all ten directions, Who abide on the ten bodhisattva levels, To attain supreme enlightenment.
Therefore, Śāriputra, having seen its real point, sons and daughters of good family, I declare, ought to respectfully make prayers to reach that buddha realm.
Relatively, they are incomparable in order to master space.
“If, Su­bhūti, you ask what are all the phenomena with respect to which the emptiness of inherent existence is applicable, they are as follows:
Or, in the same vein, do you think that [all attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, are apprehensible?
Who are devoid of faith Number no fewer than five hundred. {38}
By means of ultimate reality Suffering beings will be completely freed.
and because the tathāgatas are grateful and thankful for this transcendent perfection of wisdom.
“When they have received that prophecy Countless quintillions of beings
He should encourage his empathy for all living beings on account of his own sickness,
“Son, I can face my own death, but I couldn’t bear watching my son die.”
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities have skill in worshiping and venerating the thus-gone ones.
draped his outer robe over one shoulder,
And then she thought,
Such is the bodhisattva ground where the mind of awakening has been engendered.
Homage to Tathāgata Sattvāśaya­śamana­śarīra­śrī.
and likewise, when they engage in union with the emptiness of the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty, they are said to engage in union with the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Su­vikrānta­vikrāmin,
This, divine being, is the bodhisattva’s revelation of his correct knowledge purified through patience.
they do not actualize that finality of existence
[246]Monks, by that point the Bodhisattva had remained in Rājagṛha for as long as he wanted, and now he left together with the five ascetic companions in order to wander through the kingdom of Magadha.
And the skill in methods that they had:
Then he asked, “Lord, what are the deluded mindsets that great bodhisattva beings might have with respect to all things?”
Immersed in what is genuine, one comes to understand the meaning and becomes invulnerable.
he is the One with the Power to Know How All Habitual Tendencies Are Formed and How All Defiled States without Exception Are Exhausted.
“If you ask what are the ‘four applications of mindfulness,’
I myself will never teach, make someone teach, or rejoice in someone teaching anyone wrong views!’
This is not a worthy place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived,” others responded,
Some time later, the meal was laid out and when the wooden beam was struck,
Consciousness [and the other aggregates] are themselves illusion, and illusion itself is consciousness [and the other aggregates].
In this way, Su­bhūti, do great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of generosity, acquire the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration.
If someone wishing to go forth approaches any of you,
“Noble son,” replied the Blessed One, “to you the Thus-Gone One will always grant such an opportunity. Go ahead and ask.”
the zenith is empty of the zenith,
Their bodies are soft.
“When they are teaching They have no concept of beings.
“I will cause all men, women, and children in the city of Kapilavastu to fall asleep.”
The wife with whom he had sported, made love, and indulged all his desires later gave birth to a son.
Any phenomenon that is ultimately unborn and unceasing is also ultimately beyond being realized.
they discern through their attention endowed with omniscience that physical forms are impermanent,
“They understand the mind to be without a soul, without being, And arising from conditions like a whirled torch’s circle of fire,
They could teach the sacred doctrine, free from worldliness.
Ānanda, these future people will also not believe in the Buddha’s miracles, let alone the miracles displayed by the Thus-Gone Bodhisattva.
“I then pondered what was needed for becoming to occur and what conditions contribute to the occurrence of becoming.
‘This sentient being has low inclinations and beliefs, so I will show him a low perfection of the form body.
I will travel this path of the ten virtuous actions.
which are about beings applying their minds to what they have heard and thus
The god responded,
As he saw this, he was filled with great wonder.
but will certainly leave the palace in order to live the life of a renunciant.”
“‌Noble son, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
But this noble novice cannot. We had better give him ordinary food.’
speaking rationally, being aware of time, and teaching the Dharma correctly.
Whoever rejects this Dharma teaching,
“Sentient beings relinquish the exalted complete transcendence of suffering, which is distinguished by the sacred wisdom of nonattachment.
Kachnar flowers, the scents of summer, And wreaths of silken ribbons. {45}
Some had their heads pointing down and feet up. Some had needle-like hair on their heads.
“ ‘There are also numerous other qualities, Other than these that I have described.
That fire, moreover, once it has burnt the grass and wood, will have no more causes and will die.
“When conceptions of women have ceased, He sits at the Bodhimaṇḍa.
while inspiring others to do the same.
and when night had fallen, set out for the Blessed One.
Next the god Santuṣita, along with other gods from the Heaven of Joy, approached the Thus-Gone One as he sat at the seat of awakening and draped him with a vast patchwork of divine garments.
His teeth had fallen out and he was covered in wrinkles everywhere.
Pained by hunger and thirst,
they do not actualize the limit of reality by focusing on lack of substance.
they harbor the notion that those who are genuinely perfect buddhas are not genuinely perfect buddhas.
Mindfulness of sensations is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Just as a father and mother Cherish their only child, At that moment all beings felt Parental love for each other.
millions of drums resounded as they were beaten,
When the hills and valleys are quenched, the rain later subsides.
You are omniscient with respect to everything,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the individual concerning the kleśas,
As he sits on the throne, a goddess puts his hands on top of the hands of a god. Flowers spring from his hands,
They were in a hurry to make offerings to the Supreme Being, Who is worthy of honor in all the three realms.
“Blessed One, even one trillionth of a single ocean would be,
Similarly, it has not been revealed so that the sensory element of the ears, the sensory element of sounds, and the sensory element of auditory consciousness might be grasped or not grasped.
the teaching of the Dharma will cause those who hear it to pass quickly beyond suffering by means of whichever vehicle may inspire them.
Kauśika, thoughts of dedication are not discerned and are non-apprehensible in the mind that is set on enlightenment.
However, relatively, the vinaya of the bodhisattva great beings is to be delighted by the joy of Dharma, just as one would enjoy a park or a palace.
This, divine being, is the bodhisattvas’ revelation of their correct knowledge.
The tathatā that does not go is the authentic tathatā.
and they also actualize the formative predispositions of virtuous actions through their body, speech, and mind.
‘Look,’ people will say, ‘this vessel is now full. Look, it is completely full!’
Previously my complexion had been beautiful and smooth, but now this radiance was all gone due to exerting myself in harsh travails.
Then the terrestrial gods, in order to pay homage to the Thus-Gone One, cleansed and anointed the entire surface of the earth, sprinkled it with perfumed water,
He is seated in great wealth upon a lion throne with a footstool, adorned in gold and silver.
It is the accomplishment of the differentiation of all phenomena.
or face hostile people:
Blow the conch of the Dharma!
In twelve years’ time, the Bodhisattva will enter the womb of his mother.”
It is best if the ordinand has a set of robes already cut and sewn,
But the song that is heard does not exist. Know that all phenomena are like that. {14}
nor is it unobstructed;
The gods and goddesses offered him praises As he moved through the sky surrounded by a celestial retinue.”
But do not make assumptions on account of these [transcendent perfections]!
Bodhisattvas should be rich in the great wealth of the seven riches.
not to hold grudges;
Reverend Śāriputra, the buddhafield of the Tathāgata is pure.
Mañjuśrī, you ask me why I am without servants, but all māras and opponents are my servants.
The gods, such as Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Śiva, Indra, Kāmadeva, and so forth,
Please teach it out of compassion for the world and to benefit the myriad of beings,
It is without movement, free from movement, and the interruption of all movement, and so it does not come or go.”
Mañjuśrī, in what way are all buddhas a single buddha?
There, the light prostrated at the feet of the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha, circumambulated him seven times, and, in that blessed one’s presence, disappeared.
Reverend Upāli, the mind is neither within nor without,
and caused him to follow it, and become completely ripened together with all his court.
They know the relevant meanings, words, and their relationship.
“Then some other people say in front of that born-blind man,
does so because its [mistaken] perception is great.
If they were thinking of Avalokiteśvara They would quickly scatter in all directions.
and go on to abandon all disturbing emotions and actualize arhatship.’
What are those ten? They are to feel greatly disenchanted, wherever they may be, as well as to continuously maintain the notions of death, the devoured, the bloody, the bruised, the rotting, the decomposing, the burning, the scattered, and the skeletal.
They did not even think of the divine flowers, Which did not seem at all wonderful. {32}
in the hidden space of the blossom
“Alas! Those who inhabit the worlds are caught up in disputes and flawed by hardened ill will.
seen as a mass of merit;
and is extremely beautified by various delightful features.
“I have found someone worth venerating.”
“Venerable Lord, how wonderful is this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom within the perceptual range of the Tathā­gata, Arhat, Genuinely Perfect Buddha—the Tathā­gata who became a bodhisattva in former lives by engaging therein, and acquired the five extrasensory powers of the bodhisattvas, and who then, in this very lifetime, attained manifestly perfect buddhahood with respect to omniscience, and, having attained manifestly perfect buddhahood with respect to omniscience, comprehended all these defining characteristics. He comprehends the defining characteristics of all things.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of fundamental ignorance and, in the same vein, of [all the other links of dependent origination], up to and including aging and death, as calm or not calm, constitute a bodhisattva?”
“They will also ask themselves, ‘Have I crossed over this cycle of births that knows neither beginning nor end?’
In which world system do they abide?
“They will carry letters, engaging in inappropriate activity, And likewise discard correct conduct and the pure path.
comprehend that the words spoken by others are pointless and contrary to the truth.
"སངས་རྒྱས་བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་རྣམས་ཀྱི་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་<tthe inconceivable ways of awakened liberation of the blessed buddhas, and
Homage to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas!
I will teach the stainless state of peace And establish many beings on the path of wisdom. {76}
I would walk through that mass of fire to save just a single being who suffers and who is in need of protection, a guard, shelter, or support.
to feel aversion for the unfolding of existence;
By burying an asafetida pill at the root of a silk-cotton tree, one will cause its flowers to fall.
“They see the lords of the worlds in all directions: East, south, west, and north, Above, below, and in the intermediate directions.
Slowly, on a low fire.
On arrival, he inquired,
“Those who have the qualities of mendicancy And the qualities of austerity,
Sandalwood paste, costus root, Nakha, kata leaves, marā,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of inner knowledge. What are the four kinds of inner knowledge?
indicating how phenomena are essentially non-arising, that all things are empty of all things, that they are signless because they are empty,
by the fruition of these One will be born as a hell-being in Endless Torment.
They should create a square maṇḍala of smeared cow dung, cover it with different kinds of flowers,
When teaching the Dharma for the sake of abandoning views that involve observation, they are irreproachable.
Be a refuge to those who are weary of saṃsāra.
I would not even venerate these [precious jewels].
and pools that were completely filled with flowers.
They have no other thought concerning their bodies.
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, the maturity of a great bodhisattva being also entails the five powers.
“I teach the Dharma that I have myself realized,
“What has become of his wife?” “Her time came.”
“Great Sage, please remember your earlier promise.
Similarly, it does not enhance [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, nor does it diminish them.
“Here I have realized The great enemies within, in all their multitudes.
Within it, one writes entreating words that include the names of the practitioner and the one to be won
When they arrived there, they bowed their heads to the feet of both tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas.
They will be comfortable in body, comfortable in mind, endowed with lightness of body and
“Well trained in liberative art, They demonstrate all activities, Whichever possibly may be a method To make beings delight in the Dharma.
Through knowing
Your body, speech, and mind are perfectly pure.
Ānanda, these foolish beings will be overcome with desire for wealth, respect, and praise.
“The assembly of gods thus offered their request,
be freed from that burning great mass of flames.
born from a womb,
They have no longing for a wife, and no longing for attendants. Their conduct is peaceful and they are undefiled. {188}
They offered garlands of pearls, crescent moons, parasols, flags, and banners, And showered him with flowers and powders of aloe, tagara, and sandalwood.
After the bodhisattva mahāsattva Sarva­sattva­priya­darśana had recited that verse,
“The Sage of the Śākyas, endowed with the ten powers, went to the Hill of the Fallen Sages at Vārāṇasī, where he turned the supreme wheel of Dharma.
It is uncontrived conduct. It is engaging in conduct that is attractive.
He dedicated himself to the practice of keeping it, reading it, and meditating on it.
and to perform all kinds of actions, such as laughing,
Bhagavān, who uttered the words that came from this great precious stūpa?”
“You are victorious in battle!
Similarly, physical forms are pure, and [all other attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, are pure, owing to the purity of the transcendent perfection of perseverance.
“Noble son, you may wonder about the character of the bodhisattvas’ excellent wisdom regarding the absence of self in a person.
In a state of jubilation he rushed before King Śuddhodana and said the following verses:
that the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth
‘In accordance with the aspirations made by the thus-gone ones, through this gift of my ears and nose
Hundreds of thousands of guardians of the world stood watch,
It does not apprehend the world system of desire.
“If I might be permitted to request the Venerable Lord to pronounce on them,
Māyādevī stretched out her right arm, like a flash of lightning appearing in the middle of the sky, and grasped a branch of the tree.
The monks replied, “Venerable Subhūti, we have neither attained nor realized anything at all.
the samādhi named Increasing Power of Mindfulness,
Similarly, feelings have the defining characteristic of emotional experience, perceptions have the defining characteristics of comprehensibility,
neither mental nor not mental.
Thinking, however, that those bowls were not appropriate for a monk, the Thus-Gone One did not accept them.
If one recites the root mantra over water, and then uses that water to wash the wound from a snake bite, that will remove the poison.
Su­bhūti, the transcendent perfection of wisdom is absolutely pure because all things are utterly pure.
Yet I still have a few doubts.
“What is not being upset by criticism? It is the knowledge that comprehends the skandhas and the dhātus.
Monks, actions and accumulations do not ripen upon the outer elements.
When anyone enters into union with this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, as it has been revealed, they will generate many merits, greater than those.
the bodhisatta mahāsattva Satatam­abhayaṁdad, and all the bodhisattva mahāsattvas of the Good Eon,
Similarly, they have a view concerning the sensory element of the eyes, and in the same vein, they have a view concerning [the other sensory elements], up to and including the sensory element of mental consciousness.
The entire play of illusion is accomplished without exclusion or remainder
they do not maintain notions regarding the buddhas, they do not maintain notions regarding the bodhisattvas, they do not maintain notions regarding the śrāvakas, they have no notions regarding the pratyekabuddhas,
They do not engage with the notion that physical forms arise, or that they are non-arising.
A multicolored light from that Cleanses beings of their impurities, And turns this billion-fold world, and other such universes, into the field of space.
“What is the knowledge of the skill of presenting the distinction between words that have meaning and words that do not have meaning?
you have not attained any of the four fruitions of spiritual practice for which it was taught.
There are seven thousand leagues here in Jambudvīpa, eight thousand leagues in the western continent of Godānīya, nine thousand leagues in the eastern continent of Videha, and ten thousand leagues in the northern continent of Kuru.
“Ask the Blessed One himself and I will not object.”
The inconceivable aroma of the lotuses Fills millions of realms. {i}
This miraculous activity of the Sage Is beyond the level of verses. {25} {26}
Similarly, when this precious gemstone is attached to the body of a man or woman who is afflicted by wind disorders, or a man or woman afflicted by phlegm disorders or combined humoral disorders,
Have certainty in the Dharma, are fearless, And are praised by the guides of the worlds.
Today my wishes have come true.
These childish beings diminish, like the waning moon during the dark fortnight.
on one’s left, Upakeśinī.
With dedicated practice,
They will achieve tranquility, practice generosity on a vast scale, And become majestic princes born from lotus flowers.
nor should they abide in the notion that the aggregates, from physical forms up to and including consciousness, are signless,
Even the names of the five faculties do not exist internally, nor do they exist externally, and nor do they abide between these two.
The Kauravas, Pāṇḍavas, and the others took away the golden lion thrones, the divine parasols, the bejeweled shoes, the clothing, the jewelry, the bejeweled golden armlets, and the tawny cows, destroying the offering site.
Accordingly five hundred Śākya boys
The great and vast Dharma was proclaimed throughout, and thereby the force of their enthusiastic desire subdued all the afflictions,
“Bhagavān, for what purpose does this son of noble family carry on his head, the holiest part of the body, a precious jewel shining with brilliant bright light,
Whoever yearns to abandon attachment and anger, And wants to clear away the darkness of the afflictions,
“Gentlemen, from the first did I not say, ‘Gentlemen, the Middle Country is filled with upstanding men,
Travel from realm to realm.
“Therefore, young man, you should be someone who makes practice essential, and always trains in that way.
This mantra is the heart essence of Lord Lokanātha. One will attain success by reciting it one million times.
“Moreover, dependent arising emerges from two principles. From what two principles?
Alas! This truth that I realized and awakened to is profound, peaceful, tranquil, calm, complete, hard to see, hard to comprehend, and impossible to conceptualize since it is inaccessible to the intellect.
They bowed to the feet of the Guide And
bodhisattvas make the following aspiration: ‘In accordance with the aspirations extolled and praised by the buddhas, through this gift of parks, forests for ascetic practice, and temples may I cause all beings to perfect the factors of concentration!’
This is the king of mantras, the unsurpassable path, That manifests the spiritual accomplishments of Vajrapāṇi.
and then fires a succession of other arrows, one after another,
Śāriputra, there are masses of parasites in women’s noses.
Their forms were made visible
in the same way below
Indeed, alongside those radiances, the natural effulgence of the Tathā­gata’s body was best.
When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara comes from the realm of Sukhāvatī, the entire world shakes six times.’
That is to say, when bodhisattvas in the past engaged in bodhisattva activities,
the eight aspects of liberation, and the nine serial steps of meditative absorption,
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena as empty or not empty constitute a bodhisattva?”
That will be the cause resulting in the attainment of nirvāṇa. It is impossible for peace to come from any other cause. {37}
Desire is cyclic existence; Its purification is taught to be nirvana.
They are lifeless matter, inert like hay or a wall; There is no self here, neither a person nor life force.
“Noble one, if there were beings who were bound in iron fetters or were placed in wooden stocks, whether they were guilty or not guilty,
Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is not delusion.”
its devas, nāgas, yakṣas,
“Whoever knows emptiness As the characteristic of form Will not say that emptiness Is other than the nature of form. Whoever knows form, Knows emptiness. {13}
knowing what will be beneficial for any one person.
Any bodhisattva great being who ultimately has no patience with any phenomena having substance, actuality, or essence is
“Reverend, I have passed two years while my ward has passed one.”
While passing through the village of Senānī,
They will not migrate to the unfree states, unless it is in order to bring beings to maturity.
Prostrations to the tathāgata Sūrya­maṇḍala­pratibhāsottama­śrī, buddha of the southwest;
When Queen Māyā looked inside her belly, she saw the Bodhisattva resting on the right side of her womb.
Su­bhūti, because the attributes of genuinely perfect buddhas, and so forth, are not entities,
Whatever they even wish for is actualized, so they are able to genuinely alleviate all poverty.
He is unadulterated by the formless realm.
As an omen of the arising of the holy Dharma in Tibet, during the reign of King Lha Thothori Nyanshal (lha tho tho ri snyan shal), this text descended from the sky into the palace Yumbu Lhakhar (yum bu bla mkhar). The king dreamed that after five generations it would be possible to understand the meaning of this text. Thus the holy Dharma began.
they also give religious robes, alms, bedding, medicines to cure the sick, and necessities to śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas.
and are never separated from the mind endowed with omniscience, there are malign demonic forces and their acolytes who would seek an opportunity to harm them, but will find no such opportunity or occasion to do so.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of existents concerning the kleśas,
to step away from the true Dharma; to give up one’s commitment;
Their heads, eyes, and faces were ablaze.
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti, aware of what the venerable Śāriputra was thinking, spoke to him:
Protected by the deities, he was able to subdue hostile demonic forces.
That is how long these two have been developing the mind of awakening.
it is because they are the repositories of the six transcendent perfections.
They drop them like a filthy vessel filled with excrement.
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection constitutes the supports for miraculous ability.”
They are heroes who never fall under the power of women. Everywhere they rejoice in the teaching of the sugatas. {2}
He was disciplined, skilled, and behaved correctly.
and the stride that proceeds from a stable and indestructible diamond-like intention.
A god from the Heaven of Joy called Śubhāṅga saw the schoolmaster collapsed on the ground and,
May I do nothing wrong here Or be seized and pressed into forced labor!
Interested in the Dharma, he is not interested in attachment to the Buddha, attachment to the Dharma, or attachment to the Saṅgha.
Let forth the lion’s roar of the buddhas,
Yet immovable and calm, He practiced the all-pervasive concentration.
It would leave his spiritual practice in tatters, leave him ruined, wrecked, fallen, and defeated.
The king of Magadha responds to the Bodhisattva,
Hence it is not proper for the Bodhisattva to be conceived in this family.”
conceiving of trance, meditation, and equanimity as if they were the Avīci hell;
“Su­bhūti, the expanse of reality would be disrupted if there were any extraneous phenomena existing apart from it, but,
“Some reject butter, oil, molasses, and yogurt; Others won’t eat fish, meat, and milk.
As soon as the Bodhisattva uttered these words,
Since I turn the wheel of Dharma,
to sound the great Dharma drum, to erect the great Dharma banner, to light the great Dharma lamp,
dislike, dejection, fear, greed, jealousy, and stinginess subsided, and
There is also a corresponding measure of the smallest particles. The number of these particles can indeed be calculated but, since it is unfathomable, it is called incalculable.
of purity of livelihood, consummated by correct spiritual practice;
Then suppose those other beings rejoice on having heard it, and having rejoiced they tell it to others who will rejoice on hearing it, and then those tell it to others,
ointments, bedding, cushions, clothes, ornaments, parasols, and carriages.
two to change his diapers,
would the first echo hear or cognize the second echo?”
The syllable hūṁ is the consciousness in the intermediate state, in between the mother and the father.
It is perpetual application.
“They will see good things in their dreams: They will see bhikṣus and bhikṣunīs
Bodhisattvas do not pay respect with their bodies while their minds harbor disdain.
and they will have immense, powerful strength.
Not without cause or condition do tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly awakened buddhas smile. Ānanda,
And devas and yakṣas were present in the sky, Making offerings to the supreme human. {62}
He is a hero because he destroyed the afflictions; undefeated, he conquers all enemies.
or one who possesses especially exalted knowledge,
Thus, they are known as ‘felt-wearers.’
They will understand the Dharma taught by me, and they will not turn against me.”
for we are new and our preceptors and instructors will not go.
The tathāgatas, arhats, and samyaksaṃbuddhas know of you.
The two were in the habit of daubing three lines of ash across their foreheads and going out on their daily rounds.
Noble sons, a buddhafield is a field of pure space,
it is because, excellently abiding in the emptiness of all things, they do not consider anything at all that is to be accumulated.
Once he had made his offering to the Thus-Gone One, the bodhisattva joined his palms and praised the Thus-Gone One with these verses:
“Those who perform many kinds of offerings to the relics— They will all become buddhas in the world.
“Similarly, they should not dwell on the notion that, ‘I should cultivate the five eyes, which, you may ask, comprise the eye of flesh, the eye of divine clairvoyance, the eye of the sacred doctrine, the eye of wisdom, and the eye of the buddhas.’
But those with noble pristine knowledge That transcends the world are satisfied.
Then the Blessed One addressed Senior Śāradvatī­putra as follows:
he alone is the priest! It is for his sake that I have prepared this meal. Go, Uttarā, and fetch him.
Bhruṁ creates an eight-spoked wheel. The eight spokes stand for the eight consciousnesses. The wheel transforms into the body of Vairocana.
which considered migrating from there to this Jambu­dvīpa,
and it can be used to fetch water whenever the man or woman wishes.
Through clairaudience that surpasses the range of human hearing,
He replied, “This is owing to the non-arising of all things!”
“Mañjuśrī, whoever sees all conditioned states as unproduced has understood suffering.
(3) the support for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of mind with the formative force of exertion,
“Thoughts of desire, ill will, and harm are a cause of affliction.
In all the worlds there is nobody who equals you, O Buddha.
as there are atomic particles in buddhafields as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges.
“Śāradvatī­putra! In the same vein, do you think that the real nature of [the other links of dependent origination], up to and including aging and death, constitutes a bodhisattva?”
She should regard her in-laws with the affection reserved for teachers, And be as loving to the servants and maids as she is to herself.
These verses, the wonderful blossoms of qualities, come about.
My wondrous guide, I pray that you arise! {i}
Is this mind [of the bodhisattvas] unattached to the ears, the nose, the tongue, the body, and the mental faculty?
“Son of a lord, do as you wish.”
Although Māra reviled and abused me, My mind remained unshakable. {146}
In a similar way, consciousness that has just undergone transfer relinquishes its body and becomes reflection-like.
should fearlessly and confidently give even their own flesh and blood so that the dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu will be healed from his illness.
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Gadgadasvara said to the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Kamala­dala­vimala­nakṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña,
“ ‘Ah! Come here and speak to me! Ah!
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the west, “Intelligence in Conduct”;
Are indifferent to gain and loss. {77}
“The brahmin Tiṣya, Your Majesty.”
Indra­datta,
but he never had any anger or malice toward anyone.
They are not born in such empty buddha realms, but in buddha realms endowed with the perfect presence of the Three Jewels.
Yet that sort of diligence is false and deceptive, and it fools childish beings.
and a modicum of joy with regard to this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, but who do not commit this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom to writing;
They dedicate that root of merit to the attainment of samādhi.
Ultimately, divine son, the Thus-gone One has not arisen.
He broke free from the evil shackles of Māra,
There were eight million four hundred thousand goddesses from the Heaven of the Four Great Kings who approached the Bodhisattva, making offerings to him accompanied by music and singing.
It should also be applied to the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas
Venerable Lord! In what ways do those deluded persons who abandon this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom actually abandon it?
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings of the past who have trained in this Great Vehicle have attained omniscience.
“Upasena, who is this noble son with you?” “Reverend, he is my ward.”
It starts with ignorance causing formations and so on, until finally, birth causes aging and death.
“You are free from signs, effortless,
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who aspire to generosity. What are the ten benefits?
It constitutes an introduction to the play that is the domain of the Buddha. The Thus-Gone One has taught it to introduce himself.
Monks, from now on you should not expound this discourse to those who lack faith, nor to those who cause disputes. You should not teach it to naked ascetics, nor to the disciples of naked ascetics. You should not expound it to those who subscribe to other doctrines.
Senior Su­bhūti, if all things are non-conceptual,
always act for the sake of sentient beings by means of uncontaminated phenomena.
He has genuinely transcended the form realm and therefore he is called the one who has put down the banner of pride.
Among the fire offerings of the four enlightened activities, The stages of the wrathful one is as follows:
those who wish to comprehend feelings conditioned by sensory contact that is visually compounded,
the nature of sentient beings was ascertained,
They should also praise an excellent life span,
are indeed established on the irreversible level, and cannot waver.
Moreover, Satata­samitābhiyukta, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who possess this Dharma teaching, teach it, recite it, or write it will have the eight hundred qualities of the nose;
holding my offering bowl, I went into the city of Rājagṛha through the Gate of Warm Water and started my alms round.
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva Gagdadasvara teaches the Dharma to beings in this Sahā world realm by teaching this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.
The nine deities are the nine sections of scripture.
“Mañjuśrī, it would be wonderful if you could give us a Dharma teaching similar to what is taught in the buddha realm of the Blessed, Thus-gone Ratnaketu.”
“And should then explain this tantra,
For the sake of ripening those who experience bewilderment they engage in activities of bewilderment, yet they do not dwell on the experience of bewilderment.
They are completely beyond the sphere of all logicians, and beyond the sphere of all those who apprehend things.
Such worship and veneration takes place by focusing on all beings, which is transcendent discipline.
“I salute you, who have ten powers and have crossed the stream.
“It was for the sake of others that for many eons You gave up what is hard to abandon and were disciplined, forbearing, and diligent.
They should know that they are without fear of regressing to the level of the pratyekabuddhas.
As the bodhisattvas teach them the Dharma they make them conquer their pride and practice stainless virtue.
It is hard to live in solitude. It is hard to be happy all on your own.
‘Lord, do not abandon loving kindness And do not become void by nature!
[The other aspects of feelings], up to and including feelings conditioned by sensory contact that is mentally compounded, are not one thing, and illusions another.
Likewise, son of noble family, at a certain time, due to one’s state of life, one’s body perishes and is seen to be on the point of collapse. At that time, one discards this body and
and also arhats would have already attained arhatship.
They have put down their burden. They have reached their goals.
Noble sir, it is astonishing that these thousands of thrones, so big and so high, should fit into such a small house and
How are they like the moon? How are they like the sun?
The third aspect of liberation ensues when beings are inclined toward pleasant states.
have heard this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma directly from Tathāgata Śākyamuni,
And besides, the karma that results from good deeds Also binds one, and ever follows behind one’s back.
What wise man could reject Such noble leadership?”
They will howl as they are hit by clods and stones.
They are not unaware of the right time.
Are you not a tīrthika? Are you not a convert to a tīrthika order?
That voice emerges in order to produce happiness for all sentient beings and to prompt those who are careless.
And a precious seat that was a krośa in size, In one instant returned to the house. {v}
Engaging in conceptualization, They are doomed to the six existences. {51}
All the bound kings saw Nārāyaṇa.
abandoned and let go of my wealth,
In this regard, the expression ‘arms that reach down to his knees when standing, without bending down’ means that when the Blessed One is standing upright, the palms of both hands can touch and probe around his kneecaps, without him having to bend down.
These are considered to be non-virtuous phenomena.
Dwelling in that grove was a goddess, who sang this verse to the sages:
during the final station of the night, just at the break of dawn, right at the time of night when the morning drum is beaten,
Like the moon, he was cooling and soothing.
Similarly, [all the other causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including omniscience, are essenceless.
“He is someone free from attachment, anger, stains and their habitual tendencies.
Three weeks or twenty-one days after the birth, relatives came and gathered to celebrate her birth in grand style,
Reciting this, one should burn the effigy in the charnel ground fire,
Based on generating the roots of virtue with respect to them, beings of the world are born into any of the thirty-two divine realms.
“Then the following second time That the Jina taught many dharmas,
in all these cases, Śāradvatī­putra, great bodhisattva beings have been accepted by [genuine] spiritual mentors, and have abandoned evil associates.
Intention is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it leads to a lack of desire for the Lesser Vehicle.
They do not apprehend the notion that unconditioned elements are empty, or the notion that they are not empty.
Alas, the spaces covered with golden nets!
tell me, what favor could I grant you?”
it also carries the odor of the foul-smelling filth and corpses it passes.
She was disciplined and followed the path of the ten virtuous actions.
Nakṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña, for the person who hears this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma, writes it down, or has someone write it, and who,
and similarly, no sensory element of the ears, sensory element of sounds, sensory element of auditory consciousness, sensory element of the nose, sensory element of odors, sensory element of olfactory consciousness, sensory element of the tongue, sensory element of tastes, sensory element of gustatory consciousness, sensory element of the body, sensory element of tangibles, sensory element of tactile consciousness, sensory element of the mental faculty, sensory element of mental phenomena or sensory element of mental consciousness,
Resembling Siddhārtha, with perfect physique, He will be undaunted by weapons and treatises.
The beings who have obtained and always remember your name are happy;
And attain the ten strengths and every quality of buddhahood, That is what is called the supreme restraint of the mind. {76}
It cannot be perceived inside, outside, or in between.
made love, and indulged all his desires.
The origination of phenomena, and the nature of beings: He teaches that Dharma of the supreme, perfect enlightenment. {79}
(78) They are endowed with markings, as if they were drawn in the colors of vermilion, realgar, minium, indigo bark, and verdigris.
Nor do the applications of mindfulness exist elsewhere, apart from emptiness. This is because the nature of the applications of mindfulness is indeed emptiness and emptiness indeed is the applications of mindfulness.
That which is neither afflicted nor purified neither arises nor ceases.
“Homeless, they possessed this samādhi. They kept it, read it, and understood it.
“Similarly, the son of noble family teaches the appropriate methods to those who desire good advice or possessions, wish to recite prayers and to study,
“Mañjuśrī, should you wonder whether at that time the bodhisattva Liberator from Fear was someone else, you will not find it so.
Then, joining his palms and bowing his head,
He is the one who is venerated by the lord of the humans.
They will continually hear the voices Of those bhikṣus who are mendicants in the Sugata’s teaching And are performing their daily recitation, And those who are teaching the Dharma to assemblies.
There was no female deception, guile, envy, or feminine disturbing emotions to trouble her.
In what way are thoughts of dedication indiscernible and non-apprehensible in the mind that is set on enlightenment?
With complexions like trees, mountains, stones, Or cloud masses, The kumbhāṇḍas let out the horrific sounds Of percussion music With conch shells, kettledrums, clay drums, and large kettledrums.
The southern direction, the western direction, and the northern direction are not discernible.
Similarly, their cultivation of the emptiness of internal phenomena will not be interrupted,
Three spaces is the secret location. Likewise, three spaces marks the chakra of awareness.
“Kāśyapa, in that way the light of the omniscient wisdom of the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas brings the Dharma equally to all beings who have been born in the five states of existence, whatever their aspirations, whether they are of the Mahāyāna, of the Pratyeka­buddha­yāna, or of the Śrāvakayāna.
But once sentient beings have been favored with the power of the instructions,
“Nārāyaṇa, the true meaning eliminates the qualities of ordinary beings
And with faith he bowed down to my feet, And I established five hundred beings on the path to supreme enlightenment. {147}
The Blessed One replied, “Listen, Mahauṣadhi, to what I say.
Moreover, that words have no reference point is their true meaning.
together with a great saṅgha of five hundred monks and with twelve hundred bodhisattvas, all of whom had obtained dhāraṇīs.
They should scent it with aromatic jars.
I would not generate any thoughts of anger toward any sentient beings,
“Similarly, they should not dwell, in an apprehending manner, on the notion that ‘I… should cultivate ten powers of the tathāgatas.’
For this reason, too, great bodhisattva beings who do not realize the uniformity of all things are worthy of homage.
“Venerable Lord! By acquiring which mnemonic incantations do the irreversible great bodhisattva beings not squander the sūtras spoken by the Tathā­gata?”
and relying on that kalyāṇamitra I fulfilled the six perfections.
“Supreme Being, you shine forth, Like the king of mountains in the middle of the ocean.
This is the vow of personal liberation.
I will explain various methods,
“For someone who has wished to hear it,
It is because it genuinely transcends the three times that this vehicle is called the Great Vehicle.”
In order to make happy the fourfold assembly he gives them the gift of the town of nirvāṇa and the great city of the Dharma,
They have perfect intent due to an unwavering motivation.
The hungry and the thirsty were relieved of their hunger and thirst.
They will never be separated from the mnemonic incantations that are neither fettered nor liberated.
when those individual followers of the vehicle of the bodhisattvas are endowed with faith, tolerance, confidence, higher aspiration, willingness, volition, and renunciation,
are free from dust,
And also: ‘If there is anyone who could make use of anything I have, I will give that thing to that being, without any resentment or regret.
Brother Nanda, Brother Upananda,
Similarly, there are views concerning the applications of mindfulness, the correct exertions, the supports for miraculous ability, the faculties, the powers, the branches of enlightenment, the noble eightfold path, and liberation.
Once the sprout has been produced, red, white, or blue flowers will arise.
You have no recollection or mental placement,
“Fall down and lick her lotus,
the individuals who are tied to one more rebirth, the fruit of no longer being subject to rebirth, the individuals who are no longer subject to rebirth,
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, bodilessness is what cannot be cognized by the eye consciousness,
neither effort nor sloth,
He continued to ponder, “The monk Gautama is said to have a great deal of power.
“Such suffering has befallen us, and there are no prospects for living.”
Bhikṣus, I remember that in the past, in a time gone by, he was a holder of the Dharma of nine hundred and ninety million buddhas.
“ ‘What will assuage your illness, my good man?’ asked the prince. ‘What shall I give you?’
“Venerable Lord! Similarly, it is dependent on these great bodhisattva beings that the gods of the Catur­mahā­rāja­kāyika realm are discerned,
“Venerable one, the mind does not have any form and it cannot be shown. It has no appearance yet is unimpeded. It has no dwelling and is imperceptible.”
What wise man could reject Such noble leadership?’
When recited continuously, it will bring enormous glory.
or ‘discarder’—he teaches Dharma without attachment to these.
Likewise, so long will the paths of the ten virtuous actions emerge in the world.
Those who write, teach, and worship this teaching of the Dharma will be visited by the Tathāgata in their homes.
appropriation, relinquishment, conceptualization, dependence, clinging,
Noble son, this Dharma teaching has been taught by the seven thus-gone ones,
I sewed a precious jewel, a priceless jewel that could fulfill all your desires, into the hem of your clothes so that you could live happily.
“Noble one, my spouse has conceived a child.
you do not form concepts about the ‘world.’
the stride that actualizes the attainment of omniscient wisdom,
We have gained great benefit from having seen a holy man such as he.
Manifest praise to the teachings spoken by the Blessed One!
The Kurukullā yogin Should dissolve a pearl on account of the eye
“He has renounced the earth with its oceans, along with countless precious objects.
That would not be a very difficult task, And would not take such great dedication.
likewise [all the aggregates] up to and including consciousness, are not a self.
If you ask why, it is because they do not consider [the nature of these sensory elements], up to and including the sensory element of auditory consciousness.
For the one who must be trained by gods, a god will be emanated, and to the one who is to be tamed by Vajrapāṇi, the latter will appear.
“They will see a great hero, A tathāgata on Gṛdhrakūṭa.
First, the deceased person, agitated and distressed, sees various hell-beings appear.
They said, ‘Father, do not speak such words! We will not slay such a bhikṣu! {89}
“Boys, would you visit every place of which you hear?
Daśaratha­putra transformed himself into a dwarf who wore a deerskin as a sash, held a bamboo staff, and carried a stool.
then we will have insulted the Blessed One and we will have failed to protect the Dharma.
it is because ultimately all phenomena are the same in being utterly unarisen, and the bodhisattva great beings are the same.
“Young brahmin, you did say that.
“What is having that which will bring benefit to others? It is benefiting others.
They resemble donkeys, and they explain the Dharma most clearly.
“Monks, this monk Saṅgharakṣita comes with gifts for the Tathāgata.
“If you ask, Su­bhūti, how great bodhisattva beings act as a protector of the worlds, in this regard,
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then accepted the alms bowl from the great king Vaiśravaṇa, regarding him with compassion.
They will also refine their respective buddhafields.
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is like an echo.”
Have returned to the park, so don’t worry anymore.”
Mañjuśrī, what do you think?
In the dreams he will sit before sick people and manifest whatever appropriate medicine and instruments can pacify their illness. And with one treatment he will heal all illness.
They will not speak or express anything.
The Bhagavān placed upon the head of the youth Candraprabha
They will never be separated from the extrasensory powers that are neither fettered nor liberated.
who do not belittle others and do not praise themselves,
However, monks, as time went on, many of these gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas, as well as Śakra, Brahmā, and the world protectors, began to think to themselves:
and countless, innumerable devas and humans will develop an irreversible aspiration to the highest, supreme enlightenment.”
“As they sequentially proceed on their mendicant route, they do not become weary or disturbed, and develop neither attachment nor aversion to the beings they meet.
Because I myself was then, at that time, Prince Giver of All Wealth.
Thus he became an arhat, free of desire for the three realms,
However, if this should not accomplish it, Reverse the mantra chain and do the recitation.
“Immersed in the practice of the completion stage
Send away all the hunchbacks and all the blind, deaf, and mute people, as well as anyone who is deformed or crippled.
Then Śakra, mighty lord of the gods, said to Senior Su­bhūti,
How did you attain patient forbearance in seeing all phenomena as non-arising?
Whoever among them has heard even one verse, or heard one line of a verse, or with just one aspiration has rejoiced in this sūtra, for all those in the fourfold assembly, Bhaiṣajyarāja,
To live by indulging the mind is proper for fools and to live in control of the mind is proper for the disciples.
In doubt, the monks questioned him who severs all doubts, the Blessed Buddha,
“Because of the roots of merit that were produced by his veneration, he and his retinue were caught by
“The third dedication prayer is:
The victorious ones will relinquish their bodies, For those deluded because of holding on to a self, And for those who always want things to be permanent— So that they may be introduced to impermanence.
Thinking this, one enters through the fontanel of one’s future father just like a falling star.
go without your perfumes.
“The path of renunciation brings only suffering And taming the mind is hard.”
On all of these occasions he has become a Dharma preacher.
Similarly, the nāga kings Nanda and Upananda— Similarly, also, Takṣaka and Kṛṣṇagautama—
They are the perfections of generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, concentration, insight, skillful means, aspiration, power, and wisdom.
“Venerable Lord! For these reasons this transcendent perfection of wisdom is the great transcendent perfection, possessed by great bodhisattva beings.”
[all other attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, are non-arising.
This will remove excess wind and phlegm.
Their skin will be the pure color of beryl, and will bring happiness to those beings who see it.
Therefore have I accomplished A body that is inconceivable and radiant, too. {34}
Since it sees entities as nonentities, it comprehends both entity and nonentity.
“They came into the presence of that jina And addressed questions to that supreme human.
Thus will bodhisattva great beings who abide by the component of discipline attain these four exalted states. 
nor would it cause the slightest harm to that which is still and solid,
One will be born as a haughty spirit— One of the kings of the eight charnel grounds— Devoid of compassion, an eater of flesh and blood.
“Once the being has seen these things, it yearns for them.
King Śrīghoṣa then came there accompanied by his harem and the people of the villages, towns, and regions.
have obtained fearlessness,
with a mind as pristine and open as the center of space; it was vast and unlike any other.
The characteristics of the four joys
Is he deluded or intelligent?
By means of their celestial powers, they traveled to Kapilavastu, that sublime city with a hundred thousand gardens,
They discussed among each other, saying, “Either the time has come for the asura king Bali to die, or the time has come for us to be slain.”
The events of the past, future, and present are not the bodhisattva, and therefore the three times cannot receive any prophecy.
Kauṇḍinya understood the meaning, And so the Three Jewels came to be.
and it was ornamented with many hundreds of thousands of silk tassels and garlands.
and should observe freedom from desire.
let alone bodhisattva mahāsattvas with bodhisattva followers as numerous as the grains of sand in twenty Ganges Rivers,
Whoever’s name one includes in the mantra, she will arrive. One should make love to her.
Some great bodhisattva beings
Mañjuśrī, no dharma whatsoever can be found for which there may be arising or cessation.”
His power, gained from merit in millions of lives, is thwarting your miracles.”
Venerable Lord! The transcendent perfection of wisdom is the mother of the bodhisattvas because it generates all the attributes of the buddhas.
in the form of Lord Mañjuvajra Siddhaikavīra,
May my wealth be spontaneously accomplished.
He contemplated the impure nature of the body and developed a feeling of repulsion, and then disgust.
“Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata obtained an awakening that has no root and no ground to stand upon.”
Moreover, the precious structure that delighted the Bodhisattva clearly reflected all that is found within the abodes of the gods of the desire realm.
After tying the root of sensitive plant to one’s ear during the fertile period of one’s cycle, one will become pregnant.
“O Blessed One, certainly not!” exclaimed Śāriputra.
By rubbing two flat pieces of stone together at night time
not lack of space.
Bodhisattvas do not aspire toward unexcelled and complete awakening in reliance on others.
Mañjuśrī, awakening cannot be explained in terms of the body, the mind, or dharma, non-dharma, real, unreal, truth, or falsity.
they give rise to disrespect, disparage them, denigrate them, and speak ill of them.
Today you have conquered the demons at the foot of the king of trees.
touched and inspired
is the armor of the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration.
“Then Bodhisattva Ratnapāṇi bowed his head to Bhagavat Śikhin’s feet and departed.”
Noble son, bodhisattvas will go alone and compose themselves, with their minds withdrawn and extremely weary.
Yet neither are these temporary phenomena entirely nothing.
“Young man, however many words there can be for forms, the tathāgata has that many appellations for them.
Thatness is space.
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ expertise with respect to the reversal of cyclic existence consist in?
One should make love to Passion Vajrī.
Nevertheless, in order to also satisfy the intellect of those who lacked dedication, the Bodhisattva picked up the bundle of grass,
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, what is the abode of the thus-gone ones?”
Whoever breaches the samaya,
“What is the liberation of liberative art integrated with wisdom?
and to see the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta, to see the bodhisattva Bhaiṣajyarāja, to see the bodhisattva Pradānaśūra, to see the bodhisattva Nakṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña, to see the bodhisattva Vi­śiṣṭa­cāritra, to see the bodhisattva Vyūharāja, and to see the bodhisattva Bhaiṣajya­samudgata.”
She has actually attained irreversibility.
Until the farthermost reaches of space,
so it is that they correctly perceive the real nature of physical forms.
and acts with purpose and integrity, one still does not gain merit.”
knowing the emptiness of the aggregate of liberation,
“As an analogy, Bhadrapāla, suppose a repulsive, putrefying spirit of invisible form were to possess a person’s body, desiring dirty, putrid, defiled things—things thrown into gutters and strewn-offerings.
Whenever they wish for something, their wishes are fulfilled.”
Ratiṁkara, Dharmavyūha, Vyūharāja,
Apart from causing his own death, Does he achieve anything by separating himself from women?
The power of mindfulness is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Then hundreds of thousands of gods and humans let out hundreds of thousands of cries of amazement and waved their banners.
Your Majesty, please find out where the boy has gone.”
One king ruled half the world, The other was king over the other half. {16}
I will not be one who prizes words. Lord of humans, quickly teach me the practice. {4}
had accumulated a trillion retentions, were unobscured, and had insight into the Dharma, all attained patience.
To cover his body he wore stainless white clothes of the finest quality, without any blemishes whatsoever.
and their faces become red.
While the blessed Bodhisattva was dwelling in the Abode of Tuṣita,
“If you ask what is the ‘knowledge of phenomena,’
At that time the earth shook in six different ways, And the buddha realms were pervaded with stainless light.
Who in the teaching of that sugata will attain The six higher knowledges, the three insights, and great miracles.
This wise, supreme man has a moon-like face with the beauty of a blooming lotus.
emanating an assembly of fully ordained monks, an assembly of fully ordained nuns, an assembly of laymen, and an assembly of laywomen—and
The mad had their sanity restored.
the insentient statues of the gods, such as Śiva, Skanda, Nārāyaṇa, Kubera, Candra, Sūrya, Vaiśravaṇa, Śakra, Brahmā, and the guardians of the world, all stood up from their seats and prostrated at the Bodhisattva’s feet.
And no merit greater than pleasure.
similarly [on the other transcendent perfections], up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
He has many servants. He is a wealthy man in that great land.
knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization arose.
Reverend Ānanda, to believe there can be illness in such a body is irrational and unseemly!
It is not the purview of beginners.
If I were to teach this truth,
The nature of the four gnoses Are the antidotes that destroy the four demons.
they do not see it or identify it as suffering.
you will all become tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas.
Son of noble family, the accumulation of discipline, too, involves defilement and grasping, and ripens in the aggregates.
which is free of factors connected with evil deeds and nonvirtues.
Monks, as the Bodhisattva was about to pass away and take rebirth, many hundreds of thousands of bodhisattvas, who were bound by just one more birth,
He himself acted and accumulated thus, so no one else experiences Maudgalyāyana’s actions and accumulations for themselves.
“O gods! This doctrine is profound owing to the profundity of space.
At this point the god Excellent Rule asked the Blessed One,
Mañjuśrī, a dharma with no real perfection cannot be spoken of as either even or uneven.
“I am from the North.”
It liberates all sentient beings who have fallen into the ocean of saṃsāra.
Even the names of the understanding of all phenomena, the understanding of the aspects of the path, and the understanding of omniscience do not exist internally, nor do they exist externally, and nor do they abide between these two.
the emptiness of all things, and the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics were all entities,
“I could, with playful ease, Get hold of all the water in the four oceans.
“Su­bhūti, when those great bodhisattva beings have passed away,
[How can] they engage in every type of giving, and thus attain the untaught generosity?
“Therefore, the one who desires supreme, unsurpassable enlightenment, The accumulated wisdom of buddhahood,
And bring down storms and rains of rock and meteor.
the sublime attributes of great bodhisattva beings
Such was his first aspiration prayer from the past.
promulgate it, and make it widely known to others, those bodhisattva mahāsattvas
The color and brilliance of this light even outshone that of the sun and the moon, those magical planets that are otherwise so highly praised for their great power. The light shone so brightly that it illuminated even places so dark that those beings who are born there cannot see their hands, even if they hold them right in front of their faces.
What six qualities?
All the young princes had the twenty-eight marks of a great being, and all of them had genuinely attained unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.
‘Giving away vehicles such as horses, elephants, and chariots represents becoming included within the bodhisattvas’ Great Vehicle—the supreme vehicle, the unequaled vehicle, the unsurpassed buddha vehicle that is the foremost, sublime, and most excellent vehicle. Therefore,
Some are to be converted by gods.
There are also two types of chakra. First are the chakras themselves; second the channels.
Having that belief they will be dedicated to the teachings of the Tathāgata.
to perceive existences with an attitude of renunciation;
When Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta saw that array of lotuses he asked the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Śākyamuni,
On the other hand, the vehicle will come to rest by way of its non-resting.
The king greeted him with words of welcome and asked,
If you ask what these four are, Śāradvatī­putra, they may be described as follows:
And they feel delight and joy, And amuse themselves going in every direction.
asked, “Where has my son gone?”
It was a voice praised by the lord of the gods and the lord of the demigods.
or he will become a king of Dharma. He will be endowed with the Dharma or the seven precious emblems.
has attained the forbearance that understands that ultimately all phenomena are utterly unborn, utterly unarisen,
Only after all that did he attain the enlightenment of buddhahood.
They spontaneously see The myriad insentient and sentient, The locales and multitudes of beings.
performs an act of motion alone so that the monk who inquires into confidential matters may question the student about impediments.
Therefore, were I also to indulge in desire in the way that worldly beings do, that would not be becoming.
understands that their body is insubstantial like a dream, an illusion,
Bhagavān, in order to abandon afflictions, I have abandoned these apprehensions of the Buddha’s teachings.”
In fact the Bodhisattva did not even use his hand to shelter himself.
this lump should be sealed in a crucible together with some sand. After heating it up,
that the drop of butter extracted with that very tip of a hair split into one hundredths would be able to outshine the four great oceans filled with butter?”
Next is the number called vāhanaprajñapti.
The ultimate truth, which is so because it is the opposite of all forms of speech, statements, cognition, objects of cognition, activities, conventions, and acts, is a gateway to all dharmas.
“Even if all gods and humans became As swift and strong as you are And gathered in a single place, They would be unable to harm this peerless being.”
happiness and suffering will not be experienced but
They do not apprehend the emptiness of all intrinsic defining characteristics as the emptiness of all intrinsic defining characteristics.
and similarly, that universal monarchs will emerge in the world.
praised by Indra and the gods who attend him.
not to be a community leader;
Five thousand gods and humans accepted that phenomena are non-arising.
the four correct exertions, the four supports for miraculous ability, the five faculties,
“However, Mañjuśrī, when this happens there is neither a cloud, nor anything that can be designated as a cloud.
And so, the young brahmin Koṣṭhila began to study Lokāyata philosophy in the presence of the brahmin Tiṣya.
Conclusion of the sixth chapter, “Cultivation of the Samādhi.”
“Young man, the Tathāgata will always give you that opportunity.
After the venerable Śāriputra had allowed his going forth and given him ordination,
“In this way they know that they are untrue, That phenomena are like illusions, that they are naturally empty.
and similarly this doctrine is profound owing to the profundity of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness.
The god asked, “But Mañjuśrī, if the blessed buddhas do not teach the Dharma for the sake of the transcendence of suffering, then why do they appear?”
“Young man, what is the restraint of the mind? Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind are without fear of the Dharma of the buddhas, and have attained the unshakable, liberated mind.
They have reached safety. They have attained freedom from fear.
‘One who sees dependent arising as constant, without life force, devoid of life force, true, unmistaken, unborn, not arisen, uncreated, uncompounded, unobstructed, imperceptible, tranquil, fearless, incontrovertible, inexhaustible, and by nature never stilled,
they do not do so out of [...] aversion,
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings behold those sentient beings who are born in the three lower realms,
He is the gatekeeper of the city of Dharma.
“Gentlemen, the King of Aṅga has been crowned and anointed a kṣatriya king.
the one who abides in great compassion, the one who abides in great rejoicing,
Moreover, Ānanda, if any sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage were to establish the sentient beings of Jambu­dvīpa, as many as they are, in the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth, in the fruit of no longer being subject to rebirth, in arhatship, and in individual enlightenment,
the nature of [all attributes and unconditioned phenomena], up to and including the finality of existence, is non-entity.
Śāradvatī­putra, it is for these reasons that great bodhisattva beings who engage in union with the transcendent perfection of wisdom are said to engage in union.
is designated as the ‘mundane gift of the sacred doctrine.’
“Happy is the freedom from desire That transcends evil.
Words do not go in any direction. Words do not come from anywhere. {20}
Who has this power?
who wish to enunciate the sacred doctrine,
Kuberakāntā (Beloved of Kubera)
and kneeling on his right knee
Without praising myself, without belittling others, and without any concern for material things, I shall teach the Dharma.’
their hair is of even length and styled, wound to the right, and beautiful.
Su­bhūti, do you think, for example, that an arhat can emanate as an arhat whose contaminants have ceased,
Neither the sun nor the moon thinks, ‘I shall shine! I shall benefit sentient beings!’
“Those with foolish understanding think, ‘My sons’ and ‘my wealth.’
Su­bhūti, that is so! You have spoken correctly.
Do you seek to squander the offerings of the faithful and invite misfortune?”
Cutting off all his limbs, Eager to chop off his head
and become the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Vimalanetra.’
When they are separated from their lives they will look back at Jambudvīpa.
She looked among all the trees and eventually arrived beneath a very special and exquisite fig tree.
“Noble son, bodhisattvas possessing ten qualities are guides who unmistakenly point out the path.
In that way, therefore, the youth Candraprabha provided divine food with a hundred flavors to the Bhagavān.
and came first to all of their chores. He would rise early and say,
offer it as a gift to the buddhas, the bhagavats.
the inconceivably numerous words concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous words concerning purification. Those are the four.
He understood that in the end, any amount of wealth will be used up.
He must always remain inside with the maidens so that he will be addicted to their pleasures.
“That wisdom is difficult to understand For the foolish who suddenly hear it.
I am omniscient and all-seeing! Devas and humans, you should come to me in order to hear the Dharma!
He is beyond the three times.
in the same vein, just as [the notion of a tathāgata, arhat, and completely perfect buddha] having [the other causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, is without foundation
to relinquish those who observe discipline;
He is skilled in teaching the Dharma to others according to their capabilities, and therefore
Despite this, the medicines’ taste and efficacy are formless. Their formless taste and efficacy manifest through the vigorous appearance of the person.
attraction for the mother.
This completes the tenth chapter from “The Transcendent Perfection of Wisdom in Ten Thousand Lines,” entitled “Extrasensory Powers.”
No one shall cause him any problems through a hostile mind.
and all will be reborn in the hells.”
So come quickly for that reason!’
a lack of respect for the buddhas, as well as a lack of respect for the Dharma, the saṅgha, the training, the noble ones, and those who maintain pure conduct, whether senior, intermediate, or beginners.
they circumambulated him three times and then praised him with these verses:
“Sir, game does not eat other game.
The novice put it in his mouth and on tasting it, knew it to be divine ambrosia.
One feels extreme passion for one’s future mother
Listen, friends! Other beings have also been born here!
They never offer [leftovers] or anything rotten or decaying.
“Venerable Lord! If, owing to the emptiness of the unlimited and the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end,
the aroma of a spreading, pleasing incense Will be in this realm, O bhikṣus.
nor any turning back of, concepts and thoughts.
And you should speak of this to other śrāvakas also.”
He considers motionlessness, yet he moves in order to develop all living beings.
with Dharma pouring like rain, recollecting and placing the Dharma in the mind.
And it is the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha:
“Like a tree with flowers and fruits, People love a person who delights in giving.
Which has eight thousand trillion verses And moreover another hundred septillion. {10}
He has relinquished the cause of debate and has not engaged in divulging secrets that cause discord among others.
For this reason, divine princes, it is difficult for great bodhisattva beings who don the armor of great compassion for the sake of sentient beings who do not exist.
Monks, they have already practiced and they already possess pure qualities of accomplished scholars.
“Their births and their deaths Are the processes of their minds.
and free from concepts, unappraisable and free from appraisals, and equal to the unequaled and free from parity with the unequaled.
Then the Blessed Śākyamuni spoke to the bodhisattva great beings.
“Similarly, you should know that when these great bodhisattva beings are successful in their practice, their [realization] will be irreversible.
“One should put the soles of her feet Against the base of one’s thighs,
It is knowing that the skandhas, dhātus, and āyatanas are like illusions, and renouncing them.
that Bhīmasena is the son of Vāyu,
Tell me, O Central Deity, All the meanings of the adornments and the rest!
I possess such vast treasure as this, And I am close to the time of my death.’
“Well then, venerable Śāradvatīputra, what is this liberated mind of yours?”
At that moment, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti, having focused himself in concentration,
“as the brahmin Māṭhara is the elder, I ask that you have him defend a position first.”
who uttered these verses of praise to the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Jyoti­vikrīḍitābhijña.
With either conduct devoid of view, Or view devoid of conduct,
For these reasons, Senior Śāradvatī­putra,
Each of them praised those tathāgatas with praises of the buddhas rendered into verse.
Thus, bodhisattvas are capable of containing the limitless rainclouds of Dharma.
As it is indestructible and not destroyed, it is without destruction.
It is an unbreakable vajra recitation.
“Bodhisattvas are not born in barbarian lands where people are foolish, bewildered, and stupid like sheep.
It is the wisdom and skillful means itself,
Then Śakra, lord of the gods, together with the gods from the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, paid homage to the Thus-Gone One with a display of flowers, incense, garlands, unguents, parasols, standards, and flags,
Avalokiteśvara, Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, and Amoghadarśin; Gandhahasti, Ratnakusuma, and Ratnabāhu;
They could not bend a hair on my body, let alone kill me.
“Su­bhūti, when sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage
the inconceivably numerous kinds of words concerning behavior in regard to teaching the composite,
Similarly, when ignorance ceases, all these other phenomena that are based on a lack of knowledge will cease as well.
After that, the rays of awareness from the round sun of the Tathāgata even descend upon the body of those sentient beings with mental continua that are stuck in what is wrong.
Venerable, if these two were but seven years old when they went forth
a magnificent array of many hundreds of thousands of clusters of precious gems,
Will be under the power of gain and honor, And they will criticize each other. {27}
Since he is no longer subject to old age and death he is known as the one who discovered the cool quality.
Imagine a person splits the tip of a hair into one hundred pieces, and then uses the tip of one of those pieces to lift up one drop of water from the ocean.
like a kingly swan taken to wing, flew up into the sky above, blazing
“Noble son, why are you silent?”
“Thus, a bodhisattva who lives in the inconceivable liberation can magically transform any kind of living being into a universal monarch, a Lokapāla, a Śakra, a Brahmā, a disciple, a solitary sage, a bodhisattva, and even into a buddha.
This is my son. I am his father.
We bow to you who have cut the bondage of all fetters!
They do not apprehend unconditioned elements.
First the Bodhisattva proposed a mathematical problem.
were to take from there a single smallest particle, And having traversed a thousand worlds put it down,
hear with their divine ear,
‘If you, master, will impart instruction to her, I shall not prevent this girl from listening to the Dharma.’
I, too, shall guard, protect, and shield those who comprehend, hold, read, and perfectly master this Dharma discourse.
Prostrations to all the buddhas of the ten directions
“There were no fewer than six hundred billion In the saṅgha of that jina.
Not being perceived is to have no abode.
and similarly, no four applications of mindfulness
Even King Śuddhodana kept watch at the palace gate, accompanied by five hundred young Śākyas mounted on elephants and horses.
Thus all of King Śuddhodana’s intentions were perfectly fulfilled. Then the king wondered, “Now, what shall I name my young son?
one should recite the mantra while looking into the sky.
Teach the wisdom of the tathāgatas So that we and these beings Will attain this highest enlightenment.
You who are the god of humans, I ask you to tell me Through whose power have you become Someone who today has guided countless beings?
The bodhisattvas will know through their smells Whatever are used as adornments, The different materials that are worn on the body: Clothing, garlands, ointments, and perfumes.
Here I awakened to the realization
He is powerful, with an army unafraid of the kings from surrounding lands.
Again, venerable Śāradvatīputra asked Māra Pāpīyān,
Similarly, it neither has obsessions, fetters, or latent impulses, nor is it without them.
Beyond that is the number called kuruṭu.
and similarly they totally cultivate thoughts of compassion, thoughts of empathetic joy, and thoughts of equanimity, and they do so without apprehending anything.
and, in the same vein, the noble eightfold path are themselves omniscience, and omniscience is the noble eightfold path, [and so forth].
move on to one with a pleasant smell.
Form is not the bodhisattva, and hence form is not something that can receive a prophecy.
Intoxicated with the arrogance of patience, they create all the suffering that results from fundamental heedlessness.
Which four?
“In the past, O Receptacle of Qualities, when you were a leader of a pack of deer,
Hiding their divine forms, they took on the guise of priests and taught the Vedas to other priests.
Best of beings, you possess celestial wheels Bright and fair, with a thousand spokes and spinning rims, On your feet:
Others, however, say that there were eighty million deities Present from the realm of form. Their vision was purified At the time of the turning of the wheel of Dharma. The 84,000 humans Who had congregated there Purified their eyes And were liberated from all unfavorable rebirths.
no feeling, and no awareness.
so for him I shall make a speech related to giving.’
In that way, this is our good fortune;
its villages, cities, towns, provinces, kingdoms, men, women, and houses;
As they saw the displays, they felt great respect and exclaimed with joy,
and moreover it is the mirror that acts as the condition for the presence of the face’s reflection.
“ ‘Always following those with correct conduct, With skillful methods shunning concepts,
the goddess in all her splendor, one hand holding a lotus and the other displaying the boon-granting gesture.
Then, how could this illusory person attain emancipation in omniscience after training in omniscient pristine cognition?
“ ‘Are the two of you gods or nāgas?
And having given them felt continuous joy. {65}
you do not see the forms that are outside.
The girl wanted to listen to the Dharma but I prevented her. This is why she fell ill.
Hundreds of thousands of pairs of divine calico cloths fell from above.
This is proclaimed to be the perfection of wisdom‌.
At which point the renunciant says: “It is excellent.” Becoming a novice.
He says, ‘These noble ones are my sons; they are my sons,’ and they say, ‘This man is our father.’
Nor has anyone ever discovered hate.
Having prostrated at the Blessed One’s feet,
“Mahauṣadhi, the consciousness of beings who dwell in the realms of hell occupy skeletal bodies and do not depart from these piles of bones.
they show which teachings are of the Great Vehicle by virtue of possessing all supreme aspects, serving as the means for truly accomplishing the welfare of others, being ever excellent, and resulting in omniscience.
He who enjoys a secure refuge is not interested in the Dharma but is interested in a secure refuge.
and having pleased them he honored them, venerated them, respected them, made offerings to them, worshiped them, and revered them.
“Your diligence is firm, steadfast, and unshakable; Bliss-Gone One, you are great from beginning to end.
that is how the beings in the great Avīci hell undergo physical suffering.
It does not transcend the world system of form, nor is it established in the world system of form.
“I have now twice bowed down to your feet, O Leader and Lord— Once when you were born, And now as you practice concentration, shining.”
they have not even trained in this transcendent perfection of wisdom,
“Where is it?” asked the boy.
who had seen that all births end in death, who did not seek to be reborn,
When they are inhaling a short breath, they are fully aware that they are inhaling a short breath.
He is knowledgeable concerning crafts, astrology, the self, the Dharma, the truth, the world, and signs.
Without striving means not to grasp at any dharma.
degenerating or advancing precisely in accordance with their actions. With this understanding he thought:
‘This body is an aggregate of many things. When it is born, only things are born;
Those who keep their conduct stainless Are praised by the buddhas. {6}
it reveals the world comprising the five psycho-physical aggregates, the twelve sense fields, and the eighteen sensory elements to be inconceivable.
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities have pure eloquence.
Possessing the syllable khe
One should inscribe this mantra on a rag that has been discarded in a charnel ground, together with the name of a pregnant woman, enclose it in beeswax,
“Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings train accordingly, they do train in the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
“Do not be displeased but filled with joy! We are your servants.
Infinite names have been taught For the sake of the bodhisattvas. {9}
Just as the accomplishment of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa is described here, So too can the accomplishment of Caṇḍī be gained.
They let fall a great rain of divine flowers of various kinds.
On the way, on the bank of the Nairañjanā River between the nāga king Mucilinda’s domain and the goat herder’s banyan tree,
in perfect shape and appearance and adorned with various jewelry.
if the woman drinks the juice of red leadwort with honey and clarified butter, she will surely not conceive.
Nakṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña, a noble man or noble woman who has entered the Bodhisattva­yāna should develop that thought when they see a bhikṣu who possesses this kind of sūtra.
One should add the mantra: ‘Kill such and such!’
have been taught and rejoiced in by tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges River.
and the Blessed One decreed, “Monks, this person has killed an arhat.
sentient beings should be regarded as essencelessness because space itself is essenceless.
This shall be the sanctuary of the Blessed One Śākyamuni.”
where he approached a monk and said,
“Jagatindhara, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
This concludes the chapter on practice, the thirteenth in the glorious tantra of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa called “The Sole Hero.”
They do not become fixated on the transcendent perfection of generosity, or
Concerning the significance of the four flags, I have taught that it signifies all things Present throughout the three times.
We bow to you who save the suffering beings! We bow to you who do not remain in the migrations!
He will cause a cloud of great compassion to mass,
who wish to become an ally of those who are without allies,
In a moment, it will turn to curds.
‘I must practice all the various bodhisattva practices and all the bodhisattva trainings
Such is the bodhisattvas’ excellent power of not being subjugated.
“My senses are impaired, so be my eyes!
“Those who have entered homelessness In my teaching in order to have a livelihood
when those great bodhisattva beings hold this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom,
If you ask why, it is because the act of abiding, the abider, and that in which they would abide are non-apprehensible.
When bodhisattvas see a donor or a benefactor, they will not try to improve their conduct.
Homage to you, the infinite experience of the awakened ones! Homage to you, the sage who reveals the truth!
“A full eighty-eight trillion beings Heard these verses recited by the prince,
recite it aloud,
Throughout billions of eons;
Their arms were as long as the trunk of a fine elephant,
“At that time there was a sovereign, A king named Varapuṣpasa.
They are like lightning and clouds, unstable and empty. All are without a self, without a being, without a soul. {17}
up to the non-appropriation of the gateways of mnemonic incantation and the gateways of meditative stability,
I say they will not be released from suffering and so forth in subsequent rebirths.
“Consider, noble son, how the god Candra is always adorned and never looks shabby.
Fix it firmly at the end and clearly pronounce the mantra: guhya bhakṣa abhakṣe hūṁ.
All of it was held by the son of the jina, By the dharmabhāṇaka Varaprabha. {77}
Similarly, it should be extensively applied to [all the other attributes and attainments] as well, up to and including omniscience.
Then the Bhagavān praised Youthful Mañjuśrī, “Very well done.
there is the meditative stability named Unattached, Liberated, and Uncovered like Space.
Prostrations to the tathāgata Samādhi­hastyuttara­śrī, buddha of the northeast
Then, Bhagavān, the poor man, wandering in search of food and clothes, comes to the residence of the man who has much money, gold, property, grain, treasure, and storehouses.
I have not disclosed this
“ ‘The kings who are dedicated to their desires, Those rulers of the world throw away their prosperity
Similarly, Su­bhūti, in the same vein as before,
When they see reality, they can free sentient beings from the prison of cyclic existence.
The buddhas, those great immaculate kings, the jinas, Have patience for such fools as these.
they are neither mundane nor are they supramundane; and
In the emptiness of non-entities, the emptiness of essential nature is not discerned.
“I will give you an answer in seven days.”
Many hundreds of beings are delighted and worship you
When Māyādevī sat upon the lion throne,
venerable Bāṣpa,
Skillful means are gateways to the light of the Dharma,
it remains as the supreme syllable.
“Bhagavān, how can bodhisattvas become unobscured and purified with respect to all phenomena?”
And no one sees anyone higher than them. These are distinctive qualities of the first patience. {9}
With all the billions of skills that induce amorous infatuation, The girls were unable to seduce the Bliss-Gone One who has the gait of a young elephant.
Yet ultimately no life-force, soul, man, person, human, or human being is observed either, and they cannot be attached to them.
They must be afraid of engaging in negative deeds.
Similarly, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are like a dream, like a magical display.
Sincere interest is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it enables one to make great effort and be free from doubt.
The Bodhisattva told me in a soft and gentle voice,
I ask that the venerable saṅgha guide me.
a precious jewel, a precious woman, a precious steward, and a precious general.
“This being the case, Venerable Lord,
{12} “As they remain in evenness of mind, There will be an evenness of ripening results:
(79) There is the meditative stability named Utterly Devoid of Delimitation. (80) There is the meditative stability named Dispelling of Doubt. (81) There is the meditative stability named Without Settled Focus. (82) There is the meditative stability named Single Array.
Similarly, physical forms are also free from contaminants and not included within the three world systems, owing to the emptiness of inherent existence.
Venerable Ānanda, however much a monk is involved in boasting, conceit, construction,
Now I am old
With one guñja of this, An experienced person will transform a great quantity.
this turning of the wheel of the sacred doctrine is not the first in Jambu­dvīpa, nor is it the second.
Therefore make the village of Nālada the standard victor’s prize.
that the bodhisattva mahāsattva Samantabhadra came to this Sahā world realm.
That was me while I was practicing bodhisattva conduct. {45}
I will make them perceive the elaborate sūtras with corrupt views.
“But your complexion has faded and is almost gone,
Nor at all with caṇḍālas, swindlers, Or those who are tīrthikas.
“If you ask what are the ‘faculties that acquire the knowledge of all things,’
may my body become golden.
Noble one, you have defeated the opposing forces of the māras,
And in their place,
One should prepare an infusion of hogweed and raṇḍa in sixteen parts of water, reducing it by boiling to just one part.
The effect does not come from a mistaken cause— Barley does not sprout from a grain of wheat.
he was taken to school. He went there amid hundreds of thousands of auspicious signs, and he was surrounded and attended by tens of thousands of boys,
Su­bhūti, it is because sentient beings, the Great Vehicle, and space are all non-apprehensible.
This completes the Noble Great Vehicle Sūtra, entitled “The Transcendent Perfection of Wisdom in Ten Thousand Lines.
It is knowledge of the world.
Noble ones, King Śubhavyūha, having praised the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Jala­dhara­garjita­ghoṣa­susvarana­kṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña­ through describing those qualities, then
One should know that the Great Vehicle is non-existent because space is non-existent.
They should cultivate an attitude that regards all sentient beings as their parents, brothers, and sisters.
“Then go forth, son.”
One will be free from wrinkles and gray hair, and will live for five hundred years.
“They have no kleśas, and give material things away. They know the characteristics of things.
and not be fearful, not be terrified, and not be gripped by terror on hearing the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha?”
there was the bodhisattva mahāsattva Gadgadasvara, who had through his past roots of merit seen such light rays from many tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas.
Then Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara said to her,
They lack convictions
Because of such faults, the wise avoid the foolish And live alone like deer in the forest. {62}
An adept should investigate his body, speech, and mind.
Even if Māra and Māra’s followers were to appear there
“Why should the yakṣas rejoice in it? Because it closes the pathways to all the lower realms.
“The discernment of meaning is the meaning in the knowledge of phenomena.
requested him, ‘Lion who is Lord of Humans, Teach the Dharma! With your excellent speech Satisfy us who are in this world.
Your splendor is like that of the sun, or well-purified gold; It is like the newly risen and stainless moon, “Like the fire whose flames are fed by the sacrificial butter. Your splendor is like a blazing flash of lightning;
This will cure fever
If it is a past birth, it is already finished.
Because they are free from attachment to joy,
Bhagavān, my lustful mind arose later on.
If they thought of the beings in the hell realms in the morning
‘Here the mighty sugatas Lead with the sublime Dharma.
One kills the father in order to take his place,
“I tried to wake up the assembly of men and ladies,
Those splendorous beings that have courage because of being true, Those supreme leaders of beings also do not congregate together.”
If I see him now, I will beg his forgiveness.”
These indeed, Śāradvatī­putra, represent the Great Vehicle of great bodhisattva beings.
“They will quarrel with each other And develop intractable evil malice.
He then decreed,
They constantly have this vision of the buddhas.
The Blessed One replied, “Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings have been well trained in the emptiness of internal phenomena,
It should not be given to tīrthikas.”
“Son of noble family, since they have no misgivings concerning such actions and fear no consequences, this is the eighth root transgression for beginner bodhisattvas.
not tiring in the positive development of living beings;
With this mantra, the vacā fruit should be mashed And mixed with milk.
“I must apply myself to eating even less than this.”
By writing this mantra, interspersed with the beneficiary’s name, on a wall with chalk, one will cure all eye diseases.
I am displeased when I hear them, let alone see them, let alone consort with them!
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ perfect giving free of expectation of a reward consist in?
conceiving of the world as a garden of liberation;
“Su­bhūti, the systematic presentation of the [various] fruits may be disclosed when the relative truth is taken as the standard, but
Similarly, the emptiness of the truth of the path is not [the truth of] the path.
but when their passion is spent, desire vanishes
Witnessing this, thirty-two thousand beings in the retinue of the Blessed One developed the mind set on unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening. Such were the miracles that the Blessed One produced.
They should understand the single characteristic of all phenomena, and yet not enter faultlessness.
He did not consider that understanding to be outside physical forms, nor [outside the other aggregates], up to and including consciousness.
Their bodies will not be afflicted by illness.
Therefore, Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who wish to transcend all the transcendent perfections should train in this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom.
“The thunder from clouds, the beat of a drum, Thunderclaps and the voice of Brahmā
“Śāradvatī­putra, the ‘eight sense fields of mastery’ are merely conceptualized.
“Blessed One, there must be many bodhisattva great beings who attained the illusory absorption in that buddha realm.
He joyously exclaimed, “King, may you be victorious and live long!”
great love,
Similarly, they do not make assumptions about the ten powers of the tathāgatas,
They all requested the Thus-Gone One to turn the wheel of Dharma with these words:
They do not make assumptions on account of that wisdom, [and so forth]. They do not make assumptions on account of the act of wisdom, [and so forth], and they do not make assumptions about the act of wisdom, [and so forth].
Abode of Myriad Flowers,
Therefore those who wish for the path to nirvāṇa Must follow the path of the noble ones. {24}
Similarly, the physical forms, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness that are void constitute the nature of the six transcendent perfections that are also void, and so on,
even the wisdom of the buddhas is unable to know the limits of the merit created by such honoring, venerating, worshiping, and offering.
manifested the miracle of his right hand taking hold of the right hands of those in the entire gathering of bodhisattvas.
Beautifully taught by all the buddhas
Only after the Blessed One had given his consent, did their hair fall out and they were clothed in robes.
Kuntī and the other rākṣasīs said to the Bhagavān,
“My emanations proceed To thousands of millions of realms.
“For as long as they are incinerated by an inferno, they will experience the sufferings of the denizens of the hells.
Their understanding is perfectly pure.
I will teach the application of mindfulness that carefully considers feelings as arising and ceasing.
or ‘sentient being,’ or ‘life force,’ or ‘living being,’ or ‘man,’ or ‘person,’
There will be cessation of suffering and the end of rebirth. {128}
To drive away snakes one should scatter gravel that has been incanted,
The sixth great merit results in becoming Sunirmāṇarati.
I should refine the buddhafields in this manner,
Your Majesty, I will bring My beautiful jewel palace.
which neither decreases nor increases,
Remember your previous actions!
while some writhed on the ground, as if they were fish pulled from water, and cried.
and those in the worlds under the sway of Yama, they should reflect, ‘Alas! When I have attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, in this buddhafield
as far as Akaniṣṭha, also will arrive there,
“The man who fathered me.”
While the Blessed One was residing in the palace of the king of the gods in the Akaniṣṭha realm,
Then the Bhagavān performed that miracle, and through the power of the Buddha the five hundred instruments were played excellently.
Omniscience is pure, owing to the purity of the understanding of the aspects of the path.
They comprise (1) the eye of flesh, (2) the eye of divine clairvoyance, (3) the eye of wisdom, (4) the eye of the sacred doctrine, and (5) the eye of the buddhas.
ones’ own self-awareness‌,
when one achieves and abides in the sense field of infinite consciousness, thinking, ‘Consciousness is infinite.’
For these reasons, Senior Śāradvatī­putra, the non-arising of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness is not consciousness [and the other aggregates].
He is the one with the supreme form beautiful to behold. He is the one with calm faculties,
Similarly, they also actualize formative predispositions of the meritorious, non-meritorious, and neutral sorts through their body, speech, and mind.
“Gentlemen, as the ruler of all who have been crowned and anointed kṣatriya kings,
whenever they do not engage with the notions that physical forms are entities or that they are non-entities.
“The Jina, who was perfect, with control over his senses, Perceived the king’s pure conduct.
Having become a universal monarch, one attains The kingdom and the pleasures of the senses.
he blends them together.
“At the time of invitation, offer drum And trumpet music, fruits and incense.
“In hell, they see many hundreds of celestial pleasure groves with trees in full bloom, and areas of broad green meadows.
Śriyāmatī and Yaśamatī, Yaśaprāptā and Yaśodharā, “Suutthitā and Suprathamā, Suprabuddhā and Sukhavyūhā.
“In order to tame Māra, you entered this battle.
That person who is a hero with that meditation, And aspires for the highest enlightenment,
“Venerable ones,” he replied, “I do not wish to participate in the Dharma teaching that youthful Mañjuśrī is now giving.
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings,
“For these reasons, Su­bhūti, this supreme vehicle, the Great Vehicle, also accommodates countless, innumerable sentient beings.
Those bodhisattva great beings who seek to acquire the ‘marks of one hundred merits’ will exert themselves in the practice of meditating on this absorption.”
An uncountable number of eons ago, this son of noble family, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha, attained acceptance that phenomena are non-arising, attained discriminating awareness, and attained the meditative concentration of brave progression.
Su­bhūti, it is so!
Your parks are the best of the best, full of flowers and fruits and resounding with the singing of birds.
Were he to accomplish only this, this brahmin boy’s insight would surpass my own.”
“Preceptor, I have not fallen ill upon going forth.
acquire a corporeal form through which they will refine the buddhafields and bring sentient beings to maturity.
Because the thus-gone ones do not turn the wheel of Dharma without being requested!”
Possessing these extrasensory powers [and so forth], they will travel from buddhafield to buddhafield, and they will venerate those lord buddhas, honoring them with all resources, and they will also bring sentient beings to maturation and refine the buddhafields.
when those who follow the vehicle of the bodhisattvas, immediately after hearing this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, form aspirations toward it,
Place the diagram in a fresh clay cup And draw a crossed vajra on the lid.
Gods, although this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom has such defining characteristics, for the sake of the world the tathāgatas have named, symbolized, designated, and expressed it in conventional terms,
He was a lamp of wisdom for the entire world, But because of my desires I had him slain. {98}
and therefore may the Tathāgata reveal well the body that is the relic of the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Prabhūtaratna.’ ”
Some carried flaming mountains in their hands while playfully riding on other mountains as their mount.
The Blessed One is born with an extremely upright posture.
and tie it to the head of someone who is bound; it will release him from bondage.
“They know the minds of all beings:
“Householder,” he replied, “do you think my ascetic attendants simply sprout up like weeds?
Awareness is explained as the awareness that understands the meaning and understands consciousness;
As they had now given the true prophecy, they returned to their own abodes.
“Knowing the Dharma that is without activity, They have entered nonduality, which is the same as space.
beautify the teaching of the Buddha.
Then the great king Vaiśravaṇa said to the three other great kings,
For how long have they embarked on unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment?
“Ah! Even wrongdoing can be checked! I shall go forth among these people.”
All great displays In all the limitless millions of realms Now manifested at this place By the power of the Bodhisattva.
When they hear something that is stupid and mistaken They will repeat those blameworthy words a hundred times. {43}
And steadfastly wandered in this way for eight years. While remaining in wandering his life came to an end. {53}
At that time the Blessed One spoke to the group of five monks:
A monk whose discipline has lapsed will feel regret.
Thus, for numerous eons, for hundreds of thousands of eons, and throughout incalculable numbers of eons, they simultaneously teach the Dharma to all beings, employing all sorts of analogies and approaches, and yet there is no end to their teaching of the Dharma.
“A bala­cakra­vartin king, when pleased, Gives to his warriors many cowries,
Later, he went to the Jetavana, where he posed his question to a monk,
It is thus that they perfect the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Worshiped by him, pleased, I shall grant complete attainment.
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of ignorance concerning purification. Those are the four.
In this way, this Dharma-method of mine will spread.
Enlightenment is not a door for the sense-media.
This they consume free of desire.
He then approached the bodhisattva Prajñākūṭa, spoke with the bodhisattva Prajñākūṭa about many pleasant and joyful things, and then sat down to one side.
having obtained what he sought and with his wishes fulfilled.
But the bodhisattvas who read, hear, believe, and teach this profound teaching with its impeccable expressions reconciling dichotomies and its analyses of stages of development—these are veterans in the religious practice.
Entered the temple where the Lord of the World Contemplated in meditation on one seat For an entire eighty-four eons.
“But that echo is not past, future, or present.
The faults associated with the mind fade away in those whose minds delight in meditation.
If they abide in, cognize, and are intent on feelings due to sensory contact that is visually compounded, and so on up to feelings due to sensory contact that is mentally compounded,
“It is dualistic to refer to ‘aggregates’ and to the ‘cessation of aggregates.’
Similarly, are feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness neither fettered nor liberated?
Experienced the sufferings of hell For countless billons of rebirths. {25}
“Master, can you settle a matter in debate in my presence with this brahmin Tiṣya?”
sat down on the lion throne with its great jewel lotus inside. He sat with his legs crossed and observed the entire gathering of bodhisattvas.
“Noble son, only those who have served as many buddhas as there are grains of sand in the Ganges River will come across this discourse.
It was a pleasing bed bestrewn with flowers. There she unfastened her tiara of precious jewels, Like a goddess in the Miśraka Garden.
“Exhausting defilements is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
is bringing sentient beings to maturity, is refining the buddhafields, and is even conjuring emanational forms through miraculous abilities!
they should praise and rejoice in others who abstain from wrong views.
However much they teach They will not become proud. {16}
The Noble Great Vehicle Sūtra The Sections of Dharma
‘I have.’“The sage thought,
Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings think,
“Nārāyaṇa, they apply these four to everything.
and his circle of students was small, he said to the young brahmins,
“If someone, perceiving this teaching as their master, worships it with parasols, victory banners, [F.64.a] and flags, or
‘Relinquishing sovereignty over the four continents and Jambudvīpa, as well as its kingdoms, represents the bodhisattvas’ achievement of sovereignty over the kingdom of the sacred Dharma. Therefore,
“ ‘Your hand is burning But you are not disturbed.
I, the King of the Dharma, shall proclaim it. I shall guide toward the highest enlightenment;
the one with power,
one billion realms of the Unlofty Heaven,
“but I did see something somewhat amazing and remarkable so listen as you please.
Fled throughout the ten directions, Crying out with loud wails.
Then the rākṣasī named Lambā, the rākṣasī named Vilambā, the rākṣasī named Kūṭadantī,
“Based on the lips, throat, palate, and tongue, The sounds of syllables are produced.
they do not preoccupy themselves with degenerate morality.
“What is the attainment of joy? It is the nonperception of all phenomena,
I can say just a little about his pores.
We will approach him once he has risen from this state.” And with that they sat off to one side.
That is how you should regard inner form, too.
They were just as they are now.
and offer incense consisting of aloeswood, sandalwood, frankincense, and myrrh.
Similarly, the transcendent perfection of wisdom should be actualized due to the non-actualization of the transcendent perfection of generosity and the other transcendent perfections, up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
mighty nāgas,
That which leads to the intrinsic nature is rational.
and yet their mind does move for the sake of accumulating roots of virtue, ripening sentient beings, and upholding the sacred Dharma.
Listen, for I shall teach you their benefits.
(70) The joints of their bodies are well articulated. (71) Their crown protuberance is inconspicuous.
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline
and induce them to enter and become established in the expanse of nirvāṇa, where there is no residue of the psycho-physical aggregates.
“Nothing arises to their conceptual mind. They know emancipation from all phenomena.
die among spirits and are reborn among humans.
the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Mahābhijñā­jñānābhi­bhū who had come to the sublime, highest Bodhimaṇḍa and was seated on a lion throne at the foot of the Bodhi tree.
The Blessed One gave them instructions,
They should also observe that the attributes of the definitive transcendent perfection of wisdom,
“Good sir, is your condition tolerable?
It is just as you have said.
how could one be liberated by perceiving physical forms as entities, or by perceiving them as non-entities, or by perceiving them as both entities and non-entities!
Without these conditions the body cannot be born.
They should not initiate the workings of demons.
Knowing that nature of phenomena, I remain in the dharmakāya. {9}
Imagine, then, that the person traveling from the east knows the path very well because he has traveled on it before, and that he knows what it is like all the way.
nor is it included within the world system of formlessness.
Their head will burst into seven pieces Like the foliage of a basil plant.
and, in the same vein, they will turn the wheel of the sacred doctrine that is equal to the unequaled.
Thereupon, the Blessed One addressed Senior Śāradvatī­putra as follows:
These are the guides that appeared in two eons. I made offerings to them for the sake of enlightenment. {27}
The strength of ten bodhisattvas who have been definitively emerged for one trillion eons is the same as the strength of one bodhisattva who has been definitively emerged for ten trillion eons.
For that, bodhisattvas project emanations at the sites where there are non-Buddhists such as the carakas, the parivrājakas, and the nirgranthas.
And the guides become visible.
They know no contentment and rob others of their wealth.
Venerable Lord! How is the transcendent perfection of wisdom absolutely pure because all things neither arise nor cease, and are neither afflicted nor purified?
And should each sentient being be inspired by their own type of form,
“Su­bhūti, in the same way, one who wishes to attain emancipation in things without defining characteristics merely wishes to attain emancipation in the fruit of entering the stream.
At the time of tying the amulet, one should make the sick person face east and
are never born among beings of inferior species or class, and never descend to the levels of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas because they have perfected the roots of virtue,
Su­bhūti, the emptiness of internal phenomena constitutes the sameness of great bodhisattva beings.
anoint it with sandalwood paste, and feed it milk.
they introduce others to this misapprehension.
and which are in no way displeasing to the eye.
Some people need an analogy to understand the meaning expressed by a skilled being.
This concludes the twenty-fourth chapter, on Trapuṣa and Bhallika.
Once there, he saw that fine seats had been arranged and choice foods laid out.
In the village of Kāṣṭhavāṭa, there lives a royal priest named Potalaka.
Alas, those who remain in the world are obscured by the black darkness of ignorance.’
This makes them spin for a long time in cyclic existence, the source of suffering; Their suffering, experienced in hell, is extremely painful.
How should they train in the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, and
Meanwhile, trailing behind, the students of the young brahmin Maudgalyāyana walked, reciting mantras on their way to the city.
In this way he demonstrated hardships for six years without ever weakening his resolve.
Knowing the monk was likely to pass by one of the main crossroads, Upatiṣya went there to wait.
by such causes, conditions, and bases have become downcast and depressed,
“Your Majesty, a bodhisattva, a great being,
he felt blissful and happy.
Any practice related to any demon constitutes bodhisattva practice.
“The thus-gone ones feel great compassion for sentient beings since all phenomena are without marks and yet sentient beings experience marks.
and they will attain final nirvāṇa, in which no residue of the psycho-physical aggregates is left behind. Yet this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom will neither be diminished nor replenished.
Son of noble family, it is in this way that you should look upon arising and cessation due to karmic conditions.
and knowing that the great assembly of people had gathered to hear the Dharma,
“Far more difficult will be If someone after my nirvāṇa Is a holder of this sūtra And makes one being hear it.
Lord, it is wonderful that this holy person, having left a buddhafield as pure as Abhirati, should enjoy a buddhafield as full of defects as this Sahā universe!
and an abundance of thousands of groves and trees of different types and flawless blossoming lotus flowers.
kaṭapūtanas, and pāṃśukūla piśācas also come see me.’ “He claims, ‘I converse with the gods.
The bright radiance of an illuminating orb of light, free of dust and dimness, made them even more beautiful.
It is being first to speak on seeing beings. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {63}
the sons and daughters of noble family who follow the vehicle of the bodhisattvas will perfect their roots of virtue.
49,000 classes of garuḍa, 49,000 classes of wanderers,
one should add: ‘Make such and such respond to my practice!’
Kauśika, can you guard, protect, and offer sanctuary to a dream, a mirage, an optical aberration, a magical display, or a phantom?
She proceeded to the aśoka-tree forest, where she felt at ease.
those who have maliciously caused a tathāgata to bleed;
The Dharma that those buddha bhagavāns taught was heard by all without exception.
Similarly, [the other transcendent perfections], up to and including the transcendent perfection of generosity, are empty of the transcendent perfection of generosity, and so forth.
If he should ask, ‘Is there not an afterlife?’
I will mount a white, six-tusked king of elephants and reveal myself to them
“When it has spread through them A rain of incense falls.
In this regard, bodhisattvas think as follows: ‘All feelings without exception are suffering.
This completes the twenty-first chapter from the Transcendent Perfection of Wisdom in Ten Thousand Lines, entitled “Early Indications.
“Venerable Lord! How then does it bring about attainment?”
“Oh, look at his figure!” The students replied, “Yes, we see him. He is amazing.”
He becomes long-lived so that he lives for a great age
Having learned that, he set off for a remote land,
All those young princes had been born out of chastity.
One will clear worms and indigestion completely.
“There is such inconceivable speech But the bodhisattvas have no pride.
“ ‘I have no fear that I will fall into lower realms, And I will not again become a woman
Instead, they think, ‘Without knowing or hearing such teachings
When Mañjuśrī Kumārabhuta delivered this teaching in a manner beyond reference points,
in dismay, thinks, ‘I should not be killed!’
Thus, guru, give me the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās,
applying the Dharma according to the Dharma;
They do not consider whether the body is connected with the mental faculty.
Ānanda, I knew through foresight that
Similarly, it has not been revealed so that sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena might be grasped or not grasped.
there are few who could respond in the manner of an irreversible great bodhisattva being, whether they abide on the purificatory levels or the non-purificatory levels.
When the young brahmin Upatiṣya taught the five hundred young brahmins to recite brahminic mantras,
who have been imprisoned, are separated from friends,
“Thus, noble son, just as is the bodhisattva’s production of the spirit of enlightenment, so is his positive thought.
The monk officiant then asks about the monk who inquires into confidential matters:
This made the Bodhisattva very delighted, and he thought to himself,
“Bhagavān, what is the cause and what are the factors whereby when bodhisattva mahāsattvas are practicing infinite bodhisattva conduct,
Even so, Mahauṣadhi, for the body, craving,
Wherever you shall sit, travel, or rest, And wherever the hearers, who are the children of the Bliss-Gone Gautama,
and began to look all about them.
establish all beings, too, in great nirvāṇa.”
“They train in accord with all the jinas. Those wise ones do not practice non-Dharma.
I will definitely practice generosity by offering music!’
“Yes, that is so, Mahauṣadhi,” continued the Blessed One.
“The Tathāgata always has the quality of non-arising,
King Śuddhodana then said to the assembly,
they may be styled as the transcendent perfection of wisdom [and the rest]?”
Knowing his perfect conduct, the Sugata, The Lord of humans, the one with wisdom free of attachment, smiled.
“Su­bhūti, conditioned elements, the nature of conditioned elements, the real nature of conditioned elements, the essential nature of conditioned elements, and the defining characteristics of the essential nature of conditioned elements
As they hear the teachings they apply them and subdue their pride.
And they will smell the many kinds of smells, The pleasant and unpleasant smells that there are In this entire realm of worlds,
“Young man, at that time and in those days, King Jñānabala’s daughter was sixteen years old and she was beautiful, attractive, and charming.
And these people are only the five aggregates.
When they are sitting, they are fully aware that they are sitting.
In the form of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.
the discernment of definitions, and the discernment of eloquence. I shall manifest these four!’
not seeking the delusions of others,
and this purity of omniscience, are indivisible:
they become endowed with great compassion, and they accomplish the benefit of countless beings.”
They have reached the perfection
“Tadyathā: agaṇe gaṇe gauri gāndhāri cāṇḍāli mātaṅgi pukkasi saṃkule vrūśali svāhā.
We shall go to meet Youthful Mañjuśrī.
adherence to the points taught by the thus-gone ones,
will obtain the treasure of the buddhas, they will obtain the treasure of the Dharma,
One’s mother in this life may be one’s wife in another,
Are always restrained and established in self-discipline, And are very gentle, have pleasing speech, and speak tenderly. {5}
Are observed and beloved by many people, And those people never have enough of gazing upon them. {103}
Their happiness was destroyed
The site was also adorned with trees made of various precious gems.
Likewise the practice of the buddhas, starting with Vipaśyin and Śikhin.
“There is only one goddess, wisdom, Abiding in five forms.
It was adorned with all sorts of jewels in many different arrangements and patterns.
‘The seed phrase supreme ma teaches the way all phenomena are bereft of middle and extremes.’
As protection from the danger of arrows and thieves,
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ excellent unperturbed patience consist in?
and began searching for him among the gods, but he did not see him there.
The time for safeguarding The welfare of humans has neared!
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ excellent patience that does not differentiate consist in?
Then came twenty thousand horses covered with golden ornaments and full of jewels.
All of them were there to request Dharma teachings from the Thus-Gone One.
For those qualities of the body That I have indicated. {29}
In the same vein, [all attributes and unconditioned phenomena], up to and including the finality of existence, are empty of the nature of the finality of existence [and so forth],
whenever they do not engage with the notions that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are imbued with happiness or that they are imbued with suffering.
Neither is it the case that such action cannot be cleared away through wisdom.’ Having said this,
They follow the Dharma but not based on the path.
They are: [1] they devote themselves to wisdom and perfect it; [2] they follow the example of the buddhas;
“And this sprout of name and form is not created by itself, not created by another, not created by both, not created by Īśvara, not transformed by time, not derived from prakṛti, not dependent on a single factor, and not born without any cause.
“When was this?” “At such and such a time, a long time ago.”
Thus, the tathatā and the self are not two, they are non-dual.
‘O noble guide, we are tired, exhausted, frightened, and miserable. We are going to turn back. This jungle goes on too far.’
Bhṛgu, Aṅgiras, and others who exerted themselves in austerities Did not attain that supreme state, so forget about you, an ordinary man.”
Now, monks, since the Thus-Gone One wanted to cross the river,
Pure Being, please come here!
And likewise practices the conduct of supreme love, And has the motivation to benefit all beings. {37}
This should be known as the perfection of discipline.
For if you do not, from this day forth, I shall neither eat your food nor honor you.”
“Reverend, the two of them are not yet fifteen.”
It is said that multi-colored cords And unbroken white mustard grains Will protect them— Long live the children!
“Divine being, the omniscient mind, the mind that is equal to the unequaled, the mind that is superior to all of the three worlds, the mind that is entirely beyond the hearers and solitary buddhas—when bodhisattvas do not perceive that mind to be present inside, outside, or both,
‘Offering one’s feet represents the bodhisattvas’ Dharma feet that lead to the seat of awakening. Therefore,
freedom from pride, conceit, and arrogance by being continuously mindful of subsisting on alms;
One should blend pigeon’s droppings with honey, and after applying this to the penis,
“Evil one, you are garrulous, Like an impudent crow.
circumambulated the Bhagavān three times, and with hands together in homage,
while the accumulation of learning is like the limitless sky throughout the ten directions.
Similarly, they become equipoised in the meditative equipoise of the sense field of infinite space, and [in the other formless absorptions], up to and including the meditative equipoise of cessation. Yet,
When I had said these words, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came there and,
I do, however, think that they will long for unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, and that they will aspire even more toward unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
“They may become suns or moons, Indras, Brahmās, or lords of creatures; They may become fire or water Or earth or wind.
I approached the realm of Tathāgata Padmottama, arrived there ,
Assuming the form of White Acala,
Noble one, make vast offerings to my relics,
its blood is not contaminated,
“In what way, you may wonder, do bodhisattvas open up and arrange the infinite structures of great palaces of distinct Dharma teachings?
They are covered with excellent cloth
With such confidence, bodhisattvas pursue their training diligently and persistently.
the sensory element of gustatory consciousness,
“A complete severance is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
It will perish and after death will not arise again.
or ‘born of Manu,’ or ‘son of Manu,’
they set in place and protect their buddha realms.
Uncontaminated physical forms are neither fettered nor liberated, and similarly, uncontaminated feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are neither fettered nor liberated.
Packed with intestines, liver, spleen, lymph, and saliva, it is weak.
Well, Great King,
The aspect-less is explained as the gate to liberation of the samādhi of no-sign.
Leading sentient beings to the absence of self, it knows the self to be without self.
Thus, bodhisattvas are free from acquiring things through pretense and flattery.
Enjoin him to practice the equally applicable ethical code:
The lord, the Acala of Reality, Is well concealed by me in all the tantras.
Two thousand bodhisattvas came to accept that phenomena are non-arising,
Similarly, if they engage with the notion that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are afflicted, or that these are purified, then they are merely engaging with mental images.
Bodhisattvas see these infantile, dull, and unskilled beings that are present in each of the six realms.
Venerable Lord! This transcendent perfection of wisdom is established by means of great deeds.
Similarly, the transcendence of the eyes is always without fear.
I also saw the bodhisattva mahāsattva Bhaiṣajyarāja, who has attained the might of the power of diligence, and the bodhisattva mahāsattva Pradānaśūra
Jinaputra Ajita also manifested A divine, splendid parasol that emitted delightful sounds
They benefited many millions of beings And after, like an extinguished flame, attained nirvāṇa. {26}
They have these qualities through knowing the nature of phenomena. {50}
He is called the one with a body that issues forth entirely from the realm of phenomena because he transcends the path of space-like vision.
As Indra, Brahmā and the guardians of the world all offered their praises and acclaim,
“The ritual of arranging mantras, How might that be?”
Blessed One, bodhisattvas should respectfully learn all its profound topics and put them into practice.”
He had the sharp vajra weapon of supreme wisdom.
He has never tired of giving all kinds of elixirs to those who needed them. Therefore
Whatever you seek and wish, That request I shall grant you.”
“Noble son, when bodhisattvas have attained this intrinsic nature they feel, ‘I must establish all beings, too, in this intrinsic nature.’
He then resolved to exert himself in quest of the Dharma, with the thought, ‘Now, where will I find the sublime teachings?’
Their bodies become youthful like that of a young prince whose every whim is attended to.
It entails absorption in the nine serial steps of meditative equipoise by perceiving cyclic existence and nirvāṇa without duality.
It is the knowledge of the body’s condition.
“This sūtra is extolled by the sugatas, And upheld by many bodhisattvas.
Then the two bodhisattvas went before the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni.
the supreme being,
If he consents, there should be no delay,
For the sake of protecting all beings, Listen to me for all incantations!
If you ask why, it is because they do not consider the nature of the truth of the cessation of suffering.
“Just as many thousands of savages Do you harm in various ways,
Divine being, moreover, whenever a bodhisattva turns back or enters, he is an irreversible bodhisattva.
the saṅgha of bodhisattvas, and the saṅgha of bhikṣus.
“Senior Su­bhūti, it is for this very reason that the unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment of the bodhisattvas is extremely hard to bring forth,
You have no conceptualization whatsoever. You have the wisdom of nonattachment toward the three existences. {12}
I, the tīrthika [tīrthika’s name], ask that the reverend and compassionate saṅgha, out of your compassion,
“With the tail of the peacock, you tame all nāgas.
‘My Teacher is omniscient. He knows everything.
Their eyes will be beautified By eight hundred qualities.
This is the king of all good advice Given by all thus-gone ones.
Those beings you saw were his disciples when he lived and dwelt in the Ṛṣipatana Deer Park near Vārāṇasī.
being insatiable in the skill of perfect dedication, and
they become absorbed in the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable aspirations, and the formless absorptions, and then,
finally departing from the presence of the Blessed One.
collects virtuous and non-virtuous actions,
Having accepted it, he spoke in verse to the great king Virūḍhaka:
The medicines should be given To the patient while he is facing east.
Thereupon the Licchavi Vimalakīrti performed the miraculous feat of placing the entire assembly,
When this tathāgata teaches the sacred doctrine, no sentient beings will hesitate, wondering whether this doctrine is in fact the doctrine.
“It is the contemplation of phenomena. It is seeking to hear the Dharma.
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya then spoke these verses to Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta:
In this supreme practice of bodhisattva conduct They will always experience happiness. {62}
Su­bhūti, if, for example, an illusionist or the apprentice of an illusionist, standing at a crossroads, in the presence of a large gathering of people, were to offer food to those in need of nourishment, and dispense [all those other aforementioned] gifts, up to and including the appropriate human resources,
“The unfindability of phenomena is found, But that finding also cannot be found.
As monastics, they muster diligence to attain what had not been attained, comprehend what had not been comprehended, and actualize what had not been actualized.
The great king Virūpākṣa now arose from his seat,
It is knowledge of the past. It is knowledge of the future.
therefore, I would exclude impostors from this Dharma and Vinaya.
it is because they consider that those applications of mindfulness are not applications of mindfulness,
do not come from anywhere, do not go anywhere, and do not even abide anywhere.
who will abide in the real nature and then attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, let alone abide exclusively in the real nature and teach the sacred doctrine?
they will spoil the saṅgha’s bedding with urine and feces.”
The tathāgatas do not originate from skandhas, dhātus, and āyatanas.
what hopes I had for you to become king of the world were dashed.
What did he pray for?
“Son of noble family, bodhisattvas who have achieved this absorption that encapsulates all merit have left the eight unfree states behind, and will not be born in the lower realms.
That is to say, although bodies that are not meritorious result amongst hells beings or in the animal state or the world of the Lord of Death or among the demigods,
How does it stand?
“Young priest, listen!
Su­bhūti, if the transcendent perfection of wisdom were not absolutely void, and
and installed me among gods and humans.”
fully awaken to unexcelled and complete buddhahood.
One should visualize the wind maṇḍala arisen from the syllable yaṁ.
Similarly, if they engage with the notion that entities exist in feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness, or that entities do not exist therein, then they are merely engaging with mental images.
They teach this sacred doctrine without transgressing those aspects of emptiness at all.
But when, Mañjuśrī, a lot of rain falls on the great earth from the atmosphere and the sky above,
When sounds were heard, he was neither startled, nor did he avert his gaze.
By the twelfth year he was free from being intimidated by any of the treatises, as he was thoroughly acquainted with all of the crafts and arts.
Having incanted some ash with this mantra, one should apply it to the eyes, making a dressing with it;
“Young man, if the amount of merit that is obtained By those who possess and recite this samādhi Were to become a phenomenon that has form,
‘The Jina teaches the Dharma equally,
The offering of flowers, incense, perfume, garlands, ointments, powders, clothing, parasols, banners, and divine flags, and the offering of other material gifts, and the offering of uragasāra sandalwood does not compare.
“The one with infinite sight knew their request And
At that time the bodhisattva mahāsattva Prajñākūṭa, who had come from the buddha realm of Tathāgata Prabhūtaratna that was in the downward direction, said to Tathāgata Prabhūtaratna,
“They will be devoid of shame. They will have lost the wealth of the mendicant.
As the teacher removes the blindfold,
“Friend, go from this Brahma realm up to the Heaven of the Thirty-Three and tell them,
Su­bhūti, when a son of enlightened heritage or daughter of enlightened heritage who follows the vehicle of the bodhisattvas has heard this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, and then retained, held, recited, mastered, and been attentive to it in the correct manner, and also practiced it with the real nature as his or her focus, that son of enlightened heritage or daughter of enlightened heritage who follows the vehicle of the bodhisattvas would generate much greater merit than the aforementioned merits.
At that time the Bhagavān said to the nāga king Sāgara:
neither having obtained the result, nor not having obtained the result;
Endowed with the liberations and emptinesses, And likewise the major and minor marks.
“Enter the residence of the Jina And wear my Dharma robe.
O, abiding in the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration,
That is to say, they should not dwell on the notion that ‘I am a follower on account of faith,’ or ‘I am a follower on account of the doctrine.’
Similarly, those who wish to abandon desire, hatred, and delusion;
the samādhi named Lightning’s Illumination,
and similarly, when they establish, cognize, and become fixated on the notion that [the sensory elements] from the eyes to mental phenomena are unceasing;
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of fundamental ignorance and, in the same vein, of [all the other links of dependent origination], up to and including aging and death, as empty or not empty, constitute a bodhisattva?”
“Bhikṣus, other than the Tathāgata, there is no one who can match Pūrṇa Maitrāyaṇī­putra in meaning or in words.
“The bodhisattvas who know emptiness
Su­bhūti, these are the five extremely refined eyes of great bodhisattva beings.
“Immaculate One, destroyer of the afflictions, birth, and death: Gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, And the powerful demigods await you.
and I will make them venerable in every kingdom.
He knows impermanence but is not complacent about his roots of virtue.
‘It is the seal of the nature of all phenomena. It is the transmission of a quintillion sūtras.
The Thus-Gone One has pulled out the thorn of pride.
Nor does the body think, ‘I am produced by these conditions.’
they are not taken in hand by an excellent spiritual mentor.
O child of enlightened heritage! The ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty are similarly empty of notions of “I” and “mine.”
He was residing there together with a great saṅgha of eight thousand monks,
what is the cause and what is the condition
The previous thus-gone ones used a seat of grass as they attained unsurpassed, genuine and perfect awakening.”
A woman who is of white complexion
no one to listen, and no one to understand.
Surrounded by bodhisattvas, He is seated on a lion throne.
The completion of the trichiliocosm can be likened to that which is superior to the entire world yet extends throughout space containing all world realms.
Pomegranate trees, wood-apple trees, āmalakī trees, banyan trees, bodhi trees, plakṣa trees, kapittha trees, udumbara trees, sal trees, and tamāla trees all released their fragrances.
Sixteen, multiplied by four, Is concealed in the amount of sixty-four.
“The offerings of the gods at the seat of awakening, And the arrays of the sons of the victorious ones— They all stand together, set forth for the wheel of Dharma.
these constitute the first root transgression.
In this way, Su­bhūti, do great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, acquire the transcendent perfection of tolerance.
“No,” Rudraka replied.
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of wealth concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of wealth concerning teaching the composite,
(50) The lord buddhas have a tongue that is slender and large.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ excellent power of miracles.
I myself cooked the pieces of flesh And added various flavorings. {15}
archery,
What does he mean by ‘those who aspire to inferior ways’?
They should praise the maturity of the bodhisattvas.
They retain what they have heard for the sake of benefiting others who have no protector.
eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind
Abruptly released the moon.
Some slapped their arms with their hands, and others beat their heads.
It is not practiced out of worldly concerns. Rather, they think,
The world is drawn by the mind, but the mind does not see itself.
For a full two hundred million eons He did not descend to an unfortunate existence. {9}
He should avoid association With pig farmers and shepherds.
Just as the Lord of the World knew that, You should also know it through this samādhi. {17}
Listening to the Dharma is excellent.
the sixth door was made of silver,
Similarly, for sentient beings, the wind-like bodhisattvas expel the torments of desire, anger, dullness, inferior realms, inferior views, misdeeds, doubt, poverty, negativity, craving for things, separation from the delightful, contact with the repulsive, and disease.
You have appeared through virtue gathered over a long time.
Some loosened their clothes to reveal their hips adorned with girdles.
Though one seeks for it in the ten directions, It will be not be found, because it is empty. {22}
understanding the degrees of people’s spiritual faculties to dispel the doubts of all living beings;
[15] It is maintaining good qualities. “[16] It is not relying on rebirth.
Within that third temple made of incense was a throne with cushions.
The bodhisattva Nārāyaṇa declared,
“Each of the gods also expressed this desire, saying, ‘I also want to carry the guide of this world.’
It is because those who perform incantations in the world for the sake of healing sentient beings render these secret mantra syllables supreme, principal, exalted, sublime, profound, vast, authentic, impenetrable, and unique—it is the seal of the Dharma.
“Then the physician’s sons who do not have deluded perception see the color of the medicine, smell its aroma, taste its flavor, and quickly drink it. They become completely free from all illness.
he offered for the Bhagavān’s body two lengths of cloth of the value of a trillion silver coins,
“What is the realization of wisdom? It is the realization of both mundane and supramundane qualities.
At that time there will be no inferior beings
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, for these reasons, these [aforementioned] statements are indeed non-arising.
And were to teach them to millions of beings Together with the transmission of instructions,
Nakṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña,
“Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who possess such acceptance surpass all the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas.
“Śāriputra, I also teach the Dharma to beings through a single yāna,
is called signlessness as a gateway to liberation.
The eons are to be counted from the point at which a bodhisattva enters the sameness of all phenomena, not from the first arousing of the mind of awakening.”
Just as in the prophecy To the fearless Ārya Śāriputra,
and they will perfect [the other causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
Great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom in that manner
Similarly, the non-appropriation of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness is not consciousness [and the other aggregates], on account of the emptiness of their inherent existence.
Such are the bodhisattvas who possess inalienable diligence.
One should put some beans in one’s mouth and recite the mantra.
One never tires of looking at
a thickly woven cloth smeared with vaṅga, seeds of āra,
The thus-gone ones have fully and perfectly awakened to all things’ uncompoundedness, lack of existence, lack of occurrence, lack of origination, lack of emergence, absence of marks, and absence of characteristics. They know that no phenomenon comes, goes, or remains. They know that phenomena are inherently pure, inherently luminous, inherently beyond suffering, and like space.
The oath is to be administered with the following words:
“ ‘Thousands of nāgas always pay homage to it, And so do garuḍas, yakṣas, and kiṃnaras.
although he has transcended the three realms he has love for them like that of a father for his only son.
“We confess our fault in your presence:
All the tathāgatas sent their attendants in that way.
those who have reached the eighth level,
and just as they wish, their bodies have power over beings, as far up as those in Brahmā’s realm.”
in the same way, non-ceasing, non-conditioning, non-origination, non-apprehension, non-affliction, and non-purification are without foundation
Now, what do you think: could the semiprecious stones found in the city outshine the precious gemstones of beryl?”
pervaded by the aroma of incense from a variety of censers, adorned by garlands and wreaths,
Likewise, they know exactly which teachings lead to the attainment of a single rhinoceros-like solitary buddha.
Mastering all these roots of virtue,
Where there are no erroneous views, there is no self,
For many countless hundreds of thousands of quintillions of eons, they will have honored it with beautiful, melodious, clear sounds of many kinds of kettledrums, and large kettledrums; the sound of musical instruments and percussion; different kinds of song, dance, and amusements; and countless different kinds of music.
When their time has come and they die, they will be reborn here, so these two vats have been reserved for them.”
“Noble son,” replied the Blessed One, “there are no differences between their bodies as such, yet the body of a bodhisattva and the body of a thus-gone one still differ in terms of the power of their qualities.”
It is likewise that the element of consciousness, subtle and invisible though it is, generates bodies and then abandons them again before producing other bodies.
the applications of mindfulness
And why is that?
Similarly, they do not engage with the notion that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are entities, or that they are non-entities.
If they should say that, then all is well. A serious breach occurs if they do not say that.
Dharma­mati
With this queen of incantations, Great Upholder of the Secret Mantra, I will protect and form a boundary around the person named such-and-such.
“Master,” Upatiṣya urged, “if the whole of what little renunciation we have is for ambrosia and the search for ambrosia,
One should write this mantra on a clay pot with chalk, fill the pot with ashes,
They should avoid those with poor conduct.
With that, the bandits set upon the caravan, taking the lives of some merchants as
The dharmabhāṇaka wondered where this voice had come from.
“If you ask what constitute the three gateways to liberation,
If you ask why, it is because there are no sentient beings, because sentient beings are non-apprehensible, because sentient beings are non-arising, because sentient beings are unceasing, and because sentient beings are in fact emptiness.
Make this effort for the benefit of beings!”
Because this is how much he was gripped by great compassion.
[For that reason], it is called the transcendent perfection of supramundane generosity.
The way of the sacred teachings of the lord buddhas who reside and are present in the innumerable world systems of the ten directions at the present time
and, Venerable Lord, is this non-cultivation of all things indeed the cultivation of the transcendent perfection of wisdom?”
nor with the hope for a higher existence, nor with the hope for followers—but do so with the Dharma in mind.
Monks, at that moment Śakra, lord of the gods, was unable to resist the Bodhisattva’s request, and so
And their home is deep thought on the meaning of voidness.
the one with brilliant light that reaches everywhere, the light that grants friendly disposition and great delight,
Many thousands of bodhisattvas were seated upon those lotuses.
The person whose name has been interwoven with the mantra
the unsurpassable guide who tames beings, the teacher of gods and humans, the buddha, the Bhagavat Umeśvara.”
This, Maitreya, is how the bodhisattvas have excellent compassion.
Meditating with dedication, complete dedication. Like a deer, live always in the forests. {78}
not so in the case of those that are explained by the śrāvakas,
If everyone realized it,
such as the deva Candra, the deva Sūrya,
At that point the terrestrial yakṣas called out, “Venerable Kauṇḍinya has understood the Dharma!” And they continued,
delighted, and joyful,
What are those ten? They move in a flow of virtuous qualities; they grow the qualities of goodness; they are moist with joy, faith, and delight; they make the roots of affliction rot; they are limpid, free of murk, and clear; they pacify the torments of affliction; they alleviate craving for pleasure; they are deep and hard to fathom; they flood high and low; and they pacify the dust of affliction.
they do not abandon the sacred doctrine even for the sake of their own lives.”
Similarly, the gateways to liberation are not one thing, and illusions another.
“Su­bhūti, if physical forms were one thing and the emptiness of inherent existence another,
What are those ten? They are excellent view through the purification of views, excellent discipline, immaculate conduct, keeping proper personal associations, conduct free of affliction, open-mindedness, worship of those who maintain pure conduct, conformity, traveling a single path only, and having no other teachers. Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess ten such qualities are delightful to accompany.
So Upananda went to the assembly hall and said to the group of six,
Through the accomplishment of the yoginī, confidence swiftly develops.
“This is known as the half-moon posture; It gives complete sexual satisfaction.
“Divine princes, if, for example,
Early in the morning, in a clean place, one should draw a maṇḍala, set up a jar, and
the samādhi of stainless essence,
and suddenly it was transformed into a huge mass of precious jewels,
He has always had the confidence of speech, And always he has been practicing celibacy. {3}
with the exception of one person
Although hosts of deities ask him to turn back, Antaka does not pay heed; Instead he says, “Tear him up! Beat him! Destroy him! Don’t let him escape alive!
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of modesty. What are the four kinds of knowledge of modesty?
“ ‘It is discernment, the wisdom that enters peace. It is the knowledge of the different categories of all letters.
In this way one avoids future defilement. In the absence of defilement, actions are exhausted.
Mahārāja Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Mahārāja Vaiśravaṇa,
“Monks, a person who has killed his father is fit to be excluded from the community.
If you ask why it is called the transcendent perfection of supramundane generosity,
I will destroy All of those hundreds of billions Of yakṣas, rākṣasas, and bhūtas That dwell at the city gates, In gardens and forests, Summoning them with the sūtra noose!
these [non-human beings] will honor, venerate, respect, and make offerings to them with ribbons and so forth, along with various musical sounds.”
“Su­bhūti, all things have a modality that is neither diminished nor enhanced; great bodhisattva beings, too, do not transgress this modality.
“Venerable Lord! In what things should great bodhisattva beings, who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom, abide?”
Or serve as their disciples.
and similarly, ‘I am maintaining ethical discipline!
and, taking his robes and ornaments, he offered them to the Buddha Bhaiṣajyarāja, saying,
“He entered nirvāṇa millions of eons ago But still he listens to the Dharma.
Likewise, from inside out,
You must not look down on females, Particularly not anyone by the name of Tārā.
The young brahmins then went off to collect wood for use in fire pūjas.
Likewise the prediction of Dīpaṃkara shall come to pass.
“What is meant by it not being the level of the tīrthikas? It means that their level is the false pride of a practitioner.
When they step off the great road of razors, five hundred thorns, each with sixteen spikes, will pierce each foot.
“Seer, as you instruct, I shall not preach,” replied Saṅgharakṣita.
“In the same way, Mañjuśrī, it is due to the complete purity of the mind, as well as due to proper cultivation, that sentient beings see the body of a tathāgata.
Candraśrī (Glory of the Moon), Sūryaśrī (Glory of the Sun), Sarvagrahaśrī (Glory of All the Planets)
This mantra can be mastered by reciting it 10,000 times.
Similarly, those who are tied to one more rebirth, the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth, those who are no longer subject to rebirth, the fruit of no longer being subject to rebirth, those who are arhats, arhatship, those who are pratyekabuddhas, individual enlightenment,
By offering a homa of priyaṅgu flowers or palāśa flowers one will obtain great splendor.
I turn to the heavens and fly into the sky.”
The buddhafield will be made of beryl and be adorned with lotus flowers of gold from the Jāmbū River.”
Venerable Lord! When great bodhisattva beings practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom, how do they definitively comprehend that all things are like a dream, and that all things are like a phantom, and so on?
In the same way, one should practice with a gandharva made of bamboo;
Looking throughout all Jambudvīpa,
not bound, not liberated;
Content with what is hers, she should lie with her husband, free from carelessness. “She should not be arrogant or slothful. She should comport herself fittingly.
“ ‘Someone may be able to catch an echo, A stone may be able to float on the water,
Then Brother Sthavira Mahā­maudgalyāyana, Brother Subhūti, and Brother Mahākātyāyana, with trembling bodies and unblinking eyes, stared at the Bhagavān, and
The Bhagavān teaches the samādhi That is the field of experience of a hundred thousand trillion buddhas. {5}
I have taught the Dharma that the whole world was reluctant to accept.
In this way they render even the names of the web of the roots of affliction unknown,
“A gandharvī, even a female hell-being,
That is to say, they abide in the two extremes of eternalism and nihilism, and so forth.
attributes that are mundane or supramundane,
hung with armlets;
Since you delight in concentration, your personal qualities benefit others;
knowledge,
Within three months he will succeed even in the slaying of Brahmā.
Therein is neither ego, nor experiencer, nor doer, Yet no action, good or evil, loses its effects. Such is your teaching.
“Within that space there are the lakes and oceans, All rivers, and similarly ponds and springs,
As an analogy, a well-trained conjurer displays various cities, archways, parks, vehicles, physical forms of a universal monarch, amusements, and entertainments.
From the left side, Vātajava said:
Through this queen of incantations, Great Upholder of the Secret Mantra, the person will escape on each and every occasion.
Like a sacrificial post made of precious substances, he was refined, dazzling, and brilliant.
the precious wheel, the precious elephant, the precious horse, the precious jewel, the precious wife, the precious steward, and the precious minister.
or a water bubble—that this body is insubstantial and all phenomena are impermanent—
Evil one, today you will be dried up by the Bodhisattva, Like the water-filled footprint of a cow.
Or is it uncompounded in nature?
Su­bhūti, it is because the essential nature of dreams will not attain emancipation from the three world systems, and
the inconceivably numerous words of unquantifiability concerning the kleśas,
formerly, in times gone by, there lived a prince named Giver of All Wealth, good-looking,
The impermanence of physical forms is indeed emptiness and emptiness indeed is the impermanence of physical forms.
“They have obtained a human life that is difficult to obtain, But they have not become skilled in any craft.
And also for a sextillion and a nonillion, but beyond that is unknown to me.
“One should fall to her feet, With one’s hands joined in fervent supplication.
So, Bhagavān, the poor man in this way comes to know of that householder’s great amount of money, gold, property, grain, treasure, and storehouses.
All accumulation ends in depletion; All climbs end in falls; All meetings end in separation;
The postulant first prostrates to the Teacher,
I took a vow in his presence To have the power of patience at all times. {145}
How did you attain the preeminence of a tathāgata, and the heroism of a tathāgata?
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wonder, ‘How can I know the nature of all phenomena?’
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Maheśvara to beings who are to be taught by Maheśvara.
Su­bhūti, in the sameness of things, past time is non-apprehensible,
with but a week’s worth of hair and beard,
Likewise, if that person is to be tamed by brahmins, warriors, townspeople, or country dwellers then indeed the relevant type of person will be emanated.
Yet, Your Majesty, whoever is peaceful and gentle, Informed by the noble and stainless Dharma, And filled with knowledge—he is satisfied.
Those people will go to hell when they die. {iii}
They will always cultivate the five higher cognitions, And those heroes will always be in the presence of the sugatas. {23}
But the moon has not moved onto the water. Know that all phenomena are like that. {12}
They always work for the sake of all sentient beings.
Bhikṣus, the Mahābrahmā named Śikhin spoke these verses to the great assembly of Brahmās:
compacted matter, lump,
Imagine that yaṁ becomes a maṇḍala of wind, And raṁ becomes a maṇḍala of fire.
feeling, perception, and awareness constitute the element of consciousness.
“Free from the two extremes,
they experience innumerable, countless, and immeasurable sufferings and discomforts among the denizens of the hells, among animals, and among anguished spirits
So it is, Su­bhūti, that great bodhisattva beings should practice the six transcendent perfections, which are the emptiness of inherent existence.
The village gatekeeper recognized him and asked,
All the words that they speak Come forth through the power of the jinas. {9}
Therefore, we will sneak in, overrun his exposed camp, and kill him while their guard is down and their armor off.”
“In this teaching of the sacred doctrine, is there no imputation of physical forms?
When people hear that you have renounced all this, The world with its gods and humans will long for the same.
I contemplated this meaning in that way While gazing there upon the tree. {113}
“The incantations make their garden, Which blossoms with the flowers of the factors of enlightenment,
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, malign demonic forces will transform themselves into the guise of a buddha,
They will see all of the Merus, Sumerus, and Cakravālas;
“No longer will I behold the assembly of divine siddhas Who make offerings to you day and night,
to ripen beings,
“I seek to serve you, gentlemen.”
ethical discipline, tolerance, perseverance, meditative concentration, and wisdom never exist and are non-apprehensible.
“On the relative level, ill will is a gateway to an ugly appearance.
“ ‘Then, after contemplating, I began to make my offerings.
The Blessed One was dwelling in Nyagrodha Park, in Kapilavastu, together with a great saṅgha of five hundred monks.
They are established on various levels: As beautiful devas and humans, As Śakras, Brahmās, and as cakravartins.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness as having aspirations or lacking aspirations constitute a bodhisattva?”
who are the lowest among the realms of sentient beings and who all buddhas and bodhisattvas have given up on
“ ‘Then I meditated upon this samādhi. I listened correctly to the teaching of those jinas.
The destroyer of yakṣas and rākṣasas, When well contemplated and well applied, The incantation that guards kingdoms, Called Liberator of Kingdoms, Is the most sublime sūtra for protection In the entire great trichiliocosm.
the prince fixed the King of Aṅga’s head onto a long pole and displayed it, saying,
and these are the retributions for mental misdeeds.
“What is rejecting those who are not wise beings? It is rejecting tīrthikas who have the view of objective reality.
She has attained the retention by which she remembers the words and meaning of the teachings of all tathāgatas.
Brahmānana, highest of humans, [DP.138] Had a lifespan of twenty thousand years. {13}
“Candrabhūti, after the body has lived its life,
Furthermore, Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess six qualities,
“How does it entail the producing of a large result from a small cause? A large fruit is produced from the planting of a small seed. Therefore, it entails the producing of a large result from a small cause.
They are brahmins. They are snātakas. They are masters of the Vedas.
and similarly, if feelings were one thing, perceptions another thing,
“Why should the wise comprehend it? Because it brings the attainment of irreversibility.
“Monks, there are two extremes that you should avoid when you have taken ordination.
You defeat all the tīrthikas Like a lion defeats jackals. {20}
One causing the other, they arise in dependence, Yet all the childish beings do not recognize this.
“Divine son, it is as in the following analogy.
When they do not relish the blissful taste of concentration, they are irreproachable.
Completely fills the secret gem.
If the ordinand responds “I have gone forth,” the inquirer asks him:
whose essential nature is non-entity and emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics,
Jaya­mati
I am trying to persevere,
Should I give you food or drink? A riding-mount? Jewelry? Gold, gems, pearls, or various kinds of precious things?
they were moved by the desire to visit it.
a tantra text, and so forth.
“That which is called the restraint of speech
He never loses his absorption in the formation of faith, and therefore
Then, through further development of the path of cultivation, this [same individual] will abandon attachment to [the world system of] desire and malice in their entirety,
Through a single syllable may you realize all the natural expressions of speech!
Evil one, I will not pass into parinirvāṇa until my elder monks have become restrained, lucid, proficient, courageous, and learned; until they have embarked on the Dharma in an authentic way and become masters themselves; and until they can overcome opponents in concordance with the Dharma and teach the Dharma in conjunction with miracles.
“Who are you, venerables? What karma has led you to this?”
and as awakening is at peace, understand that all sentient beings are at peace;
perfected the sixty-four crafts, fully mastered all the arts,
Furthermore, Śāriputra, why is that tathāgata called ‘Amitābha’ (Immeasurable Light)?
they do not regress to the level of the śrāvakas or the level of the pratyekabuddhas,’ and
pausing on the seventh step,
For sixty whole intermediate eons he taught while sitting on the one seat with a motionless body and a motionless mind.
At the throat, in the chakra of enjoyment, One enjoys the six flavors. Thus, Rasanā is concealed in the chakra of enjoyment.
As soon as the two holy beings had spoken these words, all of the bodhisattva great beings in the world of Sukhāvatī assembled and said in a single voice,
who are the ones who remain at the foot of a tree,
nor should they have any special attachment to their lives.
there were two monks who had committed some infraction and were too ashamed to appear before the Lord,
Goddess, what prevents you from transforming yourself out of your female state?
The bodhisattvas, the meditative stabilities, and this transcendent perfection of wisdom are without duality, and they are inseparable.
To him should one explain this tantra.
‘Oṁ, Āṇā, blind in one eye, enthrall such and such! Svāhā!’
Thus Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, as well as the other gods of the pure realms, settled on those seats that had been arranged.
Queen Māyā bathed and applied perfumes to her body. She ornamented her arms with many bracelets and dressed in the softest and most beautiful garments. Joyful, happy, and rapturous, accompanied and encircled by ten thousand women,
“In the East they are wise,
Deploring evil, they regret it and confess it.
This concludes the Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra on Dependent Arising.
“If you ask what is the ‘knowledge of the extinction of contaminants,’
Since all these phenomena are equal to space,
“Noble son, within the perfect palace of the Heaven of Joy there are beings who act carelessly.
‘Those phenomena are to be brought about,’
He hung it with many precious strings of beads.
Through this, my gift, may all sentient beings attain happiness in this lifetime! May they attain final nirvāṇa in the expanse of reality that is beyond sorrow, and where there is no residue of the psycho-physical aggregates!
And so, monks, once again the Bodhisattva turned his fine chariot around and returned to the city.
The four bases of miraculous power are gateways to the light of the Dharma,
This is malice.
Killed should be the evil ones— Those who disparage the Buddha’s teaching.
This is not the teaching of the Teacher. This is not the path that progresses to perfect enlightenment!’
“Blessed One,” asked the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi,
“Moreover, Kauśika, when great bodhisattva beings practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
Reverend Upāli, conceptualization is total affliction, and not conceptualizing
Respectfully, one should prepare a seat for that Dharma teacher, offer praise, and frequently express one’s approval of the teaching.
Meanwhile, the disciplinarian stood at the end of the senior monks’ row.
Brahmadatta felt great pity for me, And he taught me this supreme samādhi. {4}
Annapānadā (She Who Gives Food and Drink)
Śakra, king of the gods, along with the other gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three.
“They do not consider whether physical forms are calm or not calm;
By continuing with that kind of activity Their sufferings only increase. {58}
He had vanquished the demonic opponents,
Thus, young man, there are countless names of nirvāṇa, and the tathāgata, too, has that many appellations.
one should draw A yellow one, nicely marked with a jewel.
comparable to an illusion, without characteristics,
so it would be good if I could also find a flat stone on which to wash this cloth.”
Reverend, that is the cause due to which the Tāthagata’s companions are now so few;
Nor could any phenomena, absolutely void, be attributed and sustained as existent or non-existent.
How can that outshine all the hearers and solitary buddhas who rely on reference points, who are included under the unconditioned?”
accompanied by a great assembly of brahmins, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas, and śūdras gazing upon him.
In every single instant they can visit and return from innumerable worlds.
This completes the twelfth chapter from “The Transcendent Perfection of Wisdom in Ten Thousand Lines,” entitled “Meditative Stability.”
so it is that they correctly perceive the real nature of formative predispositions.
Neither the sphere of mental objects, nor knowledge, have form.
his mind was as firm and unmoving as Mount Meru.
these śrāvakas will not preserve or teach this kind of sūtra.
unlike those of other human beings.
“Blessed One,” asked the bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkam­bhin,
If one’s body becomes malodorous, one will die within three days.
Similarly, the imperishability of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness is not consciousness [and the other aggregates].
May I realize the teaching of non-self:
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the result of a non-returner.
“Padmaśrī, do you see the bodhisattva mahāsattva Gadgadasvara?”
The children of the sugatas who are without attachment, Through wisdom are established in the highest enlightenment. {42}
those born in the water and on land
This method that benefits all beings Is based on seeing that the world is without refuge, And tormented by the three types of suffering.
they also refine the buddhafields and they bring sentient beings to maturity.
Though they hear, blessed buddhas may inquire about what they already know.
The sameness of the three times is empty of the sameness of the three times.
the pacification of elaborations is non-disturbance.
So it is, Su­bhūti, that, from the time when they first begin to set their mind on enlightenment until they are seated at the Focal Point of Enlightenment, great bodhisattva beings should train in the perfection of all virtuous attributes.
You are absorbed into non-appearance,
Give rise to devotion on hearing it And become those who are guided.”
The seventh aspect of liberation ensues when the sense field of nothing-at-all has been completely transcended in all respects, and one achieves and abides in the sense field of neither perception nor non-perception.
The Blessed One, the tathāgata, arhat, perfectly awakened, omniscient, all-seeing Buddha
Lord of the World, listen to me, And understand its true meaning. {4}
‘Giving away one’s spouses, sons, and daughters represents the bodhisattvas’ awakening to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood. Therefore, I will definitely practice generosity by giving away my spouses, sons, and daughters!’
Because I was practicing in a conceptual manner;
They should not dwell, in an apprehending manner, on the notion ‘May the desire, hatred, and delusion of those sentient beings who have scented the fragrance of my Tree of Enlightenment be eliminated,
that I should hear this Dharma discourse, and hear this topic from the Blessed One, the best of men, is hair-raising and amazing!
Seeing that his father ruled in ways compatible with the principles of justice, the boy thought,
Thus, noble son, bodhisattvas who possess these ten qualities have a pure mind.
And so, ultimately he speaks neither falsely nor truly.
Just as the moon appears in water, yet is not there.
That which is unappraisable is designated as unappraisable.
The buddhas do not stay by themselves
and will neither engage in generosity nor maintain their discipline.
They make offerings [from their own hands with respect and reverence,] and their motivation is pure, wholesome, and virtuous.
throwing a lasso, casting a spear,
Then, Senior Śāradvatī­putra asked the Blessed One,
One should grind the roots of sensitive plants and wild indigo with cold rice porridge,
“The enormity of his merit and wisdom has purified his body;
“I must expunge a wrongdoing,” he replied.
constitute the negativity of mind.
A king receives veneration surrounded by a crowd of people.
not true, not real, with no mind, without intention,
When the māra gave this teaching, five hundred bodhisattvas attained acceptance of the non-arising of phenomena.
We will also protect that land. We will worship those who teach it, and will protect them, appear to them, and inspire them.
Similarly, once they have rejoiced in those roots of virtuous action possessed by great bodhisattva beings who already abide on [the levels], up to and including the tenth level, and similarly, in those roots of virtuous action possessed by great bodhisattva beings who are tied to only one more rebirth,
And give them the prophecy of becoming a supreme being, Saying, ‘Noble one, here, in a future time You will reach the highest peace and wisdom.
How could bodhisattvas become anything other than [all those remaining phenomena], up to and including the link of aging and death!
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess these ten qualities are endowed with excellent diligence.
“Blessed One, do the thus-gone ones not gain their true accomplishment over three incalculable eons?”
they will offend all those tathāgatas.”
may I cause all beings to attain omniscient wisdom, the supreme state that is more exalted than the entirety of the three realms!’
respectfully listened to the Dharma,
And rejoice in the entirety of the merit accumulated By all these beings who are my family. {1}
but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha?
At the urging of his brethren, he set off for Śrāvastī.
“He is the one who sees wisdom perfectly clear, the one who sees all around, the one who looks all around, the one with eyes in all directions,
Nor does the seed think, ‘I form the sprout.’
There he saw his preceptor had been reborn among the gods in the realm of the Four Great Kings and,
For although things are devoid of owner, devoid of ownership, ungraspable, space-like, and their nature is the mark of illusion, there is no deficiency of requisite causes and conditions.
he is known as the One with the Beautiful, Glowing Tuft of Hair between the Eyebrows That Curls Clockwise and Has an Exquisite Color.
“Their samādhi and miraculous actions Are devoid of mentation.
he is known as the One with the Torso like a Lion.
ritual science and its related lexicon, revealed scripture, ancient stories, history, the Vedas, grammar, etymologies, phonetics, metrics and composition, rules for conducting rituals,
The directional protectors are arranged as symbols For the overcoming of concepts oriented toward the ten non-virtues.
And the patience, from listening to the Dharma, regarding birthlessness. These trainings are the path to enlightenment. {22}
I will instill in them the power of memory with which they may, having believed in this teaching, retain it, recite it, penetrate its depths, teach it, propagate it, write it down, and proclaim it extensively to others.
Is a manifestation through the power Of the blessing of the buddhas. {7}
In the same vein as before, it reveals the worlds comprising [all the attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, to be empty.
And Ratnaketu, Durabhisambhava, Vīrasena, And others followed in the Jina’s footsteps. {xxxii}
had bestowed upon you, recited, meditated on, and contemplated the words of Buddha Śākyamuni.
Therefore, without saying anything offensive and without arguing against this teaching, let us try to follow it for a while.
Their skin, flesh, and blood had dried out, and their ears, noses, hands, feet, eyes, or heads were cut.
Because they are distressed by the three realms they are dedicated to the thought,
At the onset of any type of illness, one will become well by tying a mantra knot.
“Similarly, the expanse of reality is non-apprehensible, owing to its utter purity.
Through such causes, conditions, and bases they retain the teachings that they receive with regard to the relative and ultimate truths.
These too should be cultivated without apprehending anything.
“Young brahmin, where have you come from?”
When it is within hand’s reach, Its rain falls everywhere.
“They maintained superior conduct throughout an infinity of eons; They were always praised and extolled by the guides.
when they do not make assumptions associated with omniscience [and so forth],
(65) His cheeks are plump, (66) even, (67) unblemished, and (68) free from the flush of aggression.
In Kauśāmbī the son of King Śatānīka was born.
Young man, for bodhisattva mahāsattvas the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
They paid respect to the Blessed One and made offerings to him
“The thus-gone ones feel great compassion for sentient beings since phenomena cannot belong to anyone and yet sentient beings think they can make things their own.
He is fixed at the pinnacle of non-exhaustion, the pinnacle of reality.
just as all are, so is one.
When he said the letter ṅ, out came the statement: ‘The complete purification of factors (aṅgaviśuddhi).’
Many thousands of millions of devas, Śakras, and Brahmās as numerous as the Ganges sands Have come from thousands of millions of realms.
They listen to the Dharma, read the Dharma, retain the Dharma, write it down, recite it, and practice it to perfection.
shows the absence of reference points,
That you have lost a limb Causes me the highest suffering.’ {10}
They will hear the analysis of the meaning of these transcendent perfections.
and spoke this panegyric:
undertake perseverance with respect to [the acquisition of] virtuous attributes,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of accumulation of wisdom. What are the four kinds of accumulation of wisdom?
skill in methods, and unimpeded power and guidance.
And no concept of regions and no concept of market towns. {73}
They will meditate on samādhi for many endless eons.
Ānanda, all the water of the four great oceans can be measured, but
“Why is it the contentment of those dedicated to liberation? Because it brings the accomplishment of noble greatness.
Should meditate on Calumny Vajrī.
Ānanda, he also has five thousand women serving him.
“In the past for many millions of eons
guts, a colon, kidneys, a heart, a belly, lungs, excrement, urine, a bladder, a stomach, entrails, fat, lymph, pus, blood,
In the morning as he was going there,
“The wise ones never waver from their vows. The heroic ones maintain their practice.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Maheśvara to those beings who are to be guided by Maheśvara.
“Young man, for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who are intent on giving the Dharma,
those who have killed their parents;
Through the cycle of breathing in and out,
Similarly, Su­bhūti, all things have the modality of the emptiness of internal phenomena;
Such understanding is the entrance into nonduality.”
The light pacified all the lower realms and caused all unfortunate states to cease.
Her husband replied, ‘If I give to laymen without being asked,
whenever they do not engage with the notions that the applications of mindfulness are with attachment or that they are without attachment.
“My lord, I wish for four boons. Please grant them to me!
Thus such specific karmic formations were created.
“Bhaiṣajyarāja, through your reciting these dhāraṇī-mantra words
He spoke sincerely. His face was free of frowns. He remained in a state of greatness of mind.
And the eighty-four thousand living beings who were devoted to the grandeur of the buddhafield,
It is good if we die in battle, but it’s not good to die in chains.
“Now comes the worship mantra:
“There are those who conceal their mind and restrain their senses,
Also numerous Karoṭapāṇi yakṣas And adorned yakṣa maidens
Even to this day the gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three celebrate this event during the Hair Festival.
“He answers,
So long will the way of the buddhas not be interrupted,
After twenty-one days, Karṇapiśācī will be in one’s control.
The guard at the park, overjoyed upon seeing them, Speedily conveyed the happy news to the Śākyas:
“On those kings of mountains, there are many hundreds of thousands of wish-fulfilling trees.
“Su­bhūti, physical forms are neither fettered by nor liberated from their future limits.
The copper itself becomes gold, And the gold itself comes from just copper.
He is like the sky because he has actualized the wisdom of the realm of phenomena, without center or edge, within the range of nonclinging wisdom.
“Su­bhūti, There are individuals following the vehicle of the bodhisattvas who have honored the lord buddhas in other buddhafields,
Its fluidity constitutes the water element.
and in the same vein, engage with omniscience, and so forth. Venerable Lord! For these reasons,
How should they investigate the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four assurances, the four unhindered discernments, great loving kindness, great compassion, and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas?
he would first joyfully welcome them, and then his mother would do the same.
“Bhaiṣajyarāja, those noble men and noble women dwell in the same temple as the Tathāgata.
“Whoever holds to the concept of a self, They will remain in suffering.
In that buddha’s retinue there are numerous bodhisattva great beings as well as many gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, and so forth.
Having received ordination they will reflect on their reasons for doing so.
they know the absorptions and associated spheres that the buddhas engage in.
“Kāśyapa, this is how the bodhisattva great beings, without relying on reference points, outshine the hearers and solitary buddhas who rely on reference points and who have attained the unconditioned.
practicing concentration
engage in sexual misconduct, and yet, when they engage in their passions, they find no satisfaction.
With this in mind, they would train accordingly.
Those who are born as such will be established in the stable community that is intent on genuine reality.
Thus, they are not hurt, harmed, or wounded by those forms.
“It is like this.
“Blessed One! Please grant us the teaching entitled The Play in Full.
“Each in their own realm gives forth Their profound, vast, and marvelous speech.
rubbing her lotus against his vajra, and said:
One’s voice will equal the kiṃnaras.
The brahmin boy Bhadraśuddha then spoke out loud,
Venerable ones, the minds of childish and ordinary beings stricken by errors give rise to the belief in ‘I’ and ‘mine.’
How should they train in the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, and the transcendent perfection of generosity?
and likewise, any notion of the eyes, and any notion of the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty,
“When you dream that the legs of your bed break off And the precious handle of the parasol is broken,
Through learning, one will give up harm.
If things are certain to be like that, And not in any other way,
the inconceivably numerous words of limitlessness concerning the kleśas,
Contact of different types cease, prompting feelings of different types to cease,
By offering a homa of whatever flowers are available,
“Senior Śāradvatī­putra, that is so! Just as attainment and clear realization are exclusively designated according to worldly convention, it is the case that the five classes of living beings also are differentiated owing to worldly convention but not in ultimate reality.
There is the meditative stability named Devoid of Letters.
In that way they cover all worlds, delivering sentient beings from the lower realms and the unfree states while continuously blessing them in many ways within the pure appearances of excellent marks, signs, and a circle of light.
“They gain vast knowledge So that they see the supreme humans.
They are to be unrelenting in seeking out oral instructions, and to assimilate those instructions correctly, just as one hears them.
‘In accordance with the aspirations of the thus-gone ones, through this gift of my skin
Who are free of desire,
not base or cowardly.
Also, Bhagavān, when the bodhisattvas were not present, we did not understand the Bhagavān’s teaching that had an implied meaning.
“Then the Buddha emanates Infinite buddha emanations.
Living alone in the wilderness is very trying.
Housing, disputes, and schisms in the saṅgha.
Nor should they abide in the notion that the aggregates, from physical forms up to and including consciousness, are unceasing.
the knowledge that is definitive, and similarly,
from the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth month all the way until the birth of the child—
They had perfected the samādhi of the constellations, stars, and the sun.
On thinking it over, he decided, “I shall go forth,”
They will acquire all excellences.
The one who knows phenomena, Young man, that one is called a buddha.
“They will see wealth and grain as essential. They will be attached to dairy cows, cattle, and carriages.
Oh my friend, you are a fool
"དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་གཟི་བརྗིད་<t“Vimalatejā, of the three accumulations—of generosity, discipline, and learning—it is the accumulation of learning alone that is regarded as superior,
“What is not associating with renunciants? It is avoiding that which is inappropriate and seeking that which is appropriate.
I would live the holy life in the Blessed One’s presence.”
will alight into the world of Brahmā, will have alighted into the world of Brahmā.
The realm shook, a rain of lotuses fell, and there was the music of a hundred thousand quintillion musical instruments.
They made trillions of offerings to you, as many as the grains of sand in the Ganges.
“This Rāhula, my eldest son, Was my own son when he was a child.
Formations provide the causal condition for consciousness.
to move between, distinguish, illumine, reveal, and bring to attainment all mundane and supramundane perfections.
“Blessed One, was the strength with which the Bodhisattva shot this arrow hereditary or miraculous?”
Absorbed in samādhi, one should drink it.
It is without color, mark, or shape, because it is free of all process.
“In meditation they stand and talk; Remaining in meditation they walk.
The Buddha, knowing the thoughts of the entire multitude, said to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
The nature of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas is indeed emptiness and emptiness indeed is the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
the ten powers of the tathāgatas,
the body’s bones, marrow, liquids, and unclean parts are destroyed.
‘Oṁ hrīṁ klīṁ traṁ yūṁ, when crushing Yama, be harsh, be! Shake, shake! For the consummation of all sense pleasures, hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ! Svāhā!’
Venerable Lord, if the notion of the sensory element of the eyes as permanent is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of the sensory element of the eyes as impermanent become a bodhisattva?
Monks, seven days earlier Māyādevī had gone in great pomp from the city of Kapilavastu to the pleasure grove. However, with a splendor one trillion times greater than that, the Bodhisattva now entered the city of Kapilavastu.
“I ask for two steps of ground.” “ 
“In this world there are many tīrthikas, But they feel no anger toward them.
Who will create the cause for the enlightenment of buddhahood.”
Ānanda, all the water of the four great oceans can be measured, but the marrow that I have given to sentient beings as I sought supreme, completely perfect enlightenment cannot.
The Bhagavān, having spoken those words, the youth Candraprabha,
On those kings of mountains, there dwell many millions of trillions of gandharvas,
Before that bhagavān attained the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, he went to the sublime, supreme Bodhimaṇḍa.
In time, their grief subsided.
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, and in the same vein, [all the other transcendent perfections], down to and including the transcendent perfection of generosity, are also non-conceptual.
Aggregates themselves are cessation.
Similarly, all the vehicles are included in the vehicle of the thus-gone ones.
Space is the basis.
Action that comes from appropriation and causes rebirth is becoming.
They apply the remedy for desire and abandon the conditions for desire.
Noble son, do you think that such praise would give those sentient beings a personal understanding of the divine elixir?”
“They will become angry with anyone Who they hear teaching bodhisattva conduct.
Thousands of millions of divine calico cloths Encircle and are tossed upon the guides.
Thus, the villages, cities, regions, country, kingdom, palaces, sacred sites, temples, homes, fields, government offices, trees, orchards, meadows, gardens, cowsheds, and stables will be divested of heaps of rubbish.
Even for the sake of their lives, they will not engage in any skillful means that attract women.
He considers selflessness, yet does not abandon the great compassion toward all living beings.
Whenever the diagram is drawn, There is no doubt that things will occur as desired.
This means that his physical form is elegant, fine, and beautiful to behold, just like an offering post fashioned of finest gold that is adorned with various gemstones, for which reason it is said to resemble the color of gold.
all together, during another five short eons, they honored the Tathāgata Bhaiṣajyarāja with all sorts of excellent offerings.
Give these beautiful spotless jewels to him, the servant.”
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designation of physical forms as happiness or suffering constitutes a bodhisattva?”
So its love for those who fall to the miserable realms and saṃsāra Is like the cow’s love for its fallen calf.
He possessed the ten powers and had discovered the fourfold fearlessness.
Such was the layout of all the mansions.
They retain what they have heard for the sake of giving the eye of insight to those who lack it.
“Mahauṣadhi, at the time of death the body acquires divine vision.
Only those beings who are destined to be disciplined by miracles see and understand the putting of the king of mountains, Sumeru, into the mustard seed.
How do they have equal concern for all sentient beings?
perception, and the element of dharmas are all transferred and migrate to that very same place, too.
Bhagavat Viśvabhū saw him coming.
Bodhisattvas are not just patient with their fathers, mothers, masters, sons, daughters, spouses, relatives, and kinsmen, but impatient with others.
This continuing nature cannot be described. It is the empty, unfluctuating continuity of phenomena. {23}
one should request, according to one’s wish,
We will believe what the Tathāgata says.
One who thus accomplishes my state of being and my activity should offer an oblation and make vast offerings to me and to my retinue.
even if through these images, he were to exhibit himself reborn among the royal class, standing out like a tall sāl tree,
just as I want no one to speak to me covetously, order anyone to speak to me so, or rejoice in someone so speaking to me,
‘Oṁ, Śaṃkāriṇī, dhraṁ hāṁ hūṁ haṁ haḥ!’
Then when he is in his last lifetime, In a realm that is beautiful and delightful, He will become a compassionate benefiter of the world
one reflects on non-conceptuality.
“That whole great gathering of people took off their jewels and rings, took off their shoes, removed their robes from one shoulder,
Many dharmabhāṇakas have gathered here. Guide, I ask my question for their sake. {51}
"བཅོམ་<t“Blessed One, paṇḍakas and ṣaṇḍhas are the guards of ladies’ quarters.
Su­bhūti, there is neither attainment nor clear realization due to absolute purity.
They said to them,
whereas this one should be embraced because he or she is distressed [at the sufferings of beings] in cyclic existence, and engages in [acts of] great compassion.
The eight nāga kings together with their retinues were tamed, and bowed before the Blessed One.
These various ritual methods have been set forth,
The Blessed One considered whether or not these merchants had any meager roots of virtue and saw that they did.
Establish them in the highest knowledge, And then this king of samādhis will not be difficult to attain. {5}
Similarly, the ten powers of the tathāgatas do not apprehend the limit of future time, nor the present.
It entails the meditations on the three faculties [enabling knowledge of all that is unknown, acquiring the knowledge of all things, and endowed with the knowledge of all things] by means of knowledge that is free from [the limitations] of past, present, and future.
and proceeded to teach the Dharma he needed to hear in order to fully realize each of the Noble Ones’ four truths,
The Blessed One and the venerable Śāriputra have entrusted you to us,
“ ‘The level of yoga that is based upon wisdom, The mastery of yoga through entering enlightenment,
to have trust in the fact that all phenomena are inherently without birth.
Prostrations to the tathāgata, buddha of the north, Amoghasiddhi;
the Dharma drum emits a sound that makes the demigods so frightened, alarmed, agitated, and distressed that they flee.
Dhanaśrī,
circumambulated the Bhagavān seven times, and said to the Bhagavān,
In the same vein, they conceive of and become fixated on [the other causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
At that time, herbs grew without ploughing, And devas came to serve and attend to them. {35}
“Ajita, these bodhisattva mahāsattvas live in this Sahā world realm by occupying the realm of space below,
Thinking this, the man runs away, Asking where is the street of the poor people.
That smells are not smelt is the lack of reference point.
creating a brightness that transcended the lights of devas and the lights of humans.
That Dharma which is understood only by the tathāgatas, that suchness which without doubt causes unsurpassable enlightenment—
lay all the flesh out on a single plane, in a single mound, in a single pile, or a single heap.
“Having satisfied him with food
“Blessed One, I have some qualms about this.
the state of mind in which all things are not formed, and there is nothing to be formed,
Then one will become pregnant during the fertile period of the monthly cycle.
There is the meditative stability named Subdued.
“In what way, you may wonder, are bodhisattvas vessels of jewels?
He has inquired about what is objectionable and what is not, what is to be practiced and what is not, which dharmas are bad, which mediocre, and which sublime.
or reborn among the householder class, standing out like a tall sāl tree,
“Similarly, in the future there will be beings who have no faith in this Dharma teaching,
He poured ashes from a pot on another’s head.
The aggregates, along with the clinging to them, I have discerned through my wisdom.
‘Living here in solitude I am following the Dharma-Vinaya of the Thus-Gone One.
Until I attain the essence of awakening.
Is told in sections on:
Contemplate the meaning of this And there will be no conception. {96}
excellent patience that is not temporary,
For these reasons, Su­bhūti, this transcendent perfection of wisdom is established by means of the inconceivable deeds of the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas.
remain in loving kindness,
The eight nāgas are stationed To destroy the wicked ones Of attachment, hatred and ignorance.
Hence also the Blessed One has repeatedly taught about the shortcomings of desire.
the merit of a noble son or daughter who accurately writes down this Dharma teaching, receives it properly, and engages with it through faith will be far more abundant.
“Bhikṣus, a tathāgata, knowing the time has come,
“When you dream that the sun and the moon fall to the ground And that the stars fall as well,
“Also, Śāriputra, those bhikṣus or bhikṣunīs who vow to become arhats
Right then, a nāga girl who lived in the Nairañjanā River emerged out of the earth’s surface and offered the Bodhisattva a throne made of jewels.
Monks, the village girl Sujātā then filled a golden vessel with the milk porridge and honey and offered it to the Bodhisattva.
‘People who, with a disenchanted mind, Leave their homes, they are superior
I practice the transcendent perfection of generosity.
Similarly, as in the case of the transcendent perfection of generosity,
He was a heroic giver ready to subdue the hostile forces of the entire multitude of disturbing emotions, the primary ones being longing, desire, attachment, anger, haughtiness, pride, delusion, and miserliness.
I will practice the six transcendent perfections until the excrement and urine of sentient beings is totally non-existent, and until all sentient beings indeed partake of the nourishment of delight, as do, for example, the gods of the Ābhāsvara realms.
attain the state of great equanimity, attain easeful examination, and the quality of being devoid of examination.
Your request to teach this Dharma will become a root of virtue—very valuable, yielding great benefits, and earning great praise.
This is like how a single sun Shines throughout the ten directions, Yet its profusion of rays is fused with it.
“They describe separate yānas But the Buddhayāna is the definitive one.
someone were to teach, genuinely demonstrate, and so forth, this transcendent perfection of wisdom to those irreversible bodhisattvas,
“After the king had proceeded on from the crowd of people,
Maitreya, such bodhisattva mahāsattvas, whether they hear praises or
Upon making these offerings, in his presence they praised him with these verses:
“Are the beings in your care of good character? Are they easy to guide and easy to purify?
do teach the sacred doctrine to sentient beings, they do not apprehend sentient beings.
They will never hear unpleasant sounds.
Your intention for having asked the Thus-Gone One such questions is excellent.
Subsequently, the Blessed One said to the monks,
Moreover, Su­bhūti, the great armor of great bodhisattva beings consists of the five refined eyes. What are these five, you may ask?
If someone wishing to go forth approaches any of you, ask him, ‘You are not an impostor, are you?’
saying, ‘Come! Child of enlightened heritage, you should earnestly apply this transcendent perfection of wisdom, as it has been taught,’
“Even if all the myriad beings in the ten directions Became like mighty wrestlers inclined to foul play And converged on this bull among men, His mere touch would bring them to the ground.
“What is the direct realization of birthlessness? It is not having the perception of any phenomena.
“Whoever knows form, Knows emptiness
The Bhagavān said, “Young man, if you think the time has come, be confident to speak.”
fine complexion, and return to well-being are explained as resembling virtue.
through diligence, effort, and exertion, abandoned all disturbing emotions and actualized arhatship.
We also wish to see the body that is the relic of the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Prabhūtaratna,
Flower garlands and decorations hung everywhere. Incense burners dispensed fragrant smoke, and silk canopies were spread above.
“Mother, I shall kill you.”
Who are wise, unsullied, and gentle, Who have served many millions of buddhas. {50}
Noble son, one repetition of the mahāvidyā completes the six perfections.
“Venerable Lord, what is that purity?”
What is “empty” about emptiness?
If you allow them to go forth, a serious breach occurs.”
or it is gold, or is gold-colored, or is like gold, or shines with golden light;
He is known as the one who possesses the maṇḍala of the profound perfection of wisdom that is hard to gain and hard to behold.
“The nine causes of antagonism are a cause of affliction.
“The bodhisattva great beings who abide there within the illusory absorption are indeed limitless and countless.”
That which belongs to a shrine, belongs to the Dharma, belongs to the saṅgha, and that which was not given or not offered—all such things bodhisattvas do not take and do not make their own.
These are the attributes of śrāvakas.
His body was adorned with the thirty-two characteristics of a great being, and he was ornamented with the eighty fine marks.
tended to them as one does an irrigation channel, and emerged without indecision.
They also refine the buddhafields, they pass from one buddhafield to another buddha field
Illusions are worthless, absent, empty;
“The bodhisattvas walk each evening along these walkways while thinking about various aspects of the Mahāyāna.
Just as a pile of barley, sesame, wheat, or lentils is called a ‘heap,’ so the accumulation of things belonging to the limbs and other parts of the body is called a ‘heap.’
and similarly, why would they have a view concerning the eyes, and in the same vein, why would they have a view concerning [the other sense organs], up to and including the mental faculty,
The body of a bodhisattva in his last existence is free from the four stages of embryonic development. Instead he appears seated, with all his limbs, organs, and characteristics fully formed.
“Bhagavat, I request that you teach what samādhis Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has previously remained in.”
thinking, ‘I too will be reckoned among the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas who will emerge in the future.
all the water would come to possess the eight qualities [of pure water].
They will say, one to another, ‘They are the same as us.’ {30}
Flowers arise from the herbs.
“ ‘Oh! Oh! Tamed one who tames untamed beings, Who always has the state of being tamed.
What are the negative physical acts?
Those bodhisattva mahāsattvas who were beyond number, calculation, simile, or comparison emerged from the ground of the Sahā world realm.
hearing that the bhikṣu was ill, wept and shed tears and cried, ‘May this bhikṣu not die!
Instead, rejoice in He Who Is Elevated by Hundreds of Splendors and Merits, And do not weep anymore!
He was resting comfortably in the music hall,
“Why is it an adornment? Because it brings the attainment of the thirty-two primary signs of a great being.
The statement that all phenomena are devoid of a sentient being and a life force is rational.
Conclusion of the nineteenth chapter, “The Teaching of the Inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha.”
With a beautiful form,
they prostrated at his feet and circled him three times, scattering sandalwood powder, aloeswood powder, and māndārava flowers.
And what are these marks?
they teach the sacred doctrine to sentient beings with an undistracted mind.
action does not show itself within the body, nor does the body show itself within action.
As soon as he enters,
they do not pay attention with the twofold, [over-scrupulous] attentiveness of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas to the notion that physical forms,
one billion realms of the Heaven of Limitless Virtue,
The way that they are following Is the way of those who kill their mothers; It is the way of those who kill their fathers.
It was a tree to which the wholesome and peaceful gods of the pure realms would bow down and touch with their heads, including their topknots and diadems.
“Make excellent images that are fashioned From gold or silver, and also sandalwood,
and in the same vein, they grant [the other aforementioned] gifts up to and including the appropriate human resources, but they have not actually dispensed any gifts to any sentient being.
Noble son, those who possess knowledge of only certain fields of learning may run out of words. Yet
There is nothing comparable to the absorption That perceives the vajra-like, non-dual path— The manifestation, in due order, of what is most desired, The permanent accomplishment of the teacher’s absolute practice.
When the Blessed One had given this Dharma discourse, venerable Kauṇḍinya,
sitting up straight, and establish themselves in focused mindfulness.
“Those sixteen princes, Who were his own young sons, Those mendicants requested the Jina, ‘Guide, teach us the highest Dharma!
Thus one holds desirous situations to be excellent and the emotion to be a good quality.
The house has only one door and that door is narrow.
and the bodhisattvas follow in their wake.
It is like a caravan leader for merchants.
“This is the verse of the observance of the fast:
So Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin set forth accompanied by many hundreds of thousands of lay bodhisattvas, monastics, boys, and girls.
Edited, translated, and established by the Indian abbot Śākyaprabha and the monk Ratnarakṣita.
cut off his ears and nose, and gouged out both his eyes.
because they are non-entities, this supreme Great Vehicle does overpower and attain emancipation from the world with its gods, humans, and antigods.
n time, a young brahmin named Suvarṇajaṭa from Suvarṇadvīpa arrived in Rājagṛha
six noble clans, ten high-status rebirths, and the eight grounds of a great person.
Such combined power would not measure up to a hundred thousandth of a single instance of the power that the thus-gone ones have to understand what is true or false. Indeed no analogy could be given for that power.
Then she went west and north, but in those places as well she encountered the Bodhisattva.
“ ‘He was the son of the buddhas, of the leaders of men, Of the tathāgatas who have infinite wisdom.
Venerable one, this is excellent! Hero among humans, this is excellent!
At that point, if one is going to be a man, one sees oneself in the form of a man.
Moreover, Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings, who practice the six transcendent perfections see sentient beings lacking an excellent life span,
how could they teach, without teaching, the Dharma to the hearers?
In Gaya, not far from the seat of awakening, an Ājīvika mendicant spotted him from afar.
These are the branches of the noble eightfold path.
As he is approaching the time of his death he summons the poor man
And they will fall away and wander.
Merged fully with one’s own awareness
They make their nests everywhere As dwellings for their offspring.
Overwhelmed by greed, they will not engage in activities of worship, not even toward those who teach the Dharma.
To the ones who possess this sūtra after my nirvāṇa In these later, extremely dreadful times.
“The king’s five hundred daughters were being carried in precious palanquins in front,
“Preceptor, why do you sit here thus, so unhappy?”
“Noble one, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara gives freedom from fear to beings who are afraid.
“Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings engage in union with the emptiness of the eyes, they are said to engage in union with the transcendent perfection of wisdom;
Of the merit from possessing Just one verse of this samādhi. {66}
Bhagavān, even for us bodhisattvas on the level of irreversibility this subject is beyond the scope of our thoughts.
each jewel radiating its own light rays.
At that moment everyone engendered love, altruism, and a feeling that all beings are each other’s mothers and fathers.
“In the same way, although things are devoid of owner, devoid of ownership, ungraspable, space-like, and their nature is the mark of illusion,
“If those sentient beings who suffer from various physical diseases,
Having threatened them thoroughly with punishment
Similarly, they may become equipoised in and arise from the nine serial steps of meditative equipoise, either sequentially or in reverse order.
“Similarly, do you think that anything other than sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena constitutes a bodhisattva?”
Similarly, how are feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness without limits?
May I complete the six perfections And liberate beings of the six realms.
She has a smiling face. She has a perfect, magnificent complexion. She has a loving mind. She speaks with compassion.
It ceases and dies when it lacks the collection of causes.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of piśāca to those beings who are to be guided by a piśāca.
They should praise those meditative stabilities of emptiness, signlessness, and aspirationlessness.
Here we have arrived at this most excellent mountain To worship the one who is free from the darkness of unknowing.
“Those great rishis will always be pleasant to see And offerings wil be made to them as if they were tathāgatas.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the five psycho-physical aggregates can, in a dreamlike manner, train in the transcendent perfection of wisdom and attain emancipation in omniscience?”
I have utterly reversed With the rosaries of the branches of awakening.
displaying the form of a buddha to sentient beings who are to be trained by the form of a buddha;
Similarly, Senior Śāradvatī­putra, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness, being empty of inherent existence,
You are perpetually free of ideas, in attainment of supreme wisdom— Please explain the meaning of your moon-like face’s smile.
May all living beings come to live in a buddhafield as splendid as that!
It does not apprehend happiness and suffering, or even the absence of suffering and the absence of happiness.
With seven, they become great.
“A lot of merit is created when just a single person develops a loving attitude, even if only for as long as it takes him to snap his fingers.
they too become accomplished adepts, sagacious, righteous, and agents of virtue.
“They do not disparage the Buddha Even for the sake of their life.
Similarly, whatever ethical discipline you keep, whatever tolerance you cultivate, whatever perseverance you undertake, whatever meditative concentration you are equipoised in, and whatever wisdom you cultivate,
This sentient being has vast inclinations and beliefs,
Moreover, the way in which The dharma chakra and the emanation chakra Drip and blaze
Allow him to do so, and I shall provide his begging bowl and Dharma robe.’“
Alas, these beings are blinded by ignorance!
Noble son, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has those samādhis.
He did not block his senses, but neither did he follow after the objects of his senses.
Similarly, the emptiness of internal phenomena is revealed therein,
May my mantra syllables be fulfilled!
They wade through the waters below.
With that he went to Jetavana, where he approached a monk and said,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of attainment. What are the four kinds of attainment?
Śāradvatī­putra, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom
and total dedication is the nature of omniscience.
“Oṁ, Hatred Vajrī, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
who had accomplished what had to be accomplished; who had put down their burden;
“She will never again afterward Have a female existence,
and every nice thing, pleasing to the senses, has been brought forth!”
My rib cage resembled the sides of a crab.
the latter half of the first watch, the midnight watch, the latter half of the midnight watch, the last watch of the night,
once the sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage have rejoiced in the roots of virtuous action, possessed by great bodhisattva beings who have first begun to set their mind on enlightenment,
More such prophecies will be given to other bodhisattvas. So, Pāpīyān, you should go there!
a variety of delightful, desirable, pleasing, beautiful, and charming and pleasant things, which would be difficult to find.
Those are the thoughts that should arise in their minds.
Śāradvatī­putra, just as the utter purity of the ten powers of the tathāgatas is without foundation
The Blessed One knew that the god Lord of Peace and Calm would make this request,
On this topic, it was said: “They always have few activities. They have gone far from busy crowds.
You have no idea about his valor;
Are not adequate as an analogy
nor will their bodies become too decrepit, and nor will they die a terrible death.
No unpleasant forms, sounds, smells, tastes, or textures appeared to her, and she also had no bad dreams.
Such mental worship qualifies as the training in the six transcendences.
Those who desire to study treatises, whether the words of the Buddha or expositions by the śrāvakas,
Does the sage Asita see some obstacle for my Sarvārthasiddha?
He will make offerings to those stūpas of flowers, incense, perfume, garlands, ointments, powders, cloths, parasols, banners, flags, and banners of victory.
let alone all four great oceans.”
This completes “Calling Witness with a Hundred Prostrations.”
By offering ointments, one will be free of wounds.
and then take up the practice of the Dharma.” “Excellent, excellent,” replied the Blessed One.
(14) There is the meditative stability named Power of Perseverance. (15) There is the meditative stability named Sublimation [of All Things].
Śāradvatī­putra, just as [the notion of] the physical forms of a tathāgata, arhat, and completely perfect buddha is without foundation
Such is their mental purity.
“O Gautama, no self endures.”
“One may be able to count, over millions of eons,
To retain my fine complexion and youth forever;
He replied, “This is owing to the sway that it holds over all things!”
are unskilled owing to their lack of skill and they fall into the clutches of evil associates.
What animates the puppet?”
who is rich with the flower of awakening’s seven branches; who displays the seven treasures of a noble being;
By means of the specific gestures the faults associated with the body certainly disappear
Venerable Lord! Those who would not rejoice in sentient beings who set their mind on enlightenment have been reborn here after dying in the domain of demonic forces.
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Gadgadasvara made vast, extensive offerings to the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Śākyamuni and
“ ‘As the unsurpassed protector of the world, There is no one who has ever matched you, Or displayed such qualities as yours, In the world of gods and humans.
the bodhisattva Ratnaprabha, the bodhisattva Pūrṇacandra,
“Pāpīyān, moreover, when a bodhisattva sees a beggar and responds with appreciation rather than anger, such a bodhisattva will have set out with superior intent.
“Seeking this peace, this supreme samādhi, I have in the past joyfully and with compassion Given away many trillions Of excellently decorated parks. {64}
Illness will be their clothing:
who will abide in this real nature?
And then they added this verse:
“Bhagavān, we shall accomplish all that the Tathāgata has instructed us to do.
practicing in an apprehending manner.
In what way are they upright?
just as I want no one to ravish her, order someone to ravish her, or rejoice in someone ravishing her, harassing her, or raping her,
Śakra himself, lord of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, cleared its path.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Brahmā to beings who are to be taught by Brahmā.
Likewise, it is dualistic to dedicate morality, tolerance, effort, meditation, and wisdom for the sake of omniscience.
They are the reason why you cannot obtain the great result,
“Reverend Saṅgharakṣita, we were disciples of the perfectly awakened Buddha Kāśyapa.
Nothing material has any essence.
it is called ‘mundane’ because it does not transcend the world.
Alas! Right here in my presence you should put an end to suffering!
Compared to them, someone who writes this Dharma teaching down, commissions it to be written,
and in their hands they brandished swords, bows, arrows, darts, lances, axes, tridents, clubs, staffs, bludgeons, lassos, cudgels, discuses, vajras, and spears.
Because of the nature of the four bodies,
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities are experts on the ultimate.
If I were to teach all of their modes of conduct
They called out loudly to the guhyakas:
Just like a well during the end of summer, where the reflection of the stars has sunk and is hard to notice, my eyeballs had sunk into my head and become barely visible.
This is an obscuration and that is without obscuration.
“If you ask, Su­bhūti, how great bodhisattva beings embark sentient beings for the well-being of the worlds,
Similarly, Su­bhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, is endowed neither with the fruit of having entered the stream,
They will all eliminate becoming and ceasing, And
Monks, at that time Śakra, lord of the gods, and Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, appeared before the Bodhisattva.
Distinguishing between words and having the insight of wisdom: Having developed compassion, he teaches that Dharma. {76}
Su­bhūti, when certain great bodhisattva beings, lacking the transcendent perfection of wisdom, over eons equal in number to the sands of the River Ganges, enter into union with the four applications of mindfulness, the four correct exertions, the four supports for miraculous ability, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven branches of enlightenment, the noble eightfold path, and the three gateways to liberation,
The tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Śākyamuni now manifested places for the bodies of the tathāgatas who were coming and arriving. In all ten directions there were two hundred thousand million buddha realms made of beryl,
and similarly, those who attend, in an apprehending manner, to the notions that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are the emptiness of internal phenomena,
They do overpower and attain emancipation from the world with its gods, humans, and antigods.
Great hero, compassionate one Whose wish is to bring benefit, give us the prophecy!
“Maitreya, how do such bodhisattvas have excellent intention?
all are mastered for practitioners
without dwelling,
And the universal monarch and the lion have no army.
they praise and rejoice in others who dispense the gift of the sacred doctrine and worldly gifts.
“Since Mount Meru and the surrounding ranges, The sun, the moon, Śakra, Brahmā,
His shot was so powerful that the arrow went right through the targets set up by Ānanda, Devadatta, Sundarananda, and Daṇḍapāṇi.
die among spirits only to be reborn among animals,
“And if each of them were to have heads As numerous as the grains of sand in the ocean,
Illuminates all these worlds with its light,
For a mind that stands nowhere, there will be non-arising.
one will be successful If one can arrest the movements of the mind.
However, relatively, the vinaya of the bodhisattva great beings is like gold and silver, which can be mended when broken.
there will not be the word ignorance,
these include the renunciation of all afflicted mental states, and of all propensities and impulses toward involuntary reincarnation.”
There are also one billion surrounding mountain ranges and one billion outer ranges.
On that moon, again, is the seed-syllable, From which emanate rays of light.
It is necessary to know and to understand this fact of the ultimate inactivity of all things,
“These and all other women Possess my form.
Great bliss being pure, devoid of nature, Is the sixth, pertaining to the lower door.
At the Deer Park by the Hill of the Fallen Sages, outside of Vārāṇasī.
Did they carry their belongings or did they lack uniformity?
experiencing the unfathomable [sufferings] of amputation of the hands and feet, and decapitation?
Monks, the Bodhisattva continued to think,
Never again shall he see his parents, wife, or children. He must abandon his possessions, his house, his friends, and his relatives,
are attentive to it in the correct manner;
those who seek the fruit of no longer being subject to rebirth cultivate the path in order to abandon the five fetters associated with the lower realms?
Moreover, by means of the three vehicles such a bodhisattva will deliver a limitless, countless, and boundless number of sentient beings from the three realms. Mañjuśrī, this thought brings me to despair.”
he now sits at the seat of awakening.
The environments and sentient beings, The elements and their derivatives, Have been declared to be “mind only” By those who possess the undefiled special vision.
All those things, Mahauṣadhi, are unstable and lowly, liable to dissolve quickly and be destroyed. If that man were to lose the precious wish-fulfilling jewel, his pleasant possessions would also vanish.
and in the same vein, that that one will be reborn among the gods of the Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin realm.
‘The one for whom this phenomenon arises is dependently arisen,
If those seeds are flawless,
The monk informant asks the preceptor: “Have you inquired into the confidential matters?”
fencing,
Upasena asked the Blessed Buddha, “Reverend, the Blessed One has said,
Their desires will be very powerful
They are the ground where the mind of awakening has been engendered, as well as the grounds of the Joyous, the Stainless, the Radiant, the Flaming, the Hard to Conquer, the Manifest, the Far Reaching, the Unshakable, the Excellent Intelligence, the Cloud of Dharma, and the buddhas’ ground of Universal Illumination. These are the twelve grounds.
not to speak, Bhagavān, of establishing them in the higher state of arhathood.
Nor did he see him when he looked among humans, animals, and spirits.
After they explained the situation at length, he said,
in the same way, Su­bhūti,
His wealth was inexhaustible for the purpose of sustaining the poor and the helpless.
I spoke duplicitously and fraudulently,’ in which case it is only excessive pride.
What are those ten? They are as follows. Without any attachment to beds, they neither prepare one for themselves, nor make others prepare one, nor make any gestures for a bed to be prepared.
Lapsed discipline will torment one at the time of death.
“They who have wicked minds Will reject the Buddha’s teaching.
like an optical aberration,
Thus have I heard at one time.
This person offered the prince his own saffron-colored clothes, and the prince in return gave him these silken garments.
this supreme vehicle, the Great Vehicle, does overpower and attain emancipation from the world with its gods, humans, and antigods.
And when that protector has passed into nirvāṇa. His Dharma will remain for twice as long.
In order to overthrow such beings,
“Sleep can never cause them harm. They eliminate the various subsidiary kleśas.
‘Lamp of the World, you are now seen. After a long time, you have come.
no addition.
They do not maintain discipline out of fear of becoming a hell being.
“From formations that lead to meritorious states comes consciousness that leads to meritorious states. From formations that lead to unmeritorious states comes consciousness that leads to unmeritorious states. And from formations that lead to immovable states comes consciousness that leads to immovable states. This is what is meant by ‘formations cause consciousness.’
May I never lean toward nor perform wrong, nonvirtuous actions.
They swiftly attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
The domains of your verbal and mental activity are also unfathomable.
Then the Bhagavān said a second time to Brother Śāriputra.
Thus, in the presence of some, he will manifest in an ordinary form and teach the Dharma.
as are the auguries of all-knowing beings, and the two forms of wealth—material wealth and the wealth of Dharma—are to be had.
What sort of miraculous power does a bodhisattva great being possess?
neither long nor short,
When the asura king Bali saw Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara approaching from the distance,
Since the thus-gone ones are active in this way throughout the lifespan of the body in which they transcended suffering,
they are all now present, living, and remaining.
you should ask, ‘You have not fallen by committing any of the four acts leading to defeat, have you?’
“It is from the union of the vajra and the lotus That true pleasure is derived.
“Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, there are beings who become disciplined after an immense period of evolution,
Noble son, I also wandered through many hundreds of thousands of millions of tens of millions of worlds, and then
“Today the compassionate guide Of those who need guidance has left this noble city.
This memorial is still known today as the “Memorial of Receiving the Saffron-Colored Cloth.”
“Alas! Those who inhabit the worlds are in error and enter dreadful, mistaken paths.
“You developed compassion for all sentient beings And made offerings to billions of buddhas.
gaining accomplishment on the path traveled by the thus-gone ones,
“Vimalatejā, what does the true meaning eliminate?
“Those who have correct conduct will have good qualities. They will always remain loving and be skilled in patience.
They will also achieve and maintain loving kindness, compassion, empathetic joy, and equanimity, alongside the [formless absorptions], from the sense field of infinite consciousness up to and including the sense field of neither perception nor non-perception.
In all regards he is the same, free from concepts, and free from distinctions.
With conviction in that teaching, they avoid all unvirtuous qualities.
And savor the supreme taste.
“Nanda and Upananda, this retired devotee has no obvious source of income, nor any obvious record of allocations.
These are the spiritual mentors to great bodhisattva beings.
They went to Upatiṣya, who saw them off in the distance and asked,
and similarly, that the priestly class and particularly those who stand out like mighty sāl trees will emerge in the world;
They will not construe the notion that omniscience is signless, and that signlessness is omniscience.
What are those ten? They are expertise in investigating origination, expertise in examining all phenomena, comprehension of the sameness of all phenomena, comprehension that all phenomena are characterized by illusion, expertise in the knowledge of all phenomena, expertise in the profound dependent origination that is hard to fathom, expertise regarding inconceivable karmic action, knowledge of the meaning taught, full realization of the exact meaning, and expertise concerning reality.
Kauśika, whenever great bodhisattva beings practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
and then, through [insight into] the knowledge of liberation, will forsake the three fetters.
However, Venerable Śāradvatī­putra, are these five transcendent perfections not designated as transcendent perfections when they are acquired by means of the transcendent perfection of generosity?
They have transcended the level of desire, the level of form, the level of formlessness,
“The consecration of a king with flowers, Great ones, bestow that upon me.”
Those nonhuman beings quickly departed for other places.
She goes to the river and happily sits on the banks of the Nairañjanā.
Accordingly, Ānanda, this transcendent perfection of wisdom, like a precious gemstone, is the source of all positive attributes and
Sometimes I am the Buddha, sometimes a siddha,
The sixth meditative absorption ensues when the sense field of infinite space has been completely transcended in all respects, and when one achieves and abides in the sense field of infinite consciousness, thinking, ‘Consciousness is infinite.’
Thus, bodhisattvas endowed with patience will attain freedom from obscurations.
This is wisdom.
The words they hear will be beautiful, delightful, and profound.
Transcendent perfection is endowed with all enlightened attributes. Transcendent perfection is a state of uncrushability.
They do not consider whether physical forms are with signs or signless;
and so on, up to ‘These will be reborn among the gods and humans in the world systems of the happy, exalted realms.
“ ‘This is known by wise bodhisattvas Just as taught by the Lord of Dharma.
Then King Śuddhodana arranged a great naming ceremony and announced, “This child’s name is Sarvārthasiddha.”
One should place a diadem on one’s head
He later went forth into the perfectly awakened and blessed Buddha Kāśyapa’s teachings and,
die among gods only to be reborn among spirits,
They will not save me from going to hell
“In order to help living beings, They always become chieftains, Captains, priests, and ministers, Or even prime ministers.
The eighth aspect of liberation ensues when the sense field of neither perception nor non-perception has been completely transcended in all respects, and one achieves and abides in the cessation of all perceptions and feelings.
The Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra Entitled Teaching the Four Factors
and every last one of them comes to an end.
“They know how to teach the entire Dharma. They are skilled in etymologies, teaching, and the meaning of words.
They will not fall away from attaining swift superknowledge and perfecting the wisdom of omniscience.
The space should be adorned with various parasols, victory banners, and flags.
“The multitudinous six quintillion men, Who with the king had heard the Dharma
Please bless this Dharma robe as a lower robe.”
the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha named Meghasvararāja.
“Noble ones, though there is some good to your teaching, you too have faults.”
The earth he sees dug out
‘Just as in the case of the conception of “self,” so the conception of “thing” is also a misunderstanding,
So long will the god realms be enhanced and the antigod realms be diminished.
But, noble son, would the people thereby personally know how the fruit tastes?”
Nārāyaṇa, which quantity of merit would be greater—that of the gift, or Great Brahmā’s love?”
Because they are terrified, they turn back from attaining unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment and aspire to the vehicle of the śrāvakas.
Then the gods reflected, “The Bodhisattva is having a heartwarming conversation with us.” And each one of them thought, “The Bodhisattva is speaking directly to me; to me alone he extends a friendly welcome.”
After rinsing them with warm water,
“Su­bhūti, the more those roots of virtue of great bodhisattva beings increase,
The earth with its forests shook in six ways.
If they sit down for just a moment where the Dharma of the sūtra is being taught and listen to this Dharma teaching, or make another person sit down, or share their seat with another being,
It cleared away all disturbing emotions and brought joy, happiness, trust, and supreme enjoyment to all sentient beings.
the sensory element of the body,
You bring relief and devas and humans make offerings to you. And today we also, Lord, have been made content.”
those places Become filled with the brilliant light Given off by her dedication to virtuous deeds.
In the same vein, why do you say that the [remaining] designations made with respect to the sensory element of the eyes, the sensory element of sights, and the sensory element of visual consciousness, up to and including their designation as entities or non-entities, do not constitute a bodhisattva
They teach the Dharma for the abandonment of the afflictions, yet they do not observe any abandonment of the afflictions.
the activities of the garland mantra, Of retention, and of fire offerings are all omitted.
“Śāradvatī­putra, the ‘nine contemplations of impurity’ are merely conceptualized.
“ ‘I have had the road swept and covered with cloth. Banners of flowers have been arranged on the right And other beautiful images on the left.
you should consider how you could possibly attain unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment!’
“It is far removed from the understanding of all phenomena, from the understanding of the aspects of the path, and from omniscience.
likewise, it is the understanding that the ears, nose, tongue, body, mental faculty, sights, sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena are all impermanent.
He looked with divine vision over the ten directions, mountains, earth, and oceans,
“Owing to the fact that sentient beings are non-existent,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of action concerning teaching the composite,
They have attained perfection in the supreme training
When I claim I am one whose contaminants have ceased, if some virtuous ascetic, brāhmin, god, demon, Brahmā, or anyone else should say that these particular contaminants of mine have not ceased, I would correctly disregard that reason for contradicting me, based on their worldly doctrines.
“When they who have very poor conduct See those who are maintaining correct conduct
so he remained silent. “After a time their rage passed, and when it did he went to them
“(6) One should not take delight in saṃsāra through an inauthentic conceptual understanding, saṃsāra being like a magical illusion or dream.
“Noble one, if those who possess the name of the bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara were to fall into a great mass of flames,
This completes “The Sūtra on the Threefold Training.”
All attained happiness through the majesty Of the Guide, the supreme human. {17}
“Son of noble family, there are five root transgressions for śrāvakas.
keeps his mind well disposed toward the Sugata’s teaching,
and marital unions between individuals who are pure.
they still would not reach the extent or limit of the thus-gone ones’ meditative absorptions and their respective fields of activity.
They have fallen into bewilderment.
They are not attached to the pleasures of sleep, or of resting.
it is the understanding that the eye is impermanent, and,
encouraging sentient beings to maintain them authentically as well, and establishing them securely therein.
they displease those who have entered negative paths, and are savage, childish, possessed of misguided intelligence, fond of cyclic existence, or turn away from the transcendence of suffering.
“During that time he was despised, And his bhikṣus became few in number.
They should abandon the noble truth of the origin of suffering.
that is to say, the aggregate of ethical discipline, the aggregate of meditative stability, the aggregate of wisdom, the aggregate of liberation, and the aggregate of the perception of liberating pristine cognition
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will, when the time of their death comes,
Aruṇa, Aruṇa, endowed with great compassion!
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ expertise concerning the continuity of cyclic existence consist in?
in the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, the five eyes are non-apprehensible.
who were without kleśas; who had mastered themselves;
“This great tantra is the ultimate secret, Which, without doubt, is victorious among the three vehicles And supreme among all protective intentions.”
The light then returned and circled around the Blessed One three times before it entered his mouth.
“Then the poor of the city, having seen that miracle and having heard that teaching, conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
If you ask why, it is because they do not consider [the nature of these sensory elements], up to and including the sensory element of visual consciousness.
Similarly, when the moon-like bodhisattvas rise they are praised by the world with its gods, humans, demigods, and gandharvas.
Seeing the tree, the prince was disturbed by the suffering he had just understood, And remarked, “Conditioned things are no good! They bring a lot of suffering.”
“After Jñāneśvara there was a buddha, A jina who was named Tejeśvara.
at the foot of a tree, in the open air,
Their abdomen is slender.
the lord of nāgas, the lord of yakṣas, the lord of gandharvas,
To Tagaraśikhin you offered your kingdom, and to Durjaya much incense.
They are ordained into those who stare at the sun, the followers of Maheśvara,
‘conditioned’ or ‘unconditioned.’
By letting go of everything
They will realize the profound Dharma of the Buddha.
“Ignorance does not think, ‘I produce formations.’
arising from that equipoise in the sense field of neither perception nor non-perception,
and a corresponding circumference, very imposing. This was indeed a magnificent and beautiful tree.
continuing in the same vein as far as [the designation of] the sensory element of mental consciousness, as with signs or signless, constitute a bodhisattva?
Young Candraprabha adorned the road with many different precious arrangements.
Similarly, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are not one thing, and illusions another.
said these words to the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Jala­dhara­garjita­ghoṣa­susvarana­kṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña­:
Mañjuśrī, this non-perception of all dharmas is their sameness.
have reached happiness,
So, how does the element of consciousness, after abandoning a body, assume feeling and volition?
As he retracted his hand, there was no harm done to his mother.
for the sake of a limited number of sentient beings, thinking,
And therefore I obtained this unfavorable rebirth. It is not easy to know the Dharma of the Jina. {70}
Great bodhisattva beings who train in these three gateways to liberation
Just as when the ripe fruit of the tāla tree is nipped off its stem, the severed area immediately becomes yellow, bright, and perfectly pure,
prayer,
They do not lose their miraculous powers. These are distinctive qualities of the second patience. {12}
Māra’s mind was confused and his thoughts befuddled.
“At that time I was Prince Mati. I was tormented by the pain of an illness.
‘Reverend Subhūti, do not fear these words, and pick up your bowl.
purifying your intentions, and understanding the definitive expressions of the Dharma,
blazing like this in complexion, magnificence, splendor, marks of buddhahood, and with clear, brilliant radiance, may the Tathāgata touch me with his foot.’
for those afflicted beings entangled in latent tendencies, he is like a vajra because he overcomes.
The aroma of wisdom will arise so that they Will become buddhas with the aroma of supreme conduct. {2}
He prophesied to each of them their separate names, their identical lifespans, and the individual buddha realms where
Similarly, the transcendent perfection of generosity has been taught without apprehending anything,
(3) the application of mindfulness which, with regard to the mind, observes the mind;
the earth element does not think, ‘I provide the solidity of the body by assembling.’
will enter into the [way of] the tathāgatas.
if for just a brief moment, Another teaches others this sūtra,
Similarly, they neither associate the eyes with the limit of future time, nor do they disassociate them therefrom.
Yet, Senior Śāradvatī­putra, attainment and clear realization refer to worldly conventions.
and he listened as the Blessed One had instructed him. Then the Blessed One said,
This very tathāgata will spread light in that world system,
The Bhagavān knows the enlightenment of buddhahood In which there are there no words or letters to be found. {4}
Will see and make offerings To the buddhas of the past, present, and future, And all those in the ten directions.
“ ‘Always maintaining a sense of modesty and self-respect, Speaking reverently to the guru and rising to greet him,
It is precisely in the sense that they are empty that they are to be relied on.
Grahas born from yakṣas
‘This being is not in our control.
And another six trillion, And said to the guide of the world, {41}
Has been severed by the blade of wisdom.
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Pradānaśūra then
“If a person approaches a monk wishing to go forth,
“Venerable Lord! If the fruit is not established by eradicating conditioned or unconditioned elements,
Venerable Lord! When they hold and are attentive to the transcendent perfection of wisdom
Now comes the ritual involving the third root mantra.
He first practiced austerities and hardships Before going to the center of the earth.
Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, I can count the number of leaves in a forest of agarwood trees, but
It is also called appropriating desire because one appropriates the desire for form
they explain those causes, those causal factors, that Dharma, to other beings just as they have heard it, just as they remember it, to the extent of their ability, whether it be to their father, mother, or relative, and to anyone else who will be pleased, with whom they are acquainted.
“How can such a huge multitude eat such a small amount of food?”
“ ‘Just as when a wise man rebuilds A stūpa that has fallen into ruin,
assemblies of bhūtas in the south
And finally, after so long, Saw the transcendence of all resentment and fear!
The beings who were born there could see each other and
“Excellent, noble ones, excellent! Noble ones, your praise of the Tathāgata is excellent, excellent!”
there emanated many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of bodhisattvas whose bodies were the color of gold, who possessed the thirty-two signs of a great being, and were seated upon lion thrones in the center of lotuses.
“I have taught many kings of sūtras. I have established many beings in the state of awakening.
Generosity, discipline, and patience are my witnesses;
Furthermore the great sages, those who know the thoughts of others,
“ ‘Just as echoes are created through conditions In caves, mountains, and canyons,
I shall teach a fitting dharma.
“Māṭhara, Your Majesty.”
Seven dust particles on a cow is one louse egg.
Do not prevent this girl from listening to the Dharma.
Do not put rotten food into a jeweled bowl!
At the quarters of the consorts he directed everyone to continuously sing and play music, and not to stop for even a moment. “You must apply all your skills in pleasure and games!” he told them.
Moreover, they have no limitless store of wealth and treasures. Hence this is not a worthy place for the Bodhisattva to take birth.”
“Lord, that is how it is.
“Venerable Lord, when unskilled bodhisattvas who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom engage with physical forms while their mental faculties resort to notions of ‘I’ and ‘mine,’ and
neither sentient nor insentient,
It is the seat of high resolve, because its insight is superior.
they will offend all those buddha bhagavāns.”
Conditioned phenomena are pure, owing to the purity of unconditioned phenomena.
I wonder what previous actions caused all these awful situations?
After cooking this mixture one should eat it.
Fear is said to be sixth.
Like lotuses, their minds were unstained; like jewels, their minds were pure; like gold, their minds were refined.
this was my livelihood, this is how long a lifespan was, this is how long I lived,
“They will teach in the future times Many thousand millions of entrances to the Dharma.
Your Majesty, I don’t know.
Then the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Śākyamuni
The tongue, the body, and also the mind Are empty and inert.
“How, you may wonder, do they not acquire things through non-Dharma?
Great hero, Arhat! Śākya Lion! Supreme human! Through your love for us Speak the Buddha’s words.
“Noble son, there are beings to be trained through the context of being born, growing up, and frolicking within the harem.
“Some in that way give away gifts Of wealth, money, gold, and silver;
“What, you may wonder, are the bodhisattvas’ four fearlessnesses?
In the same way, feeling, notion, co-producing factors, and consciousness are empty.’ He practices thinking in this way and also thinking that ‘they are not non-empty.’
Those who seek entry into this sublime samādhi, Through that path will attain enlightenment.
You have accomplished the perfection of everything.
one will become free from all diseases.
Similarly, when I attract them by my generosity, they will not take the life of living creatures.
In this way, Su­bhūti, do great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, acquire the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline.
Therefore, I will definitely practice generosity by offering seats!’
What are these eight?
Then the teacher should go out.
the displays together with 840 billion bodhisattvas all vanished from the world of Sukhāvatī and arrived here in this Sahā world in just a single moment, a single second, a single instant. It happened as quickly as it takes for a strong person to extend his arm and flex it again.
“If all of those worlds were filled With beings who were the same as Śāriputra
Similarly, you should have conviction in the transcendent perfection of wisdom because feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are non-apprehensible.
and departs for nowhere, so the real nature of the Elder Su­bhūti also arises from nowhere and
They see the absence of form as form, the absence of sensation as sensation, the absence of perception as perception, the absence of formation as formation, and the absence of consciousness as consciousness.
With this, they grabbed him by his arms and legs, dragged him before the senior monks and said,
It is because this Dharma teaching is the supreme elucidation of the teachings
“Similarly, how should they train in loving kindness?
He will make offerings to their stūpas.
Similarly, in the same vein as before, it indicates to these worlds that [the other causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, are empty.
“From relishing, taking delight, clinging, and having that clinging remain comes an unwillingness to let go, with the repeated wish: ‘May I never part from these dear and delightful forms!’ This is what is meant by ‘craving causes appropriation.’
Bhagavān, we are pained by the three sufferings.
the view of the transitory collection is itself emptiness. Nor are emptiness and the path two different things;
how could great bodhisattva beings differentiate between
Endowed with those aspects of emptiness, they will transcend the level of the śrāvakas and the level of the pratyekabuddhas, and enter into the maturity of the bodhisattvas.
[Please ensure] that they always meet the Buddha, that they hear the Dharma, and that the Saṅgha is honored.
“Padmaśrīgarbha,” replied the Blessed One, “there are sixty holy beings here in this gathering who intentionally wear the armor and who have attained the illusory absorption.
They are the inconceivably numerous words of incomparability concerning the composite,
At that moment all sentient beings
If perchance, after being ordained, he should say, ‘I do not acknowledge the transgression,’
When they observe the body, they understand that the nature of the body is non-arising, and so they do not instigate any contemplation that involves notions of the body.
livelihood and few activities, Without acting hypocritically for the sake of reputation. {6}
Because when the constituents of sentient beings, phenomena, and oneself, which were not realized, become directly perceptible, one becomes irreversible with respect to all phenomena.
Beings as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges will develop the aspiration to the highest, complete enlightenment and attain irreversible patience.
Applied with a paste of emblic myrobalan, costus, blue lotus, Indian spikenard, and country mallow,
“This practice that I have described Is completely that of the bodhisattvas.
clouds that rained down divine banners,
Yet the radiance of their bodies, originating through the ripening of the past actions of the gods of the Catur­mahā­rāja­kāyika realm,
Like a vajra your pledge is unwavering!
Monks, in the city of Kapilavastu, five hundred Śākyas had constructed five hundred homes for the Bodhisattva.
but gives the highest, ultimate praise to the perfection of conduct.
they were covered with hair;
Bodhisattvas should be like lotuses, unstained by the mud of mundane things.
“Then, noble ones, after eighty-four thousand years had passed,
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ expertise concerning the ripening of karma consist in?
he is the cessation of all theory and all practice.
In this regard, the expression ‘hairs that grow finely and distinctly, curling to the right’ means that from each of the pores of his skin a single hair finely grows, bluish black in color, curling softly into rings, lustrous and curling to the right.
When we were all mounted, the rākṣasīs who lived on Siṃhala Island came running after us, making a great clamor,
“This householder is hard to please and I cannot guard my mind against his abuse.
then what would you call such seeds?” “Blessed One,
Similarly, they should not abide in feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness.
and Maheśvara entered the palace with the king’s permission.
If you ask why, Su­bhūti, it is because in the transcendent perfection of generosity there are no such concepts and so they do not make assumptions.
and is attentive to it in the correct manner, and commits it to writing, or has it committed to writing and
gods, nāgas
Mind can be found neither inside nor outside.
There will be an appeasement of all ailments.
Your luster is like the flames of a sacrificial fire, or the shine of the golden mountain.
forgetful, and
Nor will they go among women, men, boys, or girls who are intent on causing harm. They avoid all places of disgrace.
“Blessed One, how much merit is created when a son or daughter of noble family remembers this sūtra taught by the Thus-Gone One, carries it, reads it, comprehends it, and extensively and genuinely teaches it to others?”
In order to fulfill the great love, he does not rest in the uncompounded, and,
Bring to mind all the deeds you engaged in over billions of eons.
Then, at that moment,
After the Blessed One gave permission for food that has been given to the saṅgha to be given to those wishing to go forth,
(15) they engage in the perception of pristine cognition which is unobstructed and unimpeded with respect to the present;
They overran the King of Aṅga’s exposed camp while their guard was down and their armor off, sneaking up and killing him.
then feelings of pain and feelings which are neither pleasant nor painful come to a halt.
“Never hold views that give rise to bad actions: That there is a self, an individual, and a soul.
All those who had been struck by illness were freed from their disease as soon as the mother of the Bodhisattva placed her right hand on the top of their head.
“What is speaking softly? It is the attainment of vipaśyanā.
Compared to the merit he would produce, the production of merit in the first instance, consisting of the bodhisattvas’ acts of giving, would not even amount to a hundredth part.
Śāriputra, defilement is one’s own doing.
and similarly, that the precious jewel of the Buddha emerges,
After doing this for one year, one’s lifespan will be extended to three hundred years.
Then, with one’s mind on the subtle nāda, One is to meditate in stages.
Thinking that, contemplating it, and wishing for it,
Ānanda! This is also a quality and advantage that sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage will accrue in this life.
They are heroes with the strength of wisdom that defeats other strengths. They are praised by those who have wisdom.
He then thought,
the white lotus among men,
By following the same procedures as previously described, one will accomplish the tasks previously described.
One who is practicing this mantra while absorbed in the samādhi described earlier
Such is the bodhisattvas’ excellent patience with respect to the Dharma.
Monk, as the arising of all phenomena is unperceived, as their arising is insignificant, as their arising is worthless, as their arising is empty, and as their arising is peaceful, they are final nirvāṇa.
“ ‘The truth of the Buddha’s primordial wisdom Frees those dwelling in the ocean of existence.
And others he crushes, or moreover Inserts them into a limb with a needle’s point,
When you assist the protector of this world, You are free from the dangers of the lower realms and difficult rebirths.’
If you ask what these six are, they are
They know existence to be emptyAnd do not rejoice in rebirth in existence.
The sādhana of yakṣiṇīs that inducts them into service, The sādhanas of dūtas and bhūtas
declared that if any monk intentionally kills a human, or a human embryo, with his own hands,
Therefore I now reap suffering, fear, misfortune, grief, ruin, Lamentation, loss of honor, and this miserable state.”
it shook, shook strongly, and shook intensely;
One should know that the non-actualization of the finality of existence by great bodhisattva beings until they have attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment indicates their skill in means with respect to emptiness, signlessness, and aspirationlessness as gateways to liberation.
Investigate suffering, impermanence, and lack of self; Examine these three phenomena thoroughly. They occur in connection to causes and conditions; They are void of life and have no owner.
“If one smears the body, in equal measure, With mustard seed, clarified butter, and brimstone, One will be freed from the grasp of vicious beings.
the Blessed One entered a state of deep absorption known as the array of the Buddha’s adornments. The moment he entered into this state of absorption,
All these absorptions, too, are cultivated without apprehending anything.
“Through great powers and illusory samādhi, You perform miracles.
“For so long he has given up unintelligent and lowly attitudes and instead has applied himself perfectly to the lofty and vast.
By means of such causes, conditions, and bases, bodhisattvas exert themselves in pacifying the mind.
knowledgeable about the seats of the senses, knowledgeable about interdependent arising,
And be disciplined, peaceful, and completely happy.
May they be eliminated!
Just like awakening, so also feeling, notion, co-producing factors, and consciousness do not swerve from the tathatā.
and yet, as far as the actualization of the finality of existence is concerned,
They live as if nestled between the abode of the gods and the slopes of Mount Meru, with the splendor of shining lamps screened from the wind, and
who hear this teaching on the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
The blessed buddhas have not come into the world for a single city, township, province, town, home, or being.
You have also said that we should take ordination and live on alms.
Retired devotee, we order you to comply.”
Then, while seated at the Bodhi tree, you quelled the afflictions of all beings.
that noble man or noble woman would not create as much merit as that created by the noble man or noble woman who possesses just one four-line verse from this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.
“Su­bhūti, you have said that this Great Vehicle neither comes nor goes, and nor does it stay.
having bowed his head at my feet, said to me,
Even the names of the eighty excellent minor marks do not exist internally, nor do they exist externally, and nor do they abide between these two.
they are always enhanced by
“Śāradvatī­putra, the ‘three faculties’ are merely conceptualized.
and likewise praise the Dharma and the Saṅgha,
Śāradvatī­putra, it is because these things are non-existent in the ways that ordinary people are fixated on them.”
“Blessed One, he’s a shape-shifter.”
They will bring stains on the monastic order and not live like proper monks.
Listen well and remember, for I shall explain how much merit they have created.
practice the understanding of the aspects of the path in order to liberate from all notions those sentient beings who have the notion that they are sentient beings.
Likewise, as seeds do not grow in the sky but do grow in the earth,
“Never attached because of discursive thoughts,
Similarly, they do not consider the notions that they are imbued with happiness or that they are imbued with suffering, that they are a self or that they are not a self, that they are empty or that they are not empty, that they are with signs or that they are signless, that they have aspirations or that they are without aspirations, that they are calm or that they are not calm, that they are void or that they are not void, that they are afflicted or that they are purified, that they arise or that they are non-arising, that they cease or that they are unceasing, that they are entities or that they are non-entities, or that they are pure or impure.
the Precious Jewel of the Buddha, the Precious Jewel of the Dharma, and the Precious Jewel of the Saṅgha will not vanish from the world.
in the same vein as before, down to ‘they will also approach omniscience.’
If you ask what world it reveals to be empty, it reveals the world comprising the five psycho-physical aggregates to be empty.
“Master, heed me.
in the same way in the west,
One will be victorious in quarrels and disputes.
Thoroughly understanding that the tongue is empty, one does not run toward flavors.
Great love is to forsake your own welfare and to take birth intentionally within existence, among the five kinds of wandering beings.
nor have they conceptualized the tolerance which they have cultivated, the perseverance which they have undertaken, the meditative concentration in which they have become equipoised, or the wisdom which they have cultivated.
Venerable Śāriputra, if one were to show a variety of things to a person blind from birth, he would not be able to see a single thing.
From countless trillions of rākṣasas A thousand million rākṣasas honored him.
So great was this miraculous manifestation, it was as if the sun and moon shone in the gulf between worlds.
satya­vacanam anusmara, bhagavan vajra­pāṇi, sarva­karmāvaraṇāni kṣapaya,
From the sky, gods called out these verses:
Of many different kinds of medicine when there is sickness
except perhaps the neck of the Bodhisattva, which resembles a conch in shape and color.
the perfect major and minor marks,
This concludes the chapter on purities, fifteenth in the glorious tantra of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa called “The Sole Hero.”
“Wherever I go, the only person I meet is that beautiful monk. Other than him, there are no monks or priests!”
And so she went back to sleep.
the gait of a great being.
With that in mind they feel that they ought to provide for even subtle forms of life by means of their own flesh,
“The bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, and laypeople, With wicked minds, will be avaricious and stupid.
Accessing authentic discerning awareness is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
He will offer flowers, incense, and music To those compassionate benefiters of the world.
and for what purpose is this transcendent perfection of wisdom?
“ ‘I shall speak words of truth. Great king, listen to me!
If he is liberated, he will liberate my realm and other realms as well;
[Bodhisattvas who are] imbued with renunciation, who dwell in solitude, maintaining detachment and remaining in a state of cessation, should cultivate the branch of genuine enlightenment that is recollection.
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Teach infinite millions of sūtras
Divine being, do you then also claim that the thus-gone ones are subject to formation?
There is no harm brought upon sentient beings when bodhisattvas let the rivers of Dharma flow due to their loving hearts.
he amount of merit possessed by that person who rejoiced—who rejoiced in just one verse from this Dharma teaching or rejoiced in just one line—after it had been passed from one to another fifty times, would be far greater than the amount of merit gained by that man, that lord of generosity, that lord of great generosity through his generosity and establishing beings in arhathood.
It then occurred to the Bodhisattva, “Existence occurs when there is clinging.
The elder granted the tīrthika ordination, sparking a number of disputes between monks.
Oneself, through the yoga of the deity, “Invites the wrathful wisdom, Visualized in the form that tames the three worlds.
one should engage in battle. One will meet with victory.
This, Maitreya, is how the bodhisattvas have excellent intention.
‘That man has an illness because of his past bad karma.
Some hold up various jewel staffs; As they arrive, they point out the Bodhisattva from afar.
the twelve sense fields,
May your powers, faculties, and concentration make the harvest of liberation bountiful.
was neither too tall nor too short, neither too fat nor too thin, neither too fair nor too dark, was in her first blush of youth, and was a jewel of a woman, just as the prince had described.
“As another analogy, a person’s body casts a shadow that is indistinct and formless, and follows that person.
He burned the Daṇḍaka Forest So that for many years no grass would grow.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of humans concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of humans concerning purification. Those are the four.
Hence their diligence is blazing and stainless, luminous and pure, and perfectly purified.
one does not understand the hidden secret,
One should grind radish seeds, perfumed cherry, red sandalwood, and costus.
Just so, reverend Śāriputra, it is impossible that I should attain the perfect enlightenment of buddhahood!
“Five hundred rākṣasīs took on the form of maidens,
and they are not liberated from the sufferings associated with birth and so forth.
“Śāriputra, when those twelve intermediate eons have passed,
While devouring children, They robbed embryos and creatures Of the strength of their limbs.
Divine, delightful perfumes, And coral tree and spider lily flowers. {2}
the samādhi named The Supreme Illumination of the Wish-fulfilling Jewel,
“Gopā, since you pay homage to me And always make offerings with the highest respect,
embryonic nucleus,
and whose minds are constantly involved in all the ten unwholesome actions, this son of noble family performs every role, from closing the door to the lower realms up to serving as a chariot.
Bright, immaculate, and delightful,
consciousness are without arising, without cessation, without affliction, and without purification.
Those who are mindful maintain it. “It is the cessation of suffering.
This body is unreal, being a collocation of the four main elements.
who wish to blow the conch of the sacred doctrine,
promote it, proclaim it, chant it, meditate on it with unadulterated meditation,
The evil Māra and his followers will not appear there.
One should clarify buffalo butter in the powder of crushed fireflies and apply it to the interior of the vagina.
I shall establish them in the deathless expanse!
They implored him again and again,
One who is without such thoughts is always proper.
Those beings who continually possess the six-syllable mahāvidyā and are dedicated to repeating it are meritorious.
“Having cut through all mental constructs, it is free from thoughts.
The teacher should wear freshly cleaned clothes and arouse faith.
Any human who possesses This unequaled, stainless samādhi
This wheel encompasses everything because it is equal to the sky. “
Then, the cord should be laid in a jewel or metal vessel filled with water, covered with flowers, and scented with various fragrances.
seal this with beeswax,
They are heroes, leaders who have destroyed Māra And realized the peace of enlightenment. {67}
Dispelling every darkness that has gathered.
Wherever this king of sūtras is found, No one is harmed by bhūtas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, “Pretas, kumbhāṇḍas, mahoragas, Kṛtyās, or kākhordas.
I became a king for the sake of the Dharma, Not for pleasures but for the supreme Dharma.
Mañjuśrī, unlearned and ignorant ordinary beings, not knowing that all phenomena have completely passed into nirvāṇa, perceive them in terms of self and other.
or it is madder, or is colored madder, or is like madder, or shines with madder light;
burned his arm that was adorned by a hundred merits.
He is not bliss,
Or alternatively, as one will experience again birth, old age, sickness, death, misery, despair, lamentation, suffering, and unhappiness,
Then he asked, “Venerable Lord! What is the refined eye of the sacred doctrine, possessed by great bodhisattva beings?
“Nārāyaṇa, when bodhisattvas know that all phenomena are uncreated and unchanging, simply by so knowing, Nārāyaṇa, those bodhisattvas have become trained in these teachings.
“How did our benefactor leave? And who helped him escape from the capital?
“Similarly, the transcendence of fundamental ignorance is not fundamental ignorance,
As human and divine maidens encircled her,
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of suffering concerning teaching the composite,
‘Master, please do me the favor of coming to our home.’
The teacher of living beings, Mañjuvajra,
Those with five years and five qualities should travel the realm without a reliable instructor.
Bhagavat, which bodhisattva is arriving?
On his arrival, he strewed the flowers before the Blessed One
The three corners are enlightened body, speech, and mind.
As soon as they see this dharmabhāṇaka, Supuṣpacandra, slain and fallen to the ground. {50}
Other worldly treatises that are In that way the realm of fools. You should reject them and teach this!
they thoroughly and precisely understand it with the thought, ‘I am experiencing the life-force’s most basic feeling.’
After the god Maheśvara had said this,
‘Young brahmin, in the future, when the lifespan of beings is one hundred years,
Great compassion is to think that you will free beings from the negative states of cyclic existence and establish them in positive ones.
before requesting the Blessed One,
With his divine eye, he looked all over Jambūdvīpa and saw that a prince had been born to King Śuddhodana in the city of Kapilavastu. It was a prince who shone with the light of merit,
His mind merciless and forsaking all thought of future lives,
but where there is ultimately no bondage where is there need for liberation?
Is the essence of supreme joy.
Anything that strengthens or weakens physical forms,
In the same vein, are there no changes and no conceptual notions regarding any [phenomena] at all, up to and including all formative predispositions?
There was no sign of him leaving from or arriving in those buddhafields.
Arise, you who are joyful in generosity, you supreme being! Arise, you who have compassion and firm conduct!
Their navel curls to the right.
worthy of all gods’ worship;
‘Young brahmin, in the future, when the lifespan of beings is one hundred years, you will become the tathāgata,
He pacified all the sufferings of hell beings, and of those abiding in the animal realms and in the world of Yama, the lord of death.
Also, Su­bhūti, among those persons who follow the vehicle of the bodhisattvas, those who are inclined toward unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment and who will attain manifestly perfect buddhahood are few in number, whereas those persons who follow the vehicle of the bodhisattvas but regress to the levels of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas are much more numerous
who desires insight should frequently examine things as empty;
“If one uses tallakṣaṇa as the basic unit of calculation, it is feasible to calculate the size of Mount Meru, the king of mountains.
“The girl took the poison from the monk, mixed it with food, and sent it with the maid, telling her, ‘Go and offer this to my suitor.’
“Blessed One, I will assist those beings who are devoted to this Dharma discourse to accomplish all their goals.”
any notion of virtuous phenomena, any notion of non-virtuous phenomena,
without awakening to unexcelled and completely perfect buddhahood, perfectly awaken. Such are the acts with immediate consequence of the bodhisattva great beings.
the ten powers,
The bodhisattvas are resolute And behave immaculately. {267}
Divine being, the buddhas appear in order to show that the nature of error is sameness.
Their relatives came to see the newly ordained, who taught the Dharma to their assembled family members,
Similarly, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are free from contaminants and not included within the three world systems, owing to the emptiness of inherent existence.
One who is without fixation perfects the transcendent perfection of wisdom and
And is renowned also among the devas and asuras. These are distinctive qualities of the third patience. {17}
My rib cage resembled the sides of a crab,
The reply may be, ‘Noble son, I have committed a deed with immediate consequences, and so I fear that I shall suffer harm for a long time and that for me there will be no fortune, but only suffering.’
throughout the world systems, from the eastern direction up to the intermediate directions, numerous as the sands of the River Ganges,
Then arising from their seat at the Focal Point of Enlightenment,
how, you may ask, do they attract sentient beings with their pleasant speech?
Similarly, the gods of the Trayas­triṃśa realm; the gods of the Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇa­rata, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin realms;
‘Do not be afraid!
“Your body is beautiful, like the stainless sun.
“If my servant was first to all of my tasks, no matter how small,
In whatever ways the body changes its posture, they are fully aware of these.
And if within each head there were tongues As numerous as the number of heads, {23}
They lack the conviction that physical forms are emptiness.
His point of reference was the Dharma, and his ultimate resort was the Dharma.
Powerful due to your diligence,
“I go to the Buddha, my refuge,
“What is being courteous? It is being welcoming and standing up quickly.
“Some give up all sensory pleasures And meditate while having pure conduct.
Answer simply by saying what is so is so, and what is not is not. Are you a male?”
Bhikṣus, I declare to you, I make it known to you,
The Blessed One is omniscient and,
“For example, Ratnākara, should one wish to build in empty space, one might go ahead in spite of the fact that it is not possible to build or to adorn anything in empty space.
‘The dwarf accepted this gift, saying, “This is auspicious.”
“Divine son, that is something you should ask yourself! Why not explain it yourself, as best you can?
The bodhisattvas who wish To give the teaching of this sūtra With confidence and courage In the later, terrifying times,
When ignorance ceases, karmic formations cease.
how could one possibly apprehend the real nature of consciousness [and the aforementioned aggregates]?
Śāradvatī­putra, this absence of change and absence of conceptual notions regarding all things is designated as the maturity of a great bodhisattva being who practices the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Such complete absence of shame and shyness expresses itself in the following ways:
the bandits were sitting around unconcerned with their armor off in a śāla forest, dividing their spoils.
many hosts of the gods will congregate in places where those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who teach the sacred doctrine, preach and expound this transcendent perfection of wisdom,
Not within the purview of logic, it is beyond the scope of logic.
He also swept clean the circumambulation walkway, moistened and washed it,
[9] their minds are prepared for liberation; and [10] they quickly manifest liberation.
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess these ten qualities attain the intrinsic nature of the thus-gone ones’ body.”
They are wise and are invincible to Māra. Those are the benefits of being devoted to wisdom. {31}
Jupiter, Venus,
Sentient beings and the designation ‘sentient being’ are non-apprehensible.
that this śrāvaka of mine, the sthavira Mahā­maudgalyāyana, will serve twenty-eight thousand buddhas, will venerate them, honor them, make offerings to them, praise them, and respect them.
And when seven days have passed in that way They will attain the wisdom of the tathāgatas.
At the time of a lunar or solar eclipse,
Venerable Blessed One, we four great kings will ensure that he has no worries about procuring monk’s robes, alms, bedding, cushions, medicines for illness, and other necessary utensils.
fell to the feet of the Thus-Gone One and asked,
and its great illumination spread in all directions, its radiance illuminating and pervading every direction.
was astonished and amazed, without worldly concerns, and filled with delight and joy. Then
The great king Virūḍhaka arrived from the south with several trillion kumbhāṇḍas holding in their hands various pearl necklaces. In addition they carried various precious gems, and vases filled with different types of perfumes.
and similarly, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness of the present are neither fettered nor liberated.
The same can be done with the sound of a conch, etc
Then their father, the physician, returns from his journey.
On this topic, it is said:
The Buddha then said to the venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana,
“Honored in the world by demi-gods, gods, and men; Free from birth, aging, illness, and death;
Youthful Mañjuśrī, the great śrāvakas, and the world with its gods, humans, demigods, and gandharvas rejoiced, and
“You may wonder, noble son, what is meant by the bodhisattvas’ trust in the training that accords with the minds of sentient beings.
Perceiving their hermitage to be excellent and peaceful, they will stay clear of displeasure,
in leaping, and likewise in writing, finger counting, computation, arithmetic, wrestling, archery, running, rowing, swimming, elephant mounting, horsemanship, carriage driving, bow-and-arrow skills,
What are these thirty-two? They are as follows:
“With the heads of ass, camel, and elephant, With arms above and head hanging, With weapons for teeth, arms, and feet,
They have self-restraint, and have attained a level of self-restraint such that when others abuse them or insult them,
“Those who do not argue Or speak unbeneficial words
and who likewise sees the Dharma to also be constant, without life force, devoid of life force, true, unmistaken, unborn, not arisen, uncreated, uncompounded, unobstructed, imperceptible, tranquil, fearless, incontrovertible, inexhaustible, and never stilled,
the sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who practice the transcendent perfection of generosity will be respected because they furnish all sentient beings with genuine happiness.
Thus, the great earth is satisfied,
As ordinary beings are quick to heed a miracle, the householder dropped like a felled tree
“Whoever wishes for the wisdom of learners, masters, and solitary buddhas, As well as the wisdom of omniscience,
In this manner the universal monarch comes to possess the precious minister.
Tejeśvara, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of sixty-seven thousand years. {3}
‘You two should go forth into his teachings.
You are peerless in generosity, Strength of moral conduct, patience, and diligence.
They ask the lords of humans about the Dharma, And having listened to it, they become holders of the Dharma. {26}
Other bodhisattva mahāsattvas, as numerous as the atoms in the intermediate thousandfold world realm, heard this Dharma teaching and turned the Dharma wheel called stainless light.
You must immediately take ordination and follow the Able One, and then you shall attain nirvāṇa.”
the lords of the garuḍas, and the lords of the kinnaras expressed in unison their approval to the Blessed One:
It is not distinguished by familiarization and the absence of entities.
Awakened by the tip of the vajra,
“Su­bhūti, that is so! Su­bhūti, that is so! It is as you have said.
Yet when they hear the lion’s frightening roar, They flee in panic in all directions.
His voice was like the clapping of a thundercloud, pervading all buddha realms in the ten directions.
to straddle a blade sixteen finger-widths long.
You have explained the vinaya of the bodhisattva great beings well on the relative level. Well done, well done.
the eye-consciousness has no ground to stand upon.
It is non-recollection,
indeed there is no arising.
whose perfectly supreme form is whatever form is pleasing;
It is they who hear this kind of Dharma And attain the immaterial patience of the noble ones.” {66}
not just patient as long as they do not find themselves in a situation where anger otherwise takes over,
“The one who made offerings to the teacher Gaṇeśvara, The one who had built a perfect monastery,
alas, O Kauśika, this world is doomed! Alas,
Here is the recipe for this ghee mixed with pennywort.
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities are specialists in the discourses.
Śāradvatī­putra, great bodhisattva beings who maintain this union achieve the ten powers of the tathāgatas.
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who, without distraction, advance courageously through body, speech,
a buddha, a bhagavān.
” The bodhisattva great being Delighted by Victory, who was among the retinue, now joined his palms and asked the Blessed One,
They are the inconceivably numerous ways of the composite, the inconceivably numerous ways of teaching the composite,
Then the bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara, with compassion for the bodhisattva mahāsattva Akṣayamati,
“Śāradvatī­putra, the ‘four immeasurable aspirations’ are merely conceptualized.
the more will the physical deformity and crookedness, the verbal deformity and crookedness, and the mental deformity and crookedness of these great bodhisattva beings be purified in accordance with those roots of virtue.
“You may wonder, noble son, what these qualities may imply, from pursuing the welfare of all beings through to not entertaining the idea of a singular whole.
The aspect is explained as the thorough consideration of the co-produced.
If one were to ask why, it is because the impermanence of physical forms is empty of the impermanence of physical forms.
owing to their lack of skill in means they actualize the level of the śrāvakas and the level of the pratyekabuddhas dependent on the [three] gateways to liberation—emptiness, signlessness, and aspirationlessness—
Similarly, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are neither profound nor subtle.
that one should know the emptiness of internal phenomena,
and attained the meditative stabilities,
teach the sacred doctrine to sentient beings with unrelenting perseverance.
The infantile grasp at the skandhas like that, too;
The Bhagavān was dwelling in Sukhāvatī together with the great saṅgha of bodhisattvas,
Thus, just like the world system known as Sukhāvatī, it was ravishing, fulfilling, pleasing, and delightful.
having trained in this Great Vehicle, now acquire omniscience.”
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ skill in accepting consist in?
one should make an effigy of a ram, and place in its heart this mantra inscribed on birchbark with turmeric or yellow orpiment, tied up with a yellow string, and enclosed in beeswax. That will put an end to their anger and paralyze their mouths.
the Blessed One said. “People such as they should not be allowed to go forth.
In her upper left hand she holds a bow, and in the second left, a red utpala.
They also do not live in tents because of being overcome by sleep, nor because of being physically exhausted.
“Why is it a raft for crossing to the other shore?
Those are the benefits of being dedicated to samādhi. {64}
Around the temple of incense were all types of flowers that surpassed even those of the gods. They had not been planted there, but appeared solely because of the maturation of the Bodhisattva’s previous basic virtue.
Do not have that wisdom. It is the unsurpassable field of activity of the buddhas. {63}
This is exactly the kind of dangerous path the wise say must be rejected.”
To that extent their mind will be fixed upon it, Through that contemplation that dwells upon it. {16}
When the shade fell on him, he did not move into the sun.
With ordinary eyes of flesh they will see all the birthplaces of beings, and know the ripening of their karma.
If the ordinand responds “I have gone forth before,” he inquirer asks him: “Did you not transgress and incur one of the four defeats?
or even for an eon, or longer than an eon, for as long as they might desire.
it occurred to him,
and venerates those who teach it with great offerings, will eradicate all their karmic obscurations.
he sat down on the seat they had prepared and addressed the monks:
“Well then, have you actualized a non-returner’s fruition? A once-returner’s fruition?
It shows how he enjoyed his retinue of consorts and the pleasures of his kingdom.
After prostrating at Aśvajit’s feet, he circumambulated him three times and went to see Kolita.
Through their might and majesty, May poison be removed from me!
“Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who practice this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom
“These many different kinds of practices I will have carried out for many eons.
This concludes the chapter on the practice of the completion stage, the sixth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called “The Sole Hero.”
“Maudgalyāyana, the strength of ten men is the same as the strength of one ox.
those who are trapped in the swamp of desire, And
It is for their sake that the One with Excellent Intellect Practiced the all-pervasive concentration.
“Gentlemen, we have not died and moved on, nor have we been born elsewhere.
—but that one has flawed discipline.
after attaining buddhahood, they establish the sacred doctrine and
In those buddhafields they cultivate the roots of virtue in the presence of the lord buddhas and their monastic communities of śrāvakas,
Fettered in every kind of bond.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech attain the thirty-two primary signs of a great being.
If one were to ask what those indications would be, the indications [of those afflicted mental states] would comprise sights, sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the real nature of the sensory element of the eyes constitutes a bodhisattva?”
He has also triumphed over the demon of the gods— Thus he has no anguish.
or those who offer clothing, alms, beds, medicine at times of illness, and necessary utensils to living, present, and remaining buddha bhagavāns as numerous as the grains of sand in sixty-two Ganges Rivers,
His parents summoned Koṣṭhila and said,
The sons of the jinas are born there miraculously, Sitting on the center of stainless lotuses.
The secret inner heat is concealed in the inner heat.
“When that bhagavān attained enlightenment,
Deliverer from Doubt, you delight in impartiality.
Moreover, so that sentient beings who remain in peace may rise above such states and attain what is superior to that, bodhisattvas demonstrate complete buddhahood.
the samādhi of skill in all sounds,
This was the first chapter from The Glorious Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld, “Accomplishing Peaceful Activity” or the “Chapter of the Gods.”
Moreover, Ānanda, when, on the one hand, the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas of the world systems of the eastern direction, numerous as the sands of the River Ganges,
the ground was fragrant and covered with a scattering of many hundreds of thousands of divine flowers.
She is attractive to others, with faultless eyes. Alluring to the mind and pleasing to the eye,
Thus, bodhisattvas remain in the application of mindfulness with respect to phenomena.
They have correct conduct that is pure, Without defect, unsullied, and faultless.
They are heroes with great wisdom Who beat the drum of deathlessness. {68}
Instead, I would become an impoverished person, or
“The eight adorning nāgas Release a giant breath of steam That terrifies all gods and nāgas.
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, this transcendent perfection of wisdom indicates to these worlds that the five psycho-physical aggregates are empty.
You neither remove, nor add,
Maheśvara came from his forehead,
It was hung about with raised parasols, standards, and flags.
Lord, you remain within truth, within veracity, And you speak words that are true. {14}
perfect the forty kinds of liberation,
His arches are high.
Monks, there are also four truths of the noble ones.
they are excellently favored by omniscience.
this vehicle which is called the ‘Great Vehicle’ is said to be equal to space.
Moreover, any other subtle defilements of this kind are called anxiety.
Su­bhūti, Do you consider [those attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, that the transcendent perfection of wisdom could appropriate or become fixated upon?
He is the one with a voice like a great drum.
not moving forth,
these goddesses rouse the lord With songs coming from their own throats.
It is in this way, Su­bhūti, that great bodhisattva beings set out sentient beings for the benefit of the worlds.
Generous and powerful, you also acknowledged the kindness of others.
The suffering of the inscribed three syllables
“ ‘I did not at that time become absorbed in anger. I maintained the power of patience, which is praised by the buddhas.
“With the dance movement of the great vajra, Circumambulate the ground three times
“There is no master superior to him throughout the three worlds;
“The Bhagavān is thus: a tathāgata, an arhat, a fully enlightened buddha, one with perfect wisdom and conduct,
“I will manifest there My shining body
An exceptional and amazing being has been born in this world!
“And every kind of jewel Appearing from their hands,
I, [ordinand’s name], petition you, reverend, to serve as preceptor. Reverend, please act as my preceptor.
He goes to the Nairañjanā surrounded by hosts of gods and nāgas as well as sages;
Owing to their utter purity, they do consider the non-arising of ordinary people themselves.
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, great bodhisattva beings who persevere in the transcendent perfection of wisdom neither associate physical forms with omniscience, nor do they disassociate them therefrom.
Divine son, when a bodhisattva great being, without producing, has produced the mind set on giving up all possessions, he will not entertain any feelings of miserliness
They should think, ‘Oh! Those beings who do not listen to the Tathāgata’s skillful method, to his teaching with an implied meaning, and do not know it, do not understand it, do not ask questions about it, have no faith in it, and have no aspiration for it—those beings have extremely corrupt knowledge .
“They do not have doubt or mistrust And they have no uncertainty.
“When someone has the thought of a name, In that cessation there is no wisdom.
They are endowed with the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four assurances, the four unhindered discernments,
“Air, bile, and phlegm should be seen as desire, anger, ignorance, and the sixty-two fabricated views.
They travel through the air like a bird, And they miraculously emit smoke and flames. {47}
The cord should then be cut with a sword and tossed into the fire.
querying Upasena, and a summary.
the sensory element of the mental faculty, the sensory element of mental phenomena, and the sensory element of mental consciousness is always without fear.
“No, Venerable Lord!” “Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty as permanent or impermanent constitute a bodhisattva?”
It is possible that all beings may think and act in unison and the great oceans may dry out;
“Śāriputra, the wisdom of the buddhas, which is profound, difficult to see, and difficult to understand, has been realized by the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas.
let alone bodhisattva mahāsattvas with bodhisattva followers as numerous as the grains of sand in ten Ganges Rivers,
In the four directions he hung censers made of various precious materials,
Monks, at that point one of Sujātā’s servants, a woman named Rādhā, had just died. She had been wrapped in a hemp cloth and left in the charnel ground. When I saw this dusty rag, I decided to use it to cover myself.
and the utterly unborn on the ultimate level is also ultimately the same as the dharmas of those who are training.
thereby bringing happiness to sentient beings and the growth of crops and trees.
“ ‘There is no passing away or returning. There is no existence of all things, yet neither are they nonexistent.
Your Majesty, tell me what else needs to be done and I shall see to it.”
The sons of the Jina, having listened to us, Meditate on the supreme path to enlightenment
The yogin will certainly become a buddha.
“Divine son, whatever is the same as suchness,
Son of noble family, such is the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of discipline.
and that, being signless, they are aspirationless.
are dedicated to making vast offerings
“The Sugata taught this sūtra, a lamp for gods and men:
when the northern side was ascendant the southern side was low,
said to the group of six, “We venerables must put off our other business for a time.”
O divine princes, the astonishing singular difficulty for those bodhisattvas is not that they do not realize the uniformity of all virtuous attributes, by realizing which they would remain on the level of the śrāvakas or the level of the pratyekabuddhas, but,
And as they are trained in teaching using terms, They speak with words that are correct. {17}
Beseeched by many quadrillions of bodhisattvas, this buddha taught the Dharma exclusively from the perspective of the intrinsic nature.
How does consciousness, after abandoning one body, appropriate another body?
Monks, the Thus-Gone One now further thought,
Because, young man, beings accomplish bad actions due to attachment to their lives and bodies.
is the non-cultivation of the sensory element of sights and the sensory element of visual consciousness.
“Like the sky, which remains unattached to darkness, dust, smoke, or comets,
According to the division of five colors. “And in truth, each of them is Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa
and the recipient is without defining characteristics.
Ānanda, it is because all great bodhisattva beings in the world systems of the ten directions, as many as they are, from those who have first begun to set their mind on enlightenment and continuing as far as those who abide on the tenth level
“Conversely, through the cessation of fundamental ignorance, formative predispositions cease.
Their minds should not be distracted. Their minds should not be captivated.
For this reason, Su­bhūti, this precious transcendent perfection is non-apprehensible.
“In their dreams they will see the body With the color of gold, possessing the signs of hundreds of merits,
The fruit is not attained when one lacks the path, nor is it when one abides on the path.
Prostrations to the bodhisattva of the zenith, “Given by Joy”;
“Place on guard twenty thousand brave fighting men in armor,
If you ask what is ‘great compassion,’ it is unstinting loving kindness toward all sentient beings, when there are actually no sentient beings. That is called great compassion.
When the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta had praised the Blessed One with these fitting verses, they asked the Blessed One about his health, saying,
that [unconditioned phenomena], up to and including the finality of existence, are without the defining characteristics of the finality of existence [and so forth].
Upon hearing the Dharma with a stainless heart, They all attain exalted liberation.
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, the spiritual mentors to great bodhisattva beings teach the doctrine that the eyes are imbued with suffering,
approach a great bodhisattva being, and proceed to teach, demonstrate, analyze, elucidate, and completely disclose the discourses associated with the śrāvakas and the pratyekabuddhas,
or giving, ethical discipline, and the other perfections up to wisdom;
Even if they have to breach a pit of burning embers Or scale a pile of razorblades to get there.
“The following verses describe her qualities; If there is a girl like that, seek her out for me!
lasting as long as the sacred doctrine itself endures,
“Bhagavān in the later times, during the later times, in the last five hundred years of the Dharma,
Such is the bodhisattvas’ excellent wisdom that is not temporary.
You will attain the highest, complete enlightenment and
one day I was engaged in a conversation with the gods of the Tuṣita heaven, the god Saṃtuṣita and his retinue, about the stage of nonregression of the great bodhisattvas. At that time,
They cried out loudly in laughter, slapped and beat their chests, and disheveled their hair.
Monks, since I had now stayed in Vaiśālī for as long as I found enjoyable,
Is ordained as a bhikṣu and practices poṣadha, And eats free of craving, without attachment to food. {77}
This was the eighth omen
Revealed their own bodies to me And with their voices they declared, ‘Excellent! {119}
For the remainder of the meal, they doused one another in molten iron,
and that the essential nature of awakening is the essential nature of all phenomena.
When the mantra is incanted 108 times,
Not dwelling on any of that, bodhisattvas do not develop any of the many forms of conceit that can arise in relation to entity, nonentity, sameness, difference, suchness, and so forth.
In height they are five thousand yojanas And their circumference is two thousand yojanas. {45}
Saw buddhas as numerous as sand grains in ten million Ganges, Made offerings to them, and engaged in practice. {26}
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is imbued with suffering.”
Having heard from the Bhagavān this kind of Dharma, which they have never heard before, they are puzzled.
non-perception inside and outside is non-disturbance.
Sarva­nadī­saricchrī (Glory of All Rivers and Streams), Sarva­toya­samudra­śrī (Glory of the Ocean of All Waters)
‘Today I will cause the buddha-knowledge to arise,
That is called the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities.
“If you ask what is the ‘knowledge of relative appearances,
the systematic presentation of the fruits cannot be disclosed in ultimate truth.
“In the northwestern corner, similarly, A red one, nicely marked with a red lotus, should be drawn.
and correct conduct that benefits beings. That is the kind of correct conduct they had.
“Those heroes emanate Delightful mansions, Palaces and pinnacled halls, And beautiful lotus ponds {74}
they do not make assumptions on account of those gifts,
One should remain with one’s mind focused one-pointedly.
“Monks, the noble son Upasena thought first only of gathering a following.
Bowing before him, Indra paid his respect to the Bodhisattva.
terminology, explaining, expounding, clarifying, disseminating, analyzing, differentiating, proclaiming,
that which angers, the anger, or one who is angry;
“How can someone teach the meaning Who does not know the meaning behind the words?
As you say, Venerable One,” responded Brahmā, master of the world, to the Blessed One, and he paid attention as the Blessed One had instructed.
Kauśika, great bodhisattva beings should abide accordingly in the transcendent perfection of wisdom.”
They sing songs while playing melodious music and dancing. They play tuṇas, paṇavas, flutes, lutes, wood kettledrums, reed pipes, wooden pins, cymbals, kimpalas, nakalus, guitars, clay kettledrums with a good sound, and paṭahas. They attend upon you with comedy and dance—playful, enjoyable, happy, and sweet.
acquiring retention, memory, and knowledge
As the celebrated omen of the wisdom, Which I previously saw at that time. {96}
“Noble son, bodhisattvas who practice excellent skill in means possess ten qualities.
Then the Bodhisattva thought, “What is the prerequisite for contact to occur?
fear of karma,
“[Venerable Lord], the cultivation of the transcendent perfection of wisdom is the non-cultivation of physical forms, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, consciousness, the six inner sense fields, the six outer sense fields, and the eighteen sensory elements.
“In such places they will recite what they previously read and heard, three times during the day and three times at night.
It has nothing to do with pretense.
“He has the excellent features. All beings pay homage to him.
Instantly the girl’s female organs vanished, and her body became that of a man
Monk, as all phenomena are like hallucinations, there is no karmic maturation.
“The disciple should then bow to the teacher, leave the room,
She is the knowledge that perfects the three worlds and fulfills all desires
Such are the qualities arrayed as features of that realm That, even by speaking of them for eons at a time, The tiny fraction of them one could thus describe Would be less than a single drop of water compared to the ocean.
When he said the letter e, out came the statement: ‘Faults come from desire (eṣaṇā­samutthāna­doṣa).’
It is explained as the basic character of joy In connection with the wisdom-gnosis initiation.
They themselves should attain omniscience, manifestly perfect enlightenment,
with them blue lotus flowers, pink lotus flowers, water lilies, and white lotus flowers, as well as jasmine, mandārava, and mahāmandārava flowers.
The other half he offered to the Tathāgata Duṣprasaha.
There will be many irreversible bodhisattvas,
“When will the god Ratnavara awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood? What will his buddha realm be like?
“If, for example, a fully ordained monk, nun, layman, or laywoman emanated by the tathāgatas were to teach the sacred doctrine continuously for an eon or for more than an eon to [phantom] persons also emanated by the tathāgatas,
He comes up to that man and scolds him, Saying, ‘You are not working!’
Śāriputra, that being the case, you should not be fond of this body.
This king of mantras, pronounced once, burns all evil.
In this way, Ānanda, without arising from the center of space, the Thus-Gone One Ratnavyūha will teach the bodhisattvas these dhāraṇī gateways known as ‘the inexhaustible gateway,’ doing so in an elaborate and genuine manner.
and similarly, the gods of the Catur­mahā­rāja­kāyika realm are all discerned in the world, as are [the other classes of gods], up to and including the gods of the Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin realm.
It is voiceless,
freedom from incorrect mental engagements,
Similarly, O gods, this doctrine is profound owing to the profundity of the emptiness of internal phenomena, and owing to the profundity of the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of both external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of non-dispersal, the emptiness of inherent existence, the emptiness of all things, the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, the emptiness of non-apprehension, the emptiness of non-entities, the emptiness of essential nature, and the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities.
one should write this mantra on a rag from a cemetery as before,
The wheel was adorned with various marks of auspiciousness, beautifully wrapped in divine fabrics and dyed in different colors.
They [will pass genuinely] beyond dangers related to poison, weapons, fire, and water.
They know their birth.
Throughout them all they train intensively in a mind of equanimity that is free of resentment, rivalry, and harm, and is expansive, immeasurable, and nondual.
“Noble son, there are a hundred thousand mountains in that pore.
they are accepted by [genuine] spiritual mentors, and abandon evil associates?
He is also open-minded, and now suffers because he has never heard the Dharma.
this tathāgata, too, intends to give a great Dharma teaching,
If you can do that, you may request from me this verse spoken by the Buddha, and I will bestow it on you.’
nor free from blame,
“Ma’am, your son here has arranged a rendezvous at a girl’s house.
“All those who normally follow you, such as Śakra, The guardians, the hordes of half kiṃnaras,
Today we have attained happiness Through having heard this prophecy.”
It is because the ultimate does not arise, does not cease, does not disintegrate, is not accepted, is not discarded, is not conveyed through syllables, is not expressed through syllables, and is not realized through constructs.
There are four formless aggregates:
They listen to many teachings. They have confidence. They long for the Dharma. They are devoted to the Dharma.
You have routed the teachings of all tīrthikas. You meditate on emptiness, the absence of being, and the absence of a soul. {77}
“ ‘They replied, “We are alive, Bhagavat.”
From here, in which direction is that world called Boundless Accumulation of Precious Qualities and Full Display of Happiness where the Blessed One, the thus-gone King of the Golden-Hued Lion’s Play lived?
When silha and camphor abide in the center, The lower sixth circulates.
He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of indolence!”
Free the moon from Rāhu!
the inconceivably numerous vajra words concerning teaching the composite,
his mind has become calm and tranquil;
Su­bhūti, in this supreme vehicle, the Great Vehicle, no coming is indeed discernible,
The reason for calling this difficult practice is because it is excruciatingly difficult, and therefore it is described in such terms.
The devas make offerings to it. Brahmā praises it.
Then Senior Śāradvatī­putra asked the Blessed One,
Why? All language does not ultimately exist,
If, having recited the mantra fifty times, one places one’s foot on the ground In pursuit of treasure within it,
“He thus has compassion for beings, And in a future time will become a buddha
That true nature, limit of reality, and essence of phenomena is the Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.
he felt sad and asked:
Of the Dharma that the lords of humans have taught
and together they sported, made love, and indulged all of their desires.
Young man, in that way the bodhisattva mahāsattvas obtain the treasure of the buddhas.
It has bountiful harvests and is teeming with people.
an act of suspension for refusal to acknowledge, an act of suspension for refusal to make reparations,
“Also at that time, a light ray shone from the ūrṇā hair between the Bhagavān’s eyebrows to twenty thousand buddha realms in the eastern direction.
I entrust this Dharma discourse to you, so that you will retain it and teach it widely to others.
that the householder class and particularly those who stand out like mighty sāl trees will emerge in the world;
some are made of gold,
“ ‘I was always speaking the praises of solitude. I always maintained correct conduct.
“All the auspicious signs have come together;
Meritorious are those beings who live in Vārāṇasī, can see you, and always gather around you.
“Those who received this sūtra From the buddhas of the past
Māra, being thus restrained, became angry; He held aloft his unsheathed, sharp sword.
Su­bhūti, because the adamantine pristine cognition of great bodhisattva beings is not an entity,
This pursuit does not involve doing anything.
“The noble son or noble daughter who repeats this six-syllable mahāvidyā will attain these samādhis:
in which case, too, the Elder Su­bhūti is the emulator of the Tathā­gata.
Do not let this Dharma teaching that is equal to the Thus-Gone One vanish, for it performs the activity of a thus-gone one.”
I will satisfy the unskillful ones with wisdom.
[23] It is not placing one’s trust in ordinary people. “[24] It is the natural result of correct conduct.
he unsheathed his knife and cut off his father’s head at the neck, which tumbled to the floor.
As a parable, Śāriputra, in a village, a town, a market town, a district, a region, a country, or a capital,
The leaves, flowers, and fruits in his parks withered.
Indeed his mind was as vast as the oceans and the earth.
He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of the perception of dreams!”
the samādhi named Summoning Nirvāṇa,
Once, when not occupied with their studies, they went to collect wood for fire pūjas.
and the inconceivably numerous families of wisdom concerning purification. Those are the four.
Supreme joy is radiance.
I hold the torch; I am the bright light.
After a while, an ethical monk happened by, which gave us an idea.
Son of noble family, this was the first time that these two beings developed the mind set upon unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.”
Whoever gives this sūtra to others or recites just a single word,
Reaching the great city of Vaiśālī, the Blessed One stepped across the city threshold at midday.
Just as a phantom may stand, sit, move, walk, and even lie down, but remains unsullied by the positive and negative effects of past actions,
and that they will know no lives after this one.
As he perfectly and completely awakens, he will be known as Samanta­raśmyabhyudgata­śrī­kūta­rāja.
Vi­śāla­netra
“Even though it is said the world is an aggregate, They know it to be empty,
(4) esteeming oneself and deprecating others.
If you ask why, it is because they do not consider the nature of the truth of suffering.
some mansions were made of combinations of gold, silver, beryl, crystal, and red pearl;
they have no attachment to anything in the three realms
will one again experience suffering?
Then comes the number called kuruṭāvi.
You will have to spend the rest of your life away from human pleasures.
“How do you base yourself on the acts with immediate consequence?”
Those sentient beings who hear this Dharma teaching, grasp it, and teach it extensively to others will reap a great profit.
She should be the last to go to sleep and the first to rise; She should lovingly obey, and be as guileless as a mother.
A bodhisattva lion, similarly, puts down the load of the afflictions and moves ahead without bringing them along.
consciousness and objects of consciousness.’
In doubt, the monks went to he who severs all doubts, the Blessed Buddha, and asked,
I am also fond of wealth; I, too, cherish it, like it, and enjoy it. Therefore,
the attributes of those who will no longer be subject to rebirth, the attributes of arhatship,
“Su­bhūti, for those great bodhisattva beings not even the slightest negative phenomenon will arise.
Likewise, while contemplating the lower yāna We are longing in that same way— Like beings during a famine— For the attainment of the Buddha’s wisdom. {13} “The great Muni, the perfect Buddha, Has not yet given us his prophecy.
Brahmānana, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of seven days. {7}
Also present were
For all of them he was someone who had realized the higher knowledge of a bodhisattva.
Nārāyaṇa, they should strive in these four.”
Suvarṇavarṇa in Puṣpa, Rabheyaka in Magadha, Kāpili in Bharukaccha, Prapuṇḍaka in Kośala, “Śūcīlomā in Bhadra, Yaśodharā in Malla, Vibhīṣaṇa in Pāñcāla, And Lohitākṣa in Aśvaja, “Piṅgala in Avanta, Kapilākṣa in Vaidiśa, Kumbhodara in Matsa, And Dīrghila in Sūrata,
Early in the morning, one should prepare a maṇḍala disk using one cat’s paw of powdered pennywort and incant it 108 times.
to the stūpa of a tathāgata who has passed into nirvāṇa,
Śākyasiṃha will be establishing
That is what my parents said to me.
When the Bodhisattva emerged from the river, he wanted to sit down, and so he looked for a suitable place on the riverbank.
Who had set out for the supreme, highest enlightenment. {128}
The multitudes of gods and nāgas joined their palms, rejoiced, and thought,
“His form is dark in color, With one face and two hands, holding a vajra.
For the real nature of sights
So Great Top-Knotted Brahmā draped his robe on one shoulder, knelt on his right knee,
who are inarticulate,
(5) considering all elements to be present in the space element,
inducing them and establishing them therein.
The bodhisattva Yaśaskāma had become lazy.
When great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of generosity
It is difficult to find even over many eons.
bodhisattvas to the number of atoms gather around them, and they reach the entranceway to the six perfections.
If that which exists were to arise, That which has arisen would arise once more.
They abide in a non-abiding manner with respect to the emptiness of physical forms, and similarly [with respect to the emptiness] of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness, and they abide in a non-abiding manner with respect to the emptiness of conditioned and unconditioned phenomena.
Similarly, Su­bhūti, one wishes to attain emancipation in things without defining characteristics merely wishes to attain emancipation in symbols, conventional expressions, and designations.
It alleviates poverty and creates prosperity.
the stride of Nārāyaṇa,
Bring these beings swiftly to the blissful state of nirvāṇa.
bodhisattva mahāsattvas who obtain this samādhi,
The brahmin remained silent as Māṭhara pointed out the position’s faults.
these marks are beyond the comprehension of any being.
Some, like the sun, send forth rays of light;
The instructor then says: “This is the procedure.”
and on that basis, they may recollect one thought, or from that up to a hundred thoughts, or even up to a thousand thoughts. They may also recollect one day, or from that up to a hundred days, up to a thousand days, or even up to a hundred thousand days.
All the people tormented by disturbing emotions found release from their anguish.
were now gathered for the turning of the wheel of Dharma. In total there were more than 18,000 divine beings from the Pure Realms, led by such beings as Maheśvara, Nanda, Sunanda, Candana, Mahita, Śānta, Praśānta, and Vinīteśvara.
“ ‘The appellations that are spoken are merely appellations; Within saṃsāra there is no end to be found.
Proclaimed the sublime Māyā to be the mother, Saying, “She is fit to give birth to the joy of the Śākya family.”
Similarly, [they discern] that the eyes are empty of the emptiness of the eyes, that the nature of the eyes is emptiness, and that emptiness is indeed the eyes.
The young man Candraprabha, having adorned the great city of Rājagṛha
Similarly, is this mind [of the bodhisattvas] unattached to the eyes?
The fire element ripens the seed.
At that time, he thought,
All of them would then possess the supreme ornaments of body, speech, and mind and would have accomplished the ten masteries.
It is in this way that these great corporeal aggregates, exclusively endowed with suffering, arise.
One should incant a cake of leftovers with the third garland mantra and offer it.
The holders of this sūtra of the Sugata Will reach the level of an ācārya,
How could the Buddha in a moment—in such a short time—inspire and ripen for the highest, complete enlightenment all these countless bodhisattvas?
"སེམས་ཅན་དེ་དག་ཐམས་<tThe sum total of the merit of all those beings with as much merit as Brahmā would then match the merit of one śrāvaka.
One hundred sarvabalas is called a visaṃjñāgati.
Monks, at this point Suvarṇa­prabhāsā, the chief queen of Kālika the nāga king, came to see the Bodhisattva. She was surrounded and escorted by many nāga girls, who were holding various types of cloth, parasols made of assorted jewels, different pearl necklaces, a variety of precious jewels, an array of garlands, a myriad of unguents and powders made by gods and humans, and containers with diverse perfumes.
When the southern direction was high, the northern direction was low.
noble son, while sentient beings revolving within cyclic existence have abundant experience with material things,
In that case, Brahmā’s quantity of merit would not match even one hundredth of that of the bodhisattva; it does not even bear comparison.
However, from this single identity that all phenomena share on the ultimate level, the Blessed One teaches the Dharma, without teaching, in many ways in order to accommodate the reference points of beings.”
any notion of contaminated phenomena, any notion of uncontaminated phenomena,
Ajita, I inspired and developed all these bodhisattva mahāsattvas toward the highest, complete enlightenment.
Venerable Lord! Great bodhisattva beings of the future, also, having trained in this supreme vehicle, the Great Vehicle, will acquire omniscience.
and they perceive minds free from desire correctly, as minds that are free from desire.
Even if he does not practice yoga.
He will not be able to leave home.”
Within a month, one’s lifespan will increase to three hundred years.
I have eliminated all weariness And
As soon as I obtained it, I reached the tenth level and many thousands of beings reached the level where they become receptive to the unborn nature of phenomena.”
“They will share the fate of those who deny the Buddha’s awakening and those who insult and defame the buddhas, the blessed ones, of the past, present, and future.”
In the same vein, do you think that anything other than [the other links of dependent origination], up to and including aging and death, constitutes a bodhisattva?
“Keep your discipline and fulfill your wishes; Remember your past actions.
I shall come before those dharmabhāṇakas in the place where those dharmabhāṇakas are walking for twenty-one days.
Even a monk of nine years should not allow going forth, should not grant ordination,
When there is such freedom from weariness, the clothes can be used well and yet no one will feel any attachment to them.
they do not consider the notion that their gifts are empty, or that they are not empty.
They will be eaten by many millions of creatures And will experience extremely dreadful sensations.
It is accompanied by feeling,
“I forsake this rebirth into a nāgī’s womb, And this birth in an extremely detestable body.
not forgetting the omniscient mind generated by high resolve;
He brings boundless offerings,
Men, on the other hand, are all said To be endowed with my form.
the samādhi named Complete Liberation from Desire and Anger,
They perfectly understand how all phenomena are inherently beyond suffering.
the circulation of the spirit of enlightenment,
In the best case, the flower has fallen in the center.
venerable Mahā­maudgalyāyana,
The noble ones call such a person the impartial one dwelling on pleasure that is imbued with mindfulness.
"ཇི་ལྟར་རང་གི་ལས་ཀྱི་རྐྱེན་གྱི་དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ་ལས་སྐྱེས་པ་བཞིན་དུ་ལྷ་དང་། རྒྱལ་པོ་དང་། སེམས་<tJust as one is born according to one’s roots of virtue—namely, one’s karmic conditions—one will be born as a god, a king, a hell being, an animal, or a being from the world of Yama.
I am a bodhisattva.’“Deva Sukuṇḍala then offered his diadem and earrings to the brahmin and recited:
Even if they should become Śakra, Brahmā, or a guardian of the world, they will still remain committed to the welfare of others.
Su­bhūti, all things are naturally pure.
Bodhisattvas, similarly, worry that their pursuers will bring an end to their commitment and cause them to become distracted.
They do not apprehend [the fruitional attributes], up to and including omniscience.
Therefore, all things stand on the root that is baseless.
‘Noble one, accept these alms.
they never forsake sentient beings,
“In all those worlds the paradises and heavenly residences shook in six ways, even as far up as the paradise of Brahmā, and
The first of these eight great types of merit results in becoming a universal monarch.
Noble ones, wherever this Dharma teaching is read, taught, explained, written out, contemplated, spoken about, chanted, or made into texts,
Desires too are [foul-smelling,] disagreeable, [and not worthy of being looked upon.’]
“In the past, for billions of eons, You cultivated supreme and unwavering diligence.
When the arrow hits a mountain peak, it rebounds;
Then Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara asked the deva Maheśvara,
Thus, free of all incorrect mental activity, they properly direct their minds to the Dharma teachings and train in them abundantly.
It is due to the particularities of concepts And, furthermore, the particularities of inclinations And the particularities of various religious systems, That such a plethora has been taught.
it is because it is absolutely, firmly established that all things are without defining characteristics.
The Dharma will cease but its outer form Will remain for a futher thirty-two intermediate eons.
When he came to the village of Senānī, the village headman’s daughters, Nandā and Nandabalā,
and the Deer Park has only a limited amount of tree shade.
At that moment, the wishes of all beings in the realm of the Sahā world were completely fulfilled.
And like putrefying spirits possessing human beings and making them eat excrement and filth,
“Through this virtuous deed, You will become victorious ones known as Madhusaṃbhava!”
“Take action! Go forth! Apply yourself to the Buddha’s teachings!
Since all worthy opponents and anyone counted as learned will be close to the king,
and knowledge.
“There was the supreme sound of the songs of bees and partridges That equaled that of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the king of geese.
likewise, they do not consider whether the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty are empty or not empty.
likewise, they do not consider whether feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are permanent or impermanent.
“Venerable Lord! This transcendent perfection of wisdom is established by means of great deeds.
Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that anything other than physical forms constitutes a bodhisattva
“When, however, White Acala is in the center,
Śāradvatī­putra! The purity of phenomena is not cognizant due to absolute purity.
Consider, noble son, the analogy of water that alleviates the thirst of thirsting sentient beings.
“Those who use the food of the saṅgha to feed dogs will be reborn in a low caste,
Nārāyaṇa, this was the first introduction to the absorption that encapsulates all merit.
Even if they were feces, urine, and blood,
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin attained these samādhis:
He cordially greeted Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, and those gods of the pure realms, and pointed out their seats to them.
Thus bodhisattvas remain in the application of mindfulness with respect to villages, cities, towns, regions, districts, and royal courts.
Nevertheless we would never slay this bhikṣu, As we have developed the aspiration for enlightenment.’ {90}
However, action possesses no form, and its maturation is formless, too.
they will be patient with the abuse and the insults that are spoken, for it is their nature to have endurance;
or among the householder class, standing out like a tall sāl tree;
And similarly, Lord, my garden. I have prepared and laid out divine food with a hundred flavors.
“Who has taught them the Dharma? Who has brought them to enlightenment?
Furthermore, they are unable to relinquish the disturbing emotions that are conjoined with the habitual tendencies.
establishing them in the arhathood in which all outflows have ceased,
Those dharmabhāṇakas will be honest.
“This is the realm of experience of the heroes, Of the bodhisattvas, the protectors.
When they walk, their steps make no sound.
They have eliminated all conceptions And they have countless samādhis. {268}
The wise refuse To kill, imprison, or torture For temporal power.”
Therefore, noble ones, after the Tathāgata has passed into nirvāṇa you should be in possession of this Dharma teaching.
“Alas, my wellborn man with a perfect body, Well formed and tapering, you are unequaled.
They have compassion toward them, And give them the teachings of ultimate truth. {65}
He will free from bondage those who are trapped in the cage and prison of saṃsāra and who are bound by the fetters of disturbing emotions.
do they also practice the other transcendent perfections?
Just like the king of swans, the great sage Asita, accompanied by his nephew Naradatta, soared through the sky to the city of Kapilavastu.
Brahmā, master of the world, then transformed the sky into metal, and the bhūtas ran off farther into the sky, suspended in the air at the height of seven palm trees.
a mendicant since he has cracked open the eggshell of ignorance,
It is the destroyer of afflictions. It uproots latent pains. It fully teaches the path of the noble ones. It opens the gates to liberation. It eradicates all beliefs in the transitory collection. It demolishes the mountain of pride. It dries the ocean of saṃsāra.
Then, in the northeastern direction,
As soon as women put food or drink in their mouths, the parasites are the first to eat.
They will experience nothing but the best, highest, and most delightful Dharma joys; that is why this realm will be known as Pritivyūha, ‘Array of Joy.’
“They who do not forget but teach this sūtra Are wise individuals who will never become blind.
Having approached the Lord, he said,
unless, that is, the ripening of their karma precludes it.
the samādhi like-the-wind,
“Is he to go forth as well?” “Yes, noble one, he is.”
the one who removes the burdens, the one who postpones his own benefit,
It is taught that a practitioner who switches To twenty-two and a half minute hours and meditates in eight sessions Equalizes sessions and breaks.
If you ask why, it is because they are not separated from the transcendent perfection of wisdom, and they are not without skill in means.
The goddess who sits in sattvaparyaṅka posture,
with clean fabrics that swirl in the breeze, and
experiencing the roots of virtue dependent on meditative concentration, and mastering all these until buddhahood is cultivated.
In this way should one meditate with reverence,
And all flowing rivers are still,
Practicing the transcendent perfection of perseverance,
There he dismounted from his horse Kaṇṭhaka and, once he was on the ground, he dismissed the great assembly of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas.
Tathāgata Svarāṅgaghoṣa Had a lifespan of six thousand years. {1}
will roast among the denizens of the hells for many hundreds of years, for many thousands of years, for many hundreds of thousands of years, and for many hundreds of billion trillion years.
You dwell in the peaceful path of bliss.
“They are tamed and are tamers of untamed beings. They are constantly in the state of being tamed.
Vikala and Lohitākṣa,
Likewise it applies to sights, and in the same vein, to [all the other sense objects], up to and including mental phenomena.
A rain of flowers fell, millions of instruments sounded, and gods and demigods rejoiced;
It may then be spoken of as ‘gold blazing with splendor’ or ‘a jewel blazing with splendor.’
offer incense, flowers, frankincense, perfumes, or plaster, and they restore shrines that have crumbled.
For the highest, supreme, unsurpassable enlightenment,
Anyone who suffered from disease was healed.
Thinking with a poor man’s outlook,
Sage, as you sat below the holy tree, you then tamed Māra and his henchmen,
Similarly, they know the modalities of the applications of mindfulness, and yet
at that time and in those days,
The yogī has knowledge, masters yoga and weaves Indra’s Web.
He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of miserliness!”
Nevertheless, there are four links that serve as the cause for assembling this twelvefold dependent arising.
What is the causal condition of birth?”
The man promised to do so and he went off into the wilds.
“How does subtle and intangible consciousness produce the great bulky body of an elephant? How does it pierce a body that is as hard as a diamond?
He will be attractive and pleasing to many people and will generate roots of merit.
whose is this transcendent perfection of wisdom,
Then Chanda took the noble horse and the ornaments with him And went into the ladies’ quarters, weeping.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of unhappiness. What are the four kinds of knowledge of unhappiness?
Then please wait a moment, O Great Ocean of Qualities of Immeasurable Glory.
who completely liberates pretas;
“When a certain poor person, Despised by the populace,
‘This stūpa that is mine, the stūpa that contains my body, may it appear within the buddha realms in world realms in the ten directions wherever this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma will be taught.
offers robes, alms-food, bedding, seats, herbs that counteract illness, and provisions,
If you ask what is the ‘emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end,’
These lotuses grew from stems of beryl, had cores of sapphire, and their anthers were of emerald.
the insides of my chest became visible through both sides of my ribs.
“Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, when persons who follow the vehicle of the bodhisattvas consider, conceptualize, and grasp the meditative stabilities of the lord buddhas of the past, future, and present,
I will slice off my skin to make a page,
Great kings, always act in this excellent way!”
Those sixteen sons of the Jina became Two jinas in each of the directions.
One who does not move from the nature of the dharmas obtains the nature of the dharmas.
Sister, likewise, all phenomena come into being owing to the power of a collection.
“ ‘In the pleasant, supreme forest Samantabhadra, Filled with birds and the aroma of flowers,
and utterly unreal,
They are content with what is in accord with the Dharma, pertains to the saṅgha, is praised by the victorious ones, is not reviled by the bodhisattvas, is admired by the gods, and is not banned for those who maintain pure conduct.
“The bodhisattvas, the protectors, Have annihilated all phenomena.
Noble one, the lights of the bodhisattva mahāsattva Gadgadasvara’s wisdom illuminate this Sahā world realm.
“Noble ones, you should practice as I have.
and that he was given the name Abhāva­samudgata.
And a magnificent form that is worthy of homage.
"The Blessed One was dwelling in the Sudharmā assembly hall in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, together with a great gathering of five hundred monks,<tei:note xml:id=""UT22084-066-007-17""/> and very many bodhisattva mahāsattvas, including Maitreya and Mañjuśrī."
Su­bhūti! Once the great bodhisattva being Maitreya has attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment,
The accomplishments are relative, And so are the transcendences of the Buddha.
the bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkam­bhin, surrounded and venerated by a retinue of one hundred sextillion bodhisattvas,
has indeed proceeded from time immemorial, without interruption, like the flow of a river.
Your Majesty, I am from the city of Kapilavastu of the Śākyas, A wonder-filled city of which you may have heard. My father’s name is Śuddhodana. I renounced this city because I wished for deeper qualities.”
It is not accompanied by birth, aging, illness, death, mourning, cries of misery,
When those buddha bhagavāns are giving this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma,
Moreover, Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings who practice the six transcendent perfections
Think of a vast wilderness during the final month of summer.
You should not misconstrue unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment as the transcendent perfection of generosity!
I will practice the transcendent perfection of generosity by any means until the resources and possessions enjoyed by those sentient beings in this buddhafield resemble those [of the gods].
That will bind the teeth of wild animals and poisonous snakes in a house, village, or town for as long as one desires.
“They will not construe the notion that physical forms are empty, and that emptiness is physical forms.
Consider, noble son, how the wind
of high resolve, consummated by renunciation;
And if any other should best Tiṣya, then award it to the victor.”
“Have Lumbinī bestrewn with gold and jewels; Adorn all the trees with many types of cloths and jewels. Quick, plant many flowers, like in the gardens of the gods.
“The vinaya of the hearers maintains equanimity with regard to all demons.
He is the best of gems, renowned as a jewel, who delights in the true Dharma.
rose up from his Dharma seat and remained floating up in the air.
When practicing generosity by offering clothing,
Has taught secrets as four-fold.
should honor, venerate, respect, and make offerings to this very transcendent perfection of wisdom with flowers, and so forth, up to and including ribbons and diverse musical sounds.
The lifespan of that bhagavān will be twelve intermediate eons.
Those who, enamored of another’s wife, have sexual intercourse with her;
pressed their palms together in reverence.
“Nāga kings, that is excellent! Your request is timely. I will reveal this for the benefit of sentient beings. I will explain; listen!”
Now, following that, I will explain the tantra called The Supreme Secret of the Secret Goddesses, the Vajraḍākinīs.
This mantra cures the closing of the eyes
Thus they dispatched scouts on horseback.
He uproots the strength of the demons.
he does not practice by thinking, ‘The present mind abides.’
They were all born in a miraculous manner.
You generated the power of patience,
I remember one day when I was teaching the Dharma to the householders in a square in the great city of Vaiśālī, and
Of the celibates, the heroes,
and (7) the branch of enlightenment that entails correct equanimity.
One should employ the mantra: ‘Seize Ananta, seize! Cause him to send rain!’
And who is the teacher of the extremely profound Dharma of the ultimate truth.” {v}
For them, all visible manifestations of the great elements also ceased and became imperceptible to the eye.
To be a human being is very precious.’
And why? Because it has reached its intrinsic nature.
You may wonder how dedication can make it boundless.
All of this was surrounded with seven threads made of precious materials.
it is the limited understanding that the five psycho-physical aggregates are to be purified.
Filling the streets, they leave their houses empty; Dropping all other tasks, they only stare at this perfect man.
Ānanda, supreme among the learned;
then cast [in the other directions], up to and including the intermediate directions.
They will bring radiance and light, As do the sun and the moon.
Without these conditions, the eye consciousness cannot arise.
Similarly, visual consciousness is empty of visual consciousness, and so [with the other modes of consciousness], up to and including mental consciousness, which is empty of mental consciousness.
“Where will I wind up? I must go into the wilds.”
"རིགས་ཀྱི་བུ་འདི་ལ་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་དེ་འདི་<tNoble son, bodhisattvas do so by reflecting in this way:
Also, in case of a lawsuit, one should incant the tongue of the effigy seven times and pierce it with seven thorns. That will bind the opponent’s mouth.
The Thus-Gone One answered the five companions,
Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten such qualities will have their words accepted.
kept as wards anyone whose going forth had been allowed and who had been ordained, but who could not recognize a rogue.
And the experiences of a buddha you shall attain today.
There is the meditative stability named Convergence of All Mental Afflictions in Non-affliction.
Then, fasten sticks, cords, and nooses To the necks of all the bhūtas Present throughout the lands And bring them here!
the water jar will dry up.
I am a woman and also a man,
If it were wrapped in blue, yellow, red, white, purple, crystal, reddish yellow, or pale yellow cloth and
This is the medicine that overcomes poison.
Noble son, think of the infinite circle of wind.
Mañjuśrī, that which cannot be cognized by mind, mentality, and consciousness is unproduced.
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of modesty concerning the composite,
Like a Lotus Flower,
This is the rite of the gāruḍa knowledge tantra.
“The wise ones meditate on patience But have expelled the conceptualization of beings.
“When you dream that your jewelry is carried off by water And my clothes and crown are left behind on my throne,
you will become
They have stamens of emerald, And have beautifully appeared. {252}
one should observe silence and sit absorbed in the samādhi of conquering the three worlds.
He replied, “This is owing to the stability of the expanse of reality!”
Its crowning parasol reached as high as the palaces in the paradises of the Four Mahārājas.
they run to him. When they come to Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara, they pay homage at his feet and ask,
likewise, they do not consider whether feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are imbued with happiness or suffering.
“You grant refuge to the protectorless,
‘Who then, in the world, possesses the divine eye?’
“Noble one, if someone being led to execution were to call on Avalokiteśvara,
[21] It is not criticizing others. [22] It is having no attachment to family.
Similarly, physical forms are pure, and [all other phenomena, attributes, and attainments], up to and including omniscience, are pure, owing to the purity of the transcendent perfection of tolerance.
It is so, Bhagavān. It is so, Sugata.
even further back beyond incalculable, numberless, immeasurable, inconceivable, vast, completely countless asaṃkhyeya eons ago,
Mañjuśrī asked him, “Venerable Śāradvatīputra, how, then, can you declare that the mind is liberated in relative terms?” So Śāradvatīputra asked,
“Son of a lord! I am with child!
“These supreme statements on the gateways to dharmas are taught so that bodhisattva great beings do not become dullwitted.
All of these I have ripened— These bodhisattvas are my offspring.
and turn the wheel of the sacred doctrine in the three times and in its twelve aspects.
Thus one will subsequently not commit negative actions.
They will not fall away from beholding the Buddha, as they have attained faith based on understanding.
Hundreds of thousands of trees bowed down, And all flowers blossomed at that time.
Some of the walkways are made of silver.
I should also induce all sentient beings and establish them in the thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment.
‘Offering music represents the perfection of the divine ear. Therefore,
To realize that all phenomena are unborn is to know how to practice the bodhisattva’s path.
The wind scatters particles of dust in the sky, and tosses them around. Thus, the sky appears impure, as dark as night.
with a body the color of gold; with a body adorned by a hundred thousand merits, shining with splendor, with an exceptional brilliance;
Without moving from one given buddha realm, they venerate, respect, revere, and worship bodhisattvas who are awakening to complete buddhahood in numerous buddha realms.
They share a single defining characteristic in that they are immaterial, unrevealed, unimpeded, and without defining characteristics.
similarly, when they offer donations to those who are tied to one more rebirth, those who are no longer subject to rebirth, those who are arhats, and those who are pratyekabuddhas,
When practicing generosity by offering beverages,
Who continually makes offerings of lamps That are filled with perfumed sesame oil
“Su­bhūti, do you think that the tathāgatas may emanate an animal body that takes birth among the animal realms, and
That method alone has the power to bring billions of billions of beings to complete maturity.
The Lord of Dharma, the Lord of the Entire World, The Great Lord, the Lord who is the Guide of the World
is intoxicated with lust, and terrifying.
they teach the Dharma by using a variety of teachings on accomplishment, and various teachings on causes, reasons, parables, supports, and skillful methods.
The bodhisattva Candrottara declared,
and the noble four-armed Avaloki­teśvara to the right.
They stay in places that are neither too far nor too close to where they go to receive alms;
The Bodhisattva then addressed the great assembly of gods with the following words:
After witnessing the great demonic horde advancing And the Bliss-Gone One toying auspiciously with them,
and individual enlightenment do not exist and are non-apprehensible. This being the case, how could they possibly come or go?
“What chance would I stand if at some point he became angry with me?”
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ excellent wisdom concerning the characteristics of all phenomena consist in?
“Will this prince be a universal monarch or will he instead depart from here as a renunciant?”
Likewise, they do not apprehend the designations of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness
“How is it that the universal monarch appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class comes to possess the precious steward?
“If, after the exhaustion of his karma,
Although it evinces no color, sowing a seed in the earth element
There were no Kāla mountain ranges. There were no Mucilinda or Mahāmucilinda Mountains. There were no Cakravāla or Mahācakravāla mountain ranges. There were no Sumerus, which are the kings of mountains. There were no other great mountains [217] or mountains.
They would reflect, ‘Aggregates, elements, and sense sources are easy to acquire, but it is not easy to encounter the blessed buddhas.
with but a week’s worth of hair and beard, alms bowl and water pitcher in hand. Having completed his approach to monkhood,
Śāriputra, why do you think this is?
knelt down on his right knee, and bending forward with palms joined, spoke in verse to the Thus-Gone One:
“Blessed One, I recall from other lives that seventy-two thousand buddhas have delivered this Dharma teaching here at Gayā­śīrṣa, with the exact same meaning, in the exact same way, and with the exact same words and syllables.”
The place where the all-basis is heard,
saluting the Tathāgata Śākyamuni, addressed him as follows:
Still, the full moon is different from the crescent moon.
At the very least, Su­bhūti,
In the arena filled with spectators, Devadatta first made a round clockwise,
Because it brings the maintenance of all good qualities and the attainment of the cultivation of all good qualities and nothing else.
they are patient regarding all the woes that sentient beings may cause,
The gatekeeper Ānandita cried out in distress.
A hundred thousand gods exclaimed, “Ah, Ah!”
” He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities!”
meditated on it with unadulterated meditation, promulgated it, and made it widely known to others.”
You must not speak of this supreme secret of all the thus-gone ones in front of anyone who has not entered this maṇḍala.
“Consider, noble son, how the presence of a roaming lion near a town will ensure that the crops there are not consumed by meek deer.
Until they attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed and genuinely perfect enlightenment, they will never be separated from this [Great] Vehicle.
so they also left their respective residences and went to see the blessed thus-gone Padma­netra.
Therein neither number nor calculations are apprehensible,
“A woman who is of yellow complexion
Or those who wish to cut the net of the fettering vines of disturbing emotions,
Those bodhisattva mahāsattvas desist
“Monk, who is your teacher? Why have you gone forth? Whose Dharma do you favor?”
This is my, [ordinand’s name]’s, begging bowl, fit to eat from. Please sanction this sage’s bowl as a container for alms begged.”
they thoroughly and precisely understand them with the thought, ‘I am experiencing the body’s most basic feelings.’
Yet, with this body, excellent in every way, I adapt to the ways of the worldly ones.
“Noble son, you may wonder how bodhisattvas are wide and infinite.
On reflection, the basis for these feelings is contact,
They possessed the assurance that overwhelms endless assemblies.
And having scattered those, they should have the thought,
The ladies were overcome by extreme grief, and some cried out, “My son!” Others called out “My brother!” “My husband!” “My lord!” and “My master!”
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ perfect giving of respect consist in?
When, in the thick of Yaṣṭī Forest, the Blessed
This is the Jewel of the Dharma.
The yogin accomplishes the sales And the merchants win great profit.
“Young man, the samādhi has been taught through this Dharma discourse by many buddhas,
Due to the absolute purity of what has this purity of phenomena not been actualized?
the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha named Nitya­pari­nirvṛta.
entire assembly of Śākyas were surprised and delighted, and they felt great appreciation and joy.
and rebirths in the animal realm will be cut off,
bodhisattvas are indifferent to harm and assistance.
and when they come they teach the door of Dharma called The Secrets of the Tathāgatas, and then depart.
Adorned with all perfect ornaments and wreathed with flowers and perfume,
What need is there to mention that gradually they will fully and completely awaken to unsurpassable, complete, and perfect awakening?
so on, up to and including feelings due to sensory contact that is mentally compounded.
Then the twelve hundred who had mastered themselves thought,
The bodhisattvas enquired,
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, the reality of phenomena, the abiding nature of phenomena, the maturity of all things and [other unconditioned phenomena], up to and including the finality of existence, are non-existent and non-apprehensible
The earth gave off a terrible and beautiful sound, And yet nobody could hear it.
learn it, understand it, keep it, recite it to others, promote it, proclaim it, chant it,
Whenever women become pregnant, the parasites also become pregnant.
As soon as the Bhagavān had consented,
make offerings of the desirable attributes of the five senses to the tathāgatas, great bodhisattva beings, the pratyekabuddhas, and the śrāvakas of the tathāgatas,
The same transcendent perfection of wisdom has primacy for those great bodhisattva beings who undertake perseverance.
“Nārāyaṇa, there are four ways that bodhisattvas should live.
It should similarly be applied to the transcendent perfection of generosity, and also [to the other perfections], up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Oṁ, svāhā to Pūrṇabhadra!
The sage Asita replied to King Śuddhodana,
in the same way they have practiced the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, and the transcendent perfection of wisdom, and then come here.
Yet we are unable to pass beyond this rose apple tree. What could be the reason for this?”
Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.
Does space abide anywhere inside, in the arising of the three feelings caused by the eye apprehending an object?
to give up regret;
“What is your name? What is your preceptor’s name?”
the essential nature of magical displays, and the essential nature of mirages, echoes, optical aberrations, and phantom emanations of the tathāgatas are empty of phantom emanations of the tathāgatas, and so forth.
For as many eons as sand grains in the Ganges;
“The wanderers.”
This is the meditative stability of great bodhisattva beings,
As your task will be to accompany the Tāthagata on his travels through the realm, happily ready your Dharma robes.’
Or a widow, or a female ascetic.
Su­bhūti, that which is unappraisable
Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings [who have cultivated the mind endowed with omniscience] themselves possess the excellent endowment of tolerance,
Similarly, the real nature of physical forms and the real nature of the Tathā­gata, and likewise the real nature of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness and the real nature of the Tathā­gata, are one and the same real nature. They are not two but indivisible.
Let him follow the Dharma Lord.
‘Reverend Rāhula, you should not teach the benefits and virtues of renunciation in the way that you do.
When the Jina placed his foot on the gateway’s threshold The supreme trees—the sal and the karnikara— At the summit of crags and on mountaintops,
The roots of merit from the mind being focused upon the Tathāgata will bring good results, benefits, and happiness for a long time. Knowing this, for the sake of those to be guided, the Tathāgata announces that he will pass into nirvāṇa even though he does not pass into nirvāṇa.
Be my protector, refuge, and support.
Homage to the Dharma!
nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras,
That night, just as people went to bed, the gods of the pure realms
and many hundreds of thousands of gods assembled from all the realms up to the highest heaven.
One should, while absorbed in the absorption mentioned previously,
Noble ones, the words the Tathāgata speaks in order to guide beings,
Then comes self-aware gnosis, In which all phenomena, being empty, are of one taste.
I guide them to the other shore, And therefore I am the Guide.
It is said that superior ones Are to meditate, or recite in full.
That state is called Brahmā, for if some were to achieve nirvāṇa in this very life, all would be well.
without grasping,
Likewise, observing a spiritual friend And listening to him is also excellent.
Hundreds of thousands of rishis will dwell there, who are śrāvakas and bodhisattvas.
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities possess a body that is solid like vajra.
Māra Pāpīyān then asked venerable Śāradvatīputra,
If, when you teach it, there are beings Who say the words ‘This makes me rejoice’
Similarly, as far as omniscience is concerned, and as far as the conditioned elements and the unconditioned elements are concerned, they will not construe the notions that these are non-arising, unceasing, calm, or void.”
(1) emptiness of internal phenomena,
When Mañjuśrī delivered this section of teaching on the revelation of correct knowledge, ten thousand beings within the gathering gave rise to the mind of unexcelled and perfect awakening.
His robes are the preceptor’s responsibility. His duties are akin to those in the novice ranks.”
It is thus that they perfect the transcendent perfection of perseverance.
This completes the thirteenth chapter from “The Transcendent Perfection of Wisdom in Ten Thousand Lines,” entitled “Like Space.”
Just as the great cloud rises, the Tathāgata appears
They reach as high as the realms of Brahmā And they are endowed with parasols and garlands.
If those beings who engage in the conduct of anger pay homage to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara, they will become free from anger.
The self-arisen Master of the World Tolerated us, awaiting the right time.
Many hundreds of thousands of nāga kings had also gathered there in that retinue.
of the power of life, consummated in the means of unification;
Discerning the dharmas through proper mental placement, the awareness of emptiness by nature and emptiness of essence is non-attachment.
‘You have passed through the dreadful jungle
“Venerable Lord, when bodhisattvas train accordingly, is it then the case that they do not train in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, and
The Blessed One, the Buddha, was residing in the Deer Park at Ṛṣivadana by Vārāṇasī.
I entered homelessness in the presence of the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Śālendrarāja
the fifth door was made of iron,
You should always wear red clothes, A red mala, Vermillion powder,
This wheel is hard to comprehend because it is not an object of conceptual investigation.
Whoever relies on me and generates the roots of virtue will be recognized by the future thus-gone ones, the worthy ones, the completely perfect buddhas, who will think, ‘Those beings are the old friends of the thus-gone ones.
Similarly, he comprehends the defining characteristics of the transcendent perfection of generosity. He comprehends the defining characteristics of the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, and the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Just like this single army,
In the same vein, do they engage with [all attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience?”
Then he gathered eighty quintillion bodhisattvas
as many eons ago as there are grains of sand in the Ganges River, at that time
And indifference to whether there is gain or no gain: That is the supreme Dharma that the Jina teaches. {85}
Teaching this way is exceedingly profound.
Similarly, great bodhisattva beings who turn away from the notions of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are reckoned to be irreversible.
They excel in all esoteric sciences, And in the many different crafts,
“With the space in the middle being the ninth. In the center of the ninth,
It is analogous to this: Say that a person wanders, passing through a great forest,
When he goes into the states of the asuras, he remains free of pride, conceit, and arrogance.
If they engage with the notion that physical forms cease, or that these are unceasing,
As prescribed, one should draw an eight-petal lotus with sandalwood paste and place on its petals
“A­martyā, reveal your buddha realm.”
Similarly, why is the acceptance of great bodhisattva beings taught,
Venerable Lord! Are non-existent eyes unattached to non-existent eyes,
“Śāriputra, the tathāgatas’ teaching that contains an inner meaning is difficult to understand.
Devas, nāgas, asuras, and guhyakas Will wish to always look upon them
“In the past, when I sought this supreme samādhi of peace With a mind that was indefatigable,
Likewise I was not separated from the four immeasurable aspirations, the four formless absorptions, all the meditative stabilities of the bodhisattvas, all the gateways of mnemonic incantation, the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four assurances, the four unhindered discernments, great loving kindness, great compassion, and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
Similarly, they reveal to sentient beings the sacred doctrine that the fruit of entering the stream, the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth, the fruit of no longer being subject to rebirth, arhatship, individual enlightenment, and omniscience all neither arise nor cease, and that they are neither defiled nor purified.
"“Blessed One, a bodhisattva may correctly understand this Dharma discourse regarding how all phenomena have such characteristics, and how they are inherently and entirely beyond suffering; upon hearing it, he or she may then believe and be convinced of it. That he or she nevertheless does not pass beyond suffering in the interval period<tei:note xml:id=""UT22084-056-002-369""/> is indeed marvelous, Blessed One."
The light shining from each of the mansions extended for 84,000 leagues.
They remember a thousand lives, a hundred thousand lives, and so on, up to many quintillions of previous lives.
always worshipped by gandharvas, and
Will have delight in their minds And all their illnesses will cease. {253}
“Master, do not leave for other parts. Remain for a while, at your leisure, in the home of your relatives.”
(1) contemplation of a bloated corpse,
“It is true that bodhisattvas Demonstrate their occupation with consorts.
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Will before long become a lord of humans.
A path that the lords Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni, and Kāśyapa also traversed, Since in your footsteps stainless and perfect lotuses spring forth, breaking out of the earth,
With her left foot on one’s shoulder, And the right foot at the base of one’s left thigh,
“If the Buddha’s body could be measured And found to be of a certain size,
maintaining the five acquisitive psycho-physical aggregates which are dreamlike, and maintaining the five acquisitive psycho-physical aggregates which are like a phantom, and so on
“When I attain awakening And shower down the teaching that leads to immortality,
“Ānanda, in the past, countless, vast, immeasurable, inconceivable, innumerable countless eons ago, at that time and in those days,
Please grant me this favor, my lord;
The mind of the Supreme Being remains unattached.
“Noble one, the samādhi that the bodhisattva mahāsattva Gadgadasvara remains in so as to benefit in that way countless beings is this samādhi called manifestation of all forms.”
They do not attach importance to tolerance.
they grew hoarse saying, “Ah! We have seen the wheel of the sacred doctrine turned for the second time in Jambu­dvīpa!”
Its duration is never certain—certain only is its end in death.
“Mañjuśrī, since the Blessed, Thus-gone Śākyamuni and all those in his retinue would like to see you,
do not teach an ultimate reality endowed with activity, production, and destruction!
They turn them away from the second meditative concentration and establish them in the third meditative concentration.
Having abandoned that, they will achieve the power of absorption in consummate perfection, without defining characteristics,
being insatiable in teaching the Dharma,
‘Alas, my refuse rags have been torn!
by which the Bhagavān, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha has a beautiful uṣṇīṣa, stainless eyes, a beautiful ūrṇā hair between the eyebrows that is as white and beautiful as the moon or a conch, the beautiful rows of teeth in his mouth that are even and perfectly aligned, the Sugata’s lips that are as red as the bimbā fruit, and the Sugata’s beautiful eyes?
they do not investigate [those other notions], including the notions that these are void or not void.
And since the world desires success and distrusts failure, several brahmins pressed their daughters on him in marriage.
Never looking for shortcomings and mistakes in others, he has been striving to make everyone get along.
Su­bhūti, it is because physical forms do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not abide anywhere.
Venerable Śāradvatīputra then said to youthful Mañjuśrī,
liberate all beings who are sinking in the oceanic swamp of cyclic existence.
Thereupon, a certain goddess who lived in that house,
Once there, the great sage Asita told the young priest,
Or is it Vaiśravaṇa,
Moreover, he completely healed the diseases of the entire Sahā world.
On the contrary,
and in all those times he taught this Dharma teaching.
and I am physician to the Blessed Buddha and his community of disciples
went to him, and said,
Became a supreme dharmabhāṇaka, A celibate who was the heart son of the Sugata.” {12}
having trained accordingly with respect to the three times,
Billions of gods, Along with myriad apsarases,
m is the non-cultivation of sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena.
Compassionate one, there is no one like you in this world. Tell us, for what reason did you smile? {83}
No-one should crave or hate them.
Monk, as all phenomena are luminous by nature, there is no delusion.
“Therefore be harmonious with one another; Act with a loving and benevolent mind.
“They should not dwell on the notion that ‘I am a pratyekabuddha.’
There are no changes and no conceptual notions regarding any mind.
and who has hundreds of thousands of samādhis as numerous as atoms.
transcend the level of the śrāvakas and also the level of the pratyekabuddhas.
With this attitude of faith, he thought,
“Noble son, you may wonder how bodhisattvas make the web of the roots of affliction rot.
Yogīs take the posture of a sporting lion;
Through the punishment of the noose incantation, They will perpetually wander in saṃsāra.
As they wish to the hear the sacred Dharma, I request, O Guide, that you teach them.
Who comes, ultimately comes not.
“Father, Mother, please listen.
will have no attachment to Dharma robes, and will have no attachment to their alms bowls.
Just as a threshold beam planted in the ground Is unmoved by winds from the four directions, So are the people of the saṅgha of noble ones, Who have insight into the highest path of the noble ones.
‘Evil One, give these heavenly maidens to the good man Vimalakīrti,
Venerable Lord! The transcendent perfection of wisdom is the mother of the bodhisattvas because it generates all the attributes of the buddhas.
We rejoice in what you have attained, As does the world and its devas.
are not apparitions, are not by-products of apparitions, are not subject to harm,
In the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena is not discerned.
Bhagavān, all phenomena are to be understood in this particular way: they are devoid of concepts, they are empty, devoid of superimposition; they are the final reality and suchness.
You will develop the ten strengths, And you will reach the supreme, highest enlightenment.
If you know that he is a worthy recipient Teach him even if he has not requested it. {46}
“Noble one, we do! We rejoice in this good you have done for others, for this is the job of those who go forth.”
“Divine being, moreover, when bodhisattvas, being physically at peace, understand that discipline is at peace;
the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
for it prevents one from transgressing the rules.
this is correctly and definitively cognized when great bodhisattva beings practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
preoccupations, or excessive attachment may arise towards the body will be confronted and will not remain.
Thereupon the Bhagavān gave prophecies of the highest, complete enlightenment to all the Bhagavān’s śrāvakas, both those in training and those who had passed beyond training.
They replied, “Who would take us there?” “We will take you.”
vomiting and diarrhea, hiccoughs, coughs, asthma, carbuncles,
At that moment even the light of the sun and moon and the splendor of the gods, such as Śakra, Brahmā, and the world protectors, was eclipsed.
Similarly, they should don the armor of the ten powers of the tathāgatas,
May it be the seed of my omniscience And inexhaustible enlightenment.
That is the nature of phenomena: It is ungraspable like space. {40}
Nakṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña, a woman who, in the final five hundred years, hears and practices this chapter, ‘The Past of Bhaiṣajyarāja,’
in the same vein, the cultivation of the transcendent perfection of wisdom is the non-cultivation of [the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path.
Then there will form an unbreakable bond of friendship, Which not even ten million māras will be able to break. {2}
They had become aware of their own error and departed from that assembly, the Bhagavān giving his permission to do so by remaining silent.
“Reverend Śāriputra, why do you shake these flowers?”
and from the sky a breeze would come that removed all the withering flowers.
We will perfect all its incomparable qualities.
“Bhagavān, I also shall recite the words of a dhāraṇī-mantra in order to compassionately benefit, bring happiness to, guard, protect, and conceal this kind of dharmabhāṇaka:
“Son,” the king answered, “your grandfather was called Siṃhahanu.
Verses like this emerge from The sounds of the women’s instruments.
they think, having investigated those phenomena, that they understand what cessation is.
In that way they will smell the scents of the bodies of beings up to the summit of existence.
So they have strayed from the Dharma-Vinaya of the Thus-Gone One.’
He will become a jina in a completely pure realm.
it is needless to mention that they are always in equipoise.
were to hear the name of the bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara
It applies to the defining characteristics of conditioned phenomena [such as these], and similarly extends as far as the defining characteristics of unconditioned phenomena.
Noble son, placing Māra Pāpīyān in confinement is not becoming for a bodhisattva.
“Blessed One, what is the name of this Dharma teaching? How should we remember it?”
to that extent there is attachment.
Joined with the syllable ī, And adorned with the two skies.
immediately answering questions correctly and properly;
and is not purified.
and attended by undesired consequences. In the long run it will prevent you from practicing your religion.
Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with these ten qualities live as mendicants.
They retain what they have heard for the sake of giving happiness to suffering sentient beings.
And beings never tire of gazing upon them.
“Ānanda, consider whether that person,
Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the awakening of the blessed buddhas is distinguished by a realization of the sameness of all phenomena.
Śāriputra, what was the reason for that?
“Sentient beings equal in number to the particles of dirt on the earth
—not with the hope for anything they desire, nor with the hope for any enjoyment,
Upon this request, the Buddha gave his approval to the young Licchavi Ratnākara. “Good, good, young man!
Many resolute bodhisattvas appear Who honor the relics of the jinas. {43}
Therefore, great bodhisattva beings, who have accepted that phenomena are non-arising, are revealed to be irreversible.
“What is the memory of previous rebirths? It is the knowledge of previous lifetimes.
I came about by the force of your merit.
Why is that? Because they think as follows:
The Dharma is not an object.
it is because those who did not commit this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom to writing; who did not have it committed to writing; who neither retained, held, nor mastered it; and who neither read it aloud nor recited it, and who did not confer its transmission and were not attentive to it in the correct manner, have not applied themselves earnestly, as instructed, in this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom.
His heart was beating fast.
It is the same as space; There is no difference between them. {2}
Venerable Lord, if the notion of physical forms as having aspirations or lacking aspirations is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of physical forms as such become a bodhisattva?
‘Your mind is at peace and perfectly stilled,
Similarly, they do not become fixated on the absorption in the sense field of infinite space, or
I have no use for an unabashed ordinary person; If someone has the qualities described here, seek her out for me!
“ ‘There is no endlessness, nor an end, nor a mode in between. There is no existence nor nonexistence, nor a partial mode.
Blessed One, how do bodhisattvas quickly and fully awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood?”
Māra, upset, angry, and furious, shouted harsh words:
‘You are my mother, my father’s wife. You are also my niece,
Venerable Lord! This transcendent perfection of wisdom is endowed with great enlightened attributes in order that infinite enlightened attributes might be possessed.
why would you give Śārikā to him in marriage?”
They are excellent ox-drawn carts made of jewels, With railings and strings of little bells
None of you must turn your eyes toward Siṃhala Island.’
“Mañjuśrī, just as the bite was not truly real, the neutralization of the poison was also not truly real.”
“From this the Great Wrathful One Blue in color, blazes forth.
‘Since I have found relief myself, now is the time to bring relief to others!’
She prostrates at his feet, saying joyfully, “Great Guide, please enjoy this!”
Investigating peace is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“If he was first to all of my tasks, no matter how small, why did I insult him?
They are teaching billions of beings And through knowledge are established in the highest enlightenment. {41}
If one were to ask why, it is because physical forms cannot be appropriated,
The body does not take on a moribund quality, nor do its limbs shrink.
“In that same way they do not perceive enlightenment as other than sensation,
showered down from innumerable clouds.
Delightful music, United with song. {56}
with his arms drawn in and his legs extended, dignified by his ceremonial robe, Dharma robes, and begging bowl.
They said to him, “Retired devotee, you have no obvious source of income,
The Bodhisattva then exclaimed: “Health is just like a play in a dream!
One does not see with the physical eye, one sees with the eye of wisdom.
the absolute truth, and freedom from a foundation.
and without strain.
They do not doubt the Buddha’s Dharma. That is the patience that is ‘concordant.’ {7}
“Evil one, today you will flee, Like a jackal at the sound of a lion’s roar.
skylights, and latticed windows. It was adorned with balustrades,
“They cannot be shaken by any opponent,
“Consider, noble son, the way that not even a tiny drop of water will stick to a lotus flower.
are bhikṣus,
how has this differentiation come about with regard to the cycle of existence with its five realms of living beings, namely, the denizens of the hells, the animal domain, the world of anguished spirits, the world of the gods, and the world of humankind?
He who seeks to associate with the Dharma is not interested in the Dharma but is interested in association.
Never in my life have I seen anyone carry himself like this renunciant.
The bodily products of a female musk shrew Are to be infused into the perfected mercury.
“Why should the mahoragas laud it? Because it destroys saṃsāra.
Bhagavat, as the great Avīci hell is without respite,
What will be their signs and what will be their forms?
They will not fall away from unabated confidence, as they seek to understand everything with regard to the roots of virtue.
And these who are eminent bodhisattvas, They must maintain this great secret of mine. {140}
It is in that way that the Lord of the World Has practiced for millions of eons. {11}
Great Guide, after a long time your appearance Is known in the worlds in the ten directions.
Venerable Lord! How do great bodhisattva beings, after abiding in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, acquire the transcendent perfection of perseverance?
Beyond that pore, there is a pore named Vajramukha. Within it live many hundreds of thousands of kiṃnaras
No one since him has been able to string the bow, let alone draw it.”
Mañjuśrī Kumārabhuta told the bodhisattva great beings.
This is Avīci, the Great Hell of Unrelenting Torment!”
“Bhikṣus, the tathāgata stayed alone in the temple in that way for eighty-four thousand eons.
During the third month of spring,
they comprise (1) the meditative absorption of the sense field of infinite space, (2) the meditative absorption of the sense field of infinite consciousness, (3) the meditative absorption of the sense field of nothing-at-all, and (4) the meditative absorption of neither perception nor non-perception.
Conclusion of the thirteenth chapter, “The Teaching of the Samādhi.”
“O divine princes! Not a single syllable has been uttered or disclosed for you to hear.
Seeing the fault in waiting, Saṅgharakṣita ate and then took a seat off to one side.
If you ask what these three are, they comprise false views about perishable composites, hesitation, and a sense of moral and ascetic supremacy.
Know that the ḍākinīs are the channels.
They will utter praises of liberation But will have no interest in liberation. {23}
When the Bhagavān teaches the Dharma,
He cries out, ‘I have done you no wrong!’
“When that night was over, on the second morning, he went back into the capital city of Ratnāvatī.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designation of the eyes as permanent or impermanent constitutes a bodhisattva?”
there is no self, and so on;
Will never be without that restraint, And in that way they will train in correct certainty. {10}
While they are walking, they contemplate with sadness the sufferings of saṃsāra:
who upholds this Dharma teaching, worships it, writes it down, commissions it to be written,
The gods in the form realm also came, Those who always experience the peace of concentration.
No matter how diligent the hearers and solitary buddhas, who rely on reference points, are, the poisonous faults of reference points have been formed,
Yet when the tree is large,
“Maitreya, there are two reasons that beginner bodhisattvas hurt themselves
Bodhisattvas who have developed one-pointed minds dwell on their slopes.
and the complexion of others had changed.
(16) all the activities of their bodies are preceded by pristine cognition and followed by pristine cognition;
Were we to transgress the queen of incantations, The sūtra Destroyer of the Great Trichiliocosm, Uttered by the victorious ones, Things would not go according to our wishes.”
Do not turn back! Rest in this great region!
He recites a few verses or poetic sayings, and recounts stories or arguments to each person.
It involves illness
I have accumulated the bad karma that will cause me to be reborn in a great hell.
That man is astonished; He thinks of his previous poverty, His inferior aspiration, and his father’s qualities:
Speak too the praises of the Dharma and the Saṅgha, and speak them perfectly.
When that buddha realm was shown to them, 84,000 beings here in this buddha realm, who had not previously aroused the mind of awakening, now gave rise to the mind set upon unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.
Venerable Lord, if the notion of the sensory element of the eyes as imbued with happiness is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of the sensory element of the eyes as imbued with suffering become a bodhisattva?
deeply distressed by her desire, she became ill.
“They are yogins who always have few activities. They have shunned the many faults of busy gatherings.
Well, the phrase dependent arising means that something arises because something else already exists; something is born because something else was already born.
The Bodhisattva, who saw them coming from a distance,
And yet they should have conviction that all merit has a connection with all sentient beings.
and if, on the other hand,
They never make criticisms of the wise, And thus their conduct is completely pure. {4}
In this regard, ‘broad heels’ means that the bases of his two heels are broad, unlike those of other human beings.
This is because of selflessness, because of the absence of defining characteristics, and because of the absence of any knower.
One should heat up a dog’s tooth above a smoky fire, add to it milk and clarified butter, and rub it on. Hair will grow even where it doesn’t normally grow.
The Blessed One replied, “It is the prayers he made.
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, physical forms are pure, and, similarly, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are pure, owing to the purity of desire, hatred, and delusion.
We clearly see all the activities of beings as they are.
Some of the girls partially covered their faces.
“Even if those who were as wise as you Were to fill all the ten directions,
and they should be attentive to non-conditioning and non-cessation,
Their bodies will be covered with blisters, rashes, sores, abscesses, and itching spots.
whatever Dharma teachings the Tathāgata has taught, all are the truth that is spoken by the Tathāgata.
Or the yellow one, or the red one.
For Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa himself Dwells here—the great bliss.’
The redness in the cardinal directions is the great affection.
Monks, while the Thus-Gone One was being praised by the gods after he had reached perfect and complete awakening,
when they teach the sacred doctrine to sentient beings in order that they might abandon their view of the ten powers of the tathāgatas;
“Even those of your sons who are wise,
And the crown prince Mañjuśrī, surrounded and followed by these bodhisattvas, disciples, Śakras, Brahmās, Lokapālas, gods, and goddesses, entered the great city of Vaiśālī.
They will no longer continue to be in saṃsāra.
Then he decreed, “In the light of this,
the asura rulers Bali and Rāhu, each with his retinue;
Quick, stand up and enjoy the prime of youth!
Without perfecting the transcendent perfection of wisdom, they will not attain emancipation in omniscience.
The Blessed Awakened One is free of poisons. Poison is eradicated by the majesty of the Awakened One!
The precious minister of a king who has been properly consecrated by sprinkling his head appears just as before.
It is like how the orb of the moon travels at a distance of forty-two thousand yojanas above earth, and yet its reflection nonetheless appears in small vessels filled with water. It is not that the moon moves from its position and enters the small vessels filled with water.
Bhagavat, where can the six-syllable mahāvidyā be obtained?
“Monks, the ripened fruits of wholly negative actions are wholly negative,
The best of beings throughout the ten directions extended their arms
if the follower of this other order becomes upset, disturbed, or angry,
The gods replied,
They cannot cultivate [the attainments], up to and including omniscience.”
It was a yojana wide and a yojana high.
This completes the second instruction on the practice of “The Great Vidyā, Queen of the Yoginīs.”
Monks, at that time all sorts of negative, inauspicious opinions started to circulate among the people of Magadha.
“Bhadrapāla,” the Blessed One continued, “the puppet is animated by action,
Like the moon you are replete with the best of all qualities!”
and also the genuinely perfect buddhas are all non-conceptual.
‘It is as you have said, great king.
If, failing to be patient and accepting, I should instead become aggressive toward anyone,
“For that reason, Su­bhūti, you should know that all things are undifferentiated, without defining characteristics, and they neither arise nor cease.
Filled with curiosity,
They who do not wish for the pleasures of a king Will know this kind of restraint of the body. {6}
Middling dullness is when one engages in negative acts but with rapid subsequent remorse.
[8] they attain illumination regarding all engagement with the composite;
and having entered therein, they neither associate anything with nor disassociate anything from physical forms.
And teaching that follows practicing the teaching: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {102}
“Why is it fame for those who wish for renown? Because it brings the attainment of vast qualities.
verbally practice the four modes of excellent conduct, and
If you ask how they correctly perceive physical forms,
“Divine being, moreover, when bodhisattvas observe the body and apply mindfulness, they know that the body of the past was unborn.
which means that without any doubt this bhikṣu was irreversibly progressing to the highest, complete buddhahood.
Lesser desire is when one adheres to desire, yet one is satisfied merely by contact through smelling, rubbing, or other bodily contact, or merely by talking, or seeing.
in order to eliminate the karma of their negative deeds, to liberate them from the lower realms, to place them in the higher realms,
The Blessed One replied,
this doctrine is profound, hard to discern, and hard to realize; it cannot be scrutinized
(42) Their gait is that of a lion. (43) Their gait is that of a mighty elephant. (44) Their gait is that of a swan.
Glowing red in color
Similarly, motion, non-motion, resting, and arising are non-apprehensible, owing to their utter purity.
One should recite the mantra 100,000 times for each syllable.
Knowing that I am their protector, I teach them of the distress that is in there.
At this time, these beings will be joyful and delighted by the sound (of those words) that bring the Buddha to mind. Then they will die and be reborn in a buddhafield, unsullied and pure, in which a buddha bhagavān dwells, lives, and resides, and where he teaches the Dharma.
In that realm there was a bodhisattva great being known as Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkam­bhin,
Seven dust particles on a hare is one dust particle on a sheep.
“Son of noble family, for the benefit of beginner bodhisattvas, the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha is born and appears in the places where such bodhisattvas dwell.
The postulant then turns to the monk who will inform the saṅgha of his desire to go forth.
You must not kill living beings, Not speak what is not true,
who told me my condition is hard to cure.
It renders them devoid of grey hair and destroys conceptuality.
They will never develop thoughts of degenerate morality, thoughts of indolence, thoughts of distraction, and thoughts of stupidity.
They will not be protected by dhyāna or by solitude, Nor by generosity or offering to buddhas.”
“Mañjuśrī, that is the bodhisattva mahāsattvas’ field of activity.
You perceive sense fields when there are no sense fields!
They have not attained the non-differentiation of perception which works toward the maturity of the bodhisattvas.
It is a wheel that genuinely subsumes the realm of phenomena. This wheel is immeasurable because it transcends all limits.
Kauśika, they are incapable of dedicating the nature of physical forms, and
His Dharma will remain for twenty intermediate eons,
“O gods! The mind of the tathāgatas who genuinely consider this objective is one that is inclined toward carefree inaction, and not toward the teaching of the sacred doctrine.
As soon as they die, they will all fall into the great Hell of Ultimate Torment.
It is the seat of learning, because it makes practice of the essence.
They do not apprehend the emptiness of all things as the emptiness of all things.
As I stood there, bent over with my left leg stretched out and my right hand reaching down in order to pick up the rag,
The supreme airborne palaces of the Brahmās Have become endowed with extreme brilliance.
“That the mind-consciousness does not perceive is signlessness.
“The Tathāgata was the principal human, A hero for the three worlds, the sole friend of beings
in that respect, there is no duality.
This is the rite of enthrallment.
“A domain essentially without undertaking, yet where all the roots of virtue are undertaken without interruption, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
Similarly, when sitting down at the seat of awakening, a bodhisattva lion conquers the hordes of demons through their own diligence, strength, and power.
"ཤཱ་རིའི་བུ་ལུས་འདི་ནི་གནོད་པ་མང་བའོ། <tŚāriputra, this body is very harmful and troublesome.
Flowers fell, and the sound of hundreds of musical instruments was heard.
Dākṣāyaṇī (Daughter of Dakṣa)
This shows that the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha possesses determination and good qualities that are inconceivable, and that he brings all sentient beings to complete maturation.”
The beings in those great hells are my task.
he or she will keep supplying perfect provisions for as long as the party is on the road, and so all will be happy and free from weariness while journeying across the wilderness.
This is the practice of the tantra of the desire family.
She is white like the rays of the autumn moon, anointed with cream of white sandalwood, and beautifully adorned with flowers.
“Even if it is explained for ten million eons That they are unproduced and unceasing,
their development and liberation of living beings,
He did not lower his banner.
He replied, “This is owing to the reality divulged as such in all languages!
My good man, what do you need?
Their karma will come; they will be under the power of their karma. Their tongues will become vast, and a hundred thousand plows will plow them.
Blazing lightning bolts sprang forth from their eyes.
Su­bhūti, it is because the expanse of reality, owing to its utter purity, has not been, is not and will not be apprehended by anyone.
“The same refrain should also be extensively applied to the sensory elements, exactly as has been indicated here in the context of the psycho-physical aggregates.
Venerable Lord! Since the Tathā­gata has said that all things are unknowable and invisible,
“Son, do you think I don’t know where you want to go? I cannot open the door for you.”
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that one is liberated by perceiving the six transcendent perfections, and in the same vein, [all the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighty minor marks, as entities and non-entities?”
“Precisely, Nārāyaṇa.
Since they illumine all dense forests everywhere with an inconceivable web of light, they beautify infinite realms.
Similarly, they know the modalities of the sensory elements, and yet
the emptiness of non-apprehension, the emptiness of non-entities, the emptiness of essential nature, and the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities;
“It will be far more difficult For someone to uphold this sūtra, To have faith in and aspiration for it, And teach it again and again.
where the movements of sentient beings unfold.
When I was practicing under hardships, they helped me.
They teach the Dharma for the attainment of the result of a worthy one, yet they observe neither worthy ones nor any result of a worthy one.
This tīrthika [tīrthika’s name] wishes to renounce this identity and go forth.
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ fearless aspiration consist in?
“(7) And one should refrain from deprecating the law of cause and effect.
“In what way, you may wonder, do bodhisattvas bring down a continuous and delightful flower rain of the true and indisputable Dharma from wish-fulfilling trees upon the circles of disciples?
They crush pride as they think, ‘With my head shaved and holding a begging bowl in my hand, I move from town to town, begging for a poor man’s things.’
when they had rested told them that this was a miraculous city,
it does not apprehend virtuous actions and non-virtuous actions, or even determinate and indeterminate [actions].
“You are absorbed in sameness,
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities have knowledge of themselves.
There his crossed legs will cover the entire celestial world and he will shine hundreds of thousands of light rays throughout the entire buddha realm.
And immediately receive the prophecy, ‘You will become buddhas in this world.’
Yellow Acala by Calumny Vajrī;
The music of human and divine instruments sounded,
that they do not cognize present phenomena as present phenomena;
engagement with the absence of self that pertains to all phenomena,
Through that previous root of merit he eventually pleased twenty thousand million tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas who were all named Meghasvararāja,
“Śrāvakas who have freed themselves From the three realms understand in this way:
To exert oneself in tranquility;
All the beings in this great trichiliocosm who had taken birth in the lower realms were instantly freed.
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, any notion of physical forms, and similarly, any notion of feelings,
Are the applications of mindfulness also free from contaminants and not included within the three world systems, owing to the emptiness of inherent existence,
“And yet I am myself still uncertain, Supreme human, of your point.
You know no agitation and are beyond deceit and deception.
I was approached
and if they perfect the transcendent perfection of generosity exclusively by way of signlessness,
“In the sky there are many quintillions Of devas, nāgas, and yakṣas.
Is innate non-dual awareness.
Venerable Lord, the depletion or replenishment of the world of sentient beings would not be discernible.
He who does not know Acala Will have a fruitless life.
“Always in possession of the awakened mind, And endowed with all commitments and vows, Engage in all of the acts of bathing.
and he was breathing only with the greatest difficulty.
The nature of the sensory element of the eyes is emptiness. Emptiness is the sensory element of the eyes.
Should meditate on this samādhi, And then they will know the Buddha’s body. {1}
They turn away from awakening, and strive on the hearers’ path.
Do they have no disrespect for their mothers? Do they have no disrespect for their fathers?
“In your previous existences you had the thought, ‘Once I myself have crossed, I will ferry others across!’
wanders through a succession of villages, towns, market towns, districts, countries, and capitals,
The entire assembly was amazed and marveled at the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha.
the inconceivably numerous mantra words concerning the kleśas,
“This was the wisdom empowerment.”
Bhagavān, yes, it is.
With such mistaken preconceptions, past sages practiced austerities.
living in liberation without impediment.
Mañjuśrī, these four grounds for the mind to stand upon are known by the Tathāgata to be non-arisen and unceasing.
or collecting wood for use in fire pūjas.
Good sir, the thrones are too big and too high, and I cannot sit upon them.
“When one is powerful, rich, and handsome, one is like a lord; People like to meet such a being, and one pleases their senses.
“Mañjuśrī, the Thus-Gone One has trained many hearers, and so their minds are liberated from defilement with no further appropriation.”
Many hundreds of thousands of female gandharvas had also gathered there.
his Dharma will remain for a long time.
Thereupon the Bhagavān spoke these verses:
It is the seat of liberative art, because it develops living beings.
Similarly, owing to the utter purity of all things, they do not apprehend the applications of mindfulness, and they do not apprehend [the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path.
“ ‘Reverend Maudgalyāyana, the Dharma is without a living being, because it is free of the dust of living beings.
they should reflect, in the same vein as before, [‘Alas! When I have attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, in this buddhafield I will practice the six transcendent perfections until] all sentient beings in this buddhafield possess all the roots of virtuous action and honor the lord buddhas with the roots of their virtuous actions,’ and so on, in the same vein as before, down to ‘they will also approach omniscience.’
When he attains enlightenment, living beings free of hypocrisy and deceit will be born in his buddhafield.
With these ten branches, I too pledge to train in, practice, and act upon the precepts of those noble arhats.”
This is called “divine ambrosia.”
the features of a woman’s physical form
Liberation is neither internal nor external, nor can it be apprehended apart from them.
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, there are individual followers of the vehicle of the bodhisattvas who have heard this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom among the god realms of Tuṣita, [and so forth],
two beautiful and captivating lotus flowers made of uragasāra sandalwood sprang up on either side of him
Then the Bhagavān, teaching this in greater detail, recited these verses:
similarly, that the designations of the ears, the nose, the tongue, the body, and the mental faculty as permanent or impermanent does not constitute a bodhisattva?
Finally the nāga kings Varuṇa, Manasvin, Sāgara, Anavapta, Nanda, and Upananda spoke:
Noble ones, I still have an entire lifespan of twice times a hundred thousand quintillion eons.
nor does it exist apart from consciousness.
Monks, this is how you should train.”
“There is no birth and there is no death For beings, humans, the descendants of Manu.
“It is I, your mother, O son, Who for ten months Carried you in my womb like a diamond. It is I who now cry out in despair.”
for primordial wisdom, he is discernment. For the entire Buddhadharma, he is the abode;
Thus, the kingdom will be delivered.
“Noble sons, there is a liberation of bodhisattvas called destructible and indestructible.
Through gaining familiarity with the fifth.
Blessed One, thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha, please use your miraculous powers to show a mental sign by which the two holy beings will come to this Sahā world,
He had been reborn in the Brahma realm, and now manifested among them in the form of a young brahmin.
and they fall into the hands of evil associates.
“Mañjuśrī, in whose hands will a sūtra such as this end up?”
in the same vein, the non-arising, non-affliction, and non-purification of [all other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path, are without foundation.
Similarly, how could future and present time be apprehended?
This is the transcendent perfection of wisdom, which does not objectify anything.”
Monks, in this way the Bodhisattva made up his mind regarding Rudraka, the son of Rāma, and his followers. He left them, saying, “This is enough; I am leaving.”
And give food and drink to boys and girls.
Illuminating many tens of millions of locales.
“From within that assembly Bodhisattva Ratnapāṇi arose from his seat,
Controlled and conditioned by its actions, its consciousness is reborn in a body in a putrid, foul-smelling water conduit.
Perhaps, king of gods, you are wondering or experiencing some doubt about whether or not, at that former time, the King Ratnacchattra was not some other than the actual Tathāgata Ratnārcis.
Then Arjuna asked,
That sentient beings acquire understanding and insight has nothing to do with causes and conditions.
We will bind The sun, the moon, the winds, And all the stars!
“Exactly, Ānanda. It is just as you have said.
the samādhi named The King of Arrays,
I am the guardian of the Dharma;
Although this body is also influenced by one’s state of life and is given up according to one’s state of life, one does not think about this,
So now, Virtuous One, shine the beautiful light of knowledge On those who are caught in delusion and doubt.
He was beautiful with his splendor and majesty, And through his love for beings he had come to town. {82}
“One after the other one should visualize Four syllables—yaṁ raṁ vaṁ laṁ
dismember, flog, and tear apart everything,
adopt the noble eightfold path.
This completes the Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra, “The Questions of the Nāga King Sāgara.”
“Therefore, son of noble family, a bodhisattva who wishes to manifest inexhaustible merit should endeavor in these sorts of accumulations of generosity.”
venerable Nanda,
Ah! This sacred doctrine which the Elder [Su­bhūti] has explained, described, and taught through the power of the tathāgatas, through the blessing of the tathāgatas, through the potent force of the tathāgatas, has indeed been eloquently explained.
How should we properly understand the irreversible great bodhisattva beings?”
One should cook clarified butter of a cow with peacock’s bile and the juice of false daisy,
Will quickly go to the Abhirati buddha realm, Attain patience, and become kings of the Dharma. {1}
Their conduct is in line with what they teach.
but the nature of consciousness is itself voidness.
Thus he, the Benefactor, attained spiritual heat and the most auspicious awakening.
The many hundreds of vultures are burned,
and conformed with the teachings of all buddhas.
“Caṇḍa means that he is exceedingly fierce, Known as Mahāroṣaṇa (Great Angry One).
Conclusion of the twenty-ninth chapter, “Ten Benefits.”
With palms pressed together, he informs the saṅgha with these words:
All the results mentioned previously will come to the person who recites this mantra.
“The seat of the Śākyas is wealthy, prosperous, agreeable, and pleasant.
nothing that arises or ceases, and nothing that is afflicted or purified.
Homage to Tathāgata Nārāyaṇa­vrata­sannāha­sumeru­śrī.
Blessed One, since no phenomenon can be blessed, their very essence is blessed.
Even the far-reaching rays of the sun and moon do not penetrate this place.
Indeed, it is wonderful how all the lord buddhas, who understand the equality of all things, manifest all sorts of buddhafields in order to develop living beings!
“Noble son, the so-called relative, therefore, refers to names, designations, and conventions.
and creating food that had a hundred flavors.
“Young man, in that way bodhisattva mahāsattvas should constantly seek for kalyāṇamitras as if their head or clothing were on fire,
Terribly sad in body and mind, the sage shed tears and sighed deeply.
Knowing this being was certain to become one of the fortunate, the venerable Śāriputra
As soon as the bodhisattva mahāsattva Sarva­sattva­priya­darśana was born,
The names of their worlds were the same, And they all appeared in a time of degeneration. {14}
They hold up sickles, brandish discuses, roll their eyes,
“Recruiting all the gods,
cultivates the five powers,
They do not apprehend the emptiness of emptiness as the emptiness of emptiness.
When they had arrived, they bowed their head to the Bhagavān’s feet,
Which brings an end to old age, death, anguish, and pain For the benefit of the world.
This will cure all indigestion.
They [will pass genuinely] beyond the danger of gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, kumbhāṇḍas, and rākṣasas.
I am known as a king of Dharma.
Gradually the light streamed forth and brightened the entire palace.
Young man, that is the restraint of speech.
Whoever hopes to exhaust the sufferings of birth, old age, sickness, and death, And be free from the shackles of cyclic existence, And enjoy purity equal to limitless space,
When they practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom accordingly, they do not consider whether or not they engage in union with the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
When the Bhagavān was young he had had sixteen sons of his own, and they immediately knew that he had attained buddhahood.
Sprinkling the Bodhisattva with māndārava flowers, she circumambulated him three times.
Divine son, similarly, the hearers’ meditation on the truths is observed for just a short period of time.
five hundred disciples,
engage wrongfully in acts of desire, knowingly speak falsehoods,
“Mañjuśrī, how, then, is a monk who is not excessively proud?”
Oṁ, Mocanī, release! O Mokṣaṇī, set free! O Jīvaṃvaradā, svāhā!
There at present resides the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Padma­netra.
“Excellent, Candrabhūti!”
upon the Bhagavān they tossed and scattered flowers from their baskets the size of Sumeru.
Because of this, women are completely ablaze with afflictions,
“Yes, Venerable Lord, it is so! Venerable Su­gata, it is so!
“They will make unsurpassable offerings To Buddha Maitreya.
The five monks— Kauṇḍinya and the rest— Along with sixty million gods Purified their eye of Dharma.
You will be liberated from the noose of saṃsāra.
“Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who train in the expanse of reality have trained in all phenomena.
No-notion is non-division.
And also because of the light that shines from the tuft of hair on his forehead,
Whatever buddha realm they are born into, they will be born miraculously in front of the Tathāgata from within a lotus made of the seven precious materials.”
They should praise the actualization of individual enlightenment.
“Under that king there were many other bhikṣus Who desired gain and who entered homes.
If, Su­bhūti, you appreciate that the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas lack the wonderful and marvelous attributes of great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
will be guarded, protected, looked after, and brought peace and well-being by them!
Nor does the space element think, ‘I create hollow spaces inside the body.’
They will know if the woman is going to be free of suffering And will give birth to a meritorious boy.
He does not emulate unconditioned phenomena.
“They will be given protection by the kings And those princes who listen to the Dharma.
They should not even dwell on the notion ‘[In this, my buddhafield], may the term “transcendent perfection of generosity” exist and similarly may the terms [indicative of the other transcendent perfections], starting from the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom, exclusively exist.’
Honor them without being disheartened, In order to attain the highest enlightenment. {38}
What could be the cause, what could be the reason for this?”
May they especially protect you With health and well-being!
(19) There is the meditative stability named Seal of Retention. (20) There is the meditative stability named Unimpaired.
the Blessed Buddha asked the monks,
disappears in the atmosphere itself,
When all sounds and words are abandonedThere will be meditation without pride. {11}
These are called the four correct exertions.
had attained retention; remained in great eloquence;
At that point some of the other boys, who were carrying their seats, made a commotion.
Could it become controlled by afflictions, or cleansed?” Stainless Light replied, “Bhagavān, no, it could not.” The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, what do you think?
The completion of the thousandfold universe can be compared to the perfections of the solitary buddhas.
Kāśyapa, the blind man represents the beings who dwell in the saṃsāra of the five kinds of existences.
Some wore fine, transparent clothes that revealed their hips and their girdles.
so it is that they correctly perceive the cessation of formative predispositions.
By that truth and those true words, may the person person named such-and-such be guarded, protected, embraced, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon.
A fire is born in dependence on conditions. It is born, fulfills its purpose, and quickly ceases. “In this way some scholars investigate: ‘Where does this come from and where does it proceed?’
displaying the form of Śakra to sentient beings who are to be trained by the form of Śakra;
I shall not hide, shall not conceal, and shall not fail to acknowledge them.
This is the reality of all things.
rub it into a wound caused by a venomous spider, a monkey, or skin eruptions.
Similarly, feelings, too, are not one thing, perceptions are not one thing, formative predispositions are not one thing, consciousness is not one thing, and non-arising another, [distinct from these].
They will not lose their recollection of the Buddha, And it will not be stolen away by the experience of suffering. {21}
non-mental-placement.
Unequaled, impossible to describe, And they brought many millions of beings to buddha wisdom. {48}
Having abandoned their training in loving kindness, great compassion, and the perfection of wisdom, as well as their training in skillful means and the trainings taught in other sūtras,
Similarly, Senior Pūrṇa, the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, and the transcendent perfection of wisdom are also neither fettered nor liberated.
“Lord, when I heard these words of the Licchavi Vimalakīrti, I wondered what I should say
who do not read it aloud or recite it, confer its transmission or be attentive to it in the correct manner;
As the new monk’s preceptor was a hermit living in the forest, the monk took the nāga disguised as a brahmin to see him and said,
served him the food with divine perfect flavors, and
Give us that which you have described— Those three delightful carts!
Just as one is, so are all;
How are they “developed”?
Venerable Lord! When great bodhisattva beings practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
and they intend to induce others also to degenerate from the pathways to the higher realms and to liberation [from cyclic existence].
“Bhagavān, do not be concerned.
Having immersed it in sesame oil he set it alight.
I do not hold that the unsurpassed, genuinely perfect buddhas are found in non-arising,
When a bodhisattva comprehends that the nature of all beings is the complete transcendence of suffering, such a bodhisattva will have departed by means of the perfection of insight.
At that time I made the following aspiration: ‘When I become perfectly enlightened, I will seek the Dharma.’
However, if the nāgas do not send rain, leprosy will break out.
Then the nāga king Śatamukha comes from his residence and burns the grass, the bushes, the herbs, and the forests.
pure meditative absorption is the saṃbhogakāya
“You develop kindness, you increase joy, You teach wisdom, you eliminate ignorance,
“Those who have these major marks of a superior man, which the tathāgatas possess,
Oṁ, O thousand-armed one called Grey Monkey, please release such-and-such from bondage! Svāhā!
“This samādhi is not difficult to attain For those who are not agitated, who have a well-tamed mind, Who remain within the conduct of mendicants and bodhisattvas, And who are predisposed toward generosity and are without miserliness. {20}
When all the devas, nāgas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, and humans had gathered together,
I applied myself, Ānanda, with burning diligence and quickly realized supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
It is the profound meaning of dependent origination In connection with the secret initiation.
Thinking about it again and again, one falls into depression.
scattered with various flowers; it resounded with the sound of divine music,
He offered clothes to those who needed clothing,
and can proceed with a compassionate outlook.
And thus their minds neither dwell on virtue nor on sin.
as well as misery, lamentations,
“Bhaiṣajyarāja, in that way, while bodhisattva mahāsattvas do not hear, do not possess, do not comprehend, do not practice, and do not contemplate this Dharma teaching, those bodhisattva mahāsattvas are far from the highest, complete enlightenment.
what did he do that it should lead him to be reborn among the denizens of Avīci?”
When they repeat it, bhagavats and buddhas to the number of sand grains in ninety-nine Ganges Rivers gather around them,
the stride that leaves an impression of a thousand-spoked wheel on the ground,
Likewise there are one billion Mount Merus, the kings of mountains.
“They who possess this supreme samādhi, Whatever subtle Dharma teachings they hear They attain perfect mastery of them all, And gain their power and detailed reasoning. {108}
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess ten such qualities rest in equanimity.
At that time, noble disciples experience only feelings of pain
Her mind, let alone her body, desires no one other than the universal monarch.
He dispatches some messengers after him, Saying, ‘Bring me this poor man!’
The hair of their heads is not dishevelled.
Similarly they establish them in [all the causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including omniscience.
generosity is an obscuration,
which praises Sukhāvatī’s inconceivable qualities.’“What do you think about this, Śāriputra, why is this Dharma discourse called ‘Complete Embrace by All Buddhas’?
The learned sage held the child and gazed upon him, deep in thought.
Have no regrets!” When this Dharma teaching was taught, this world wobbled and rocked.
this is the time to stay within royal circles,
Through patience you are forbearing, self-controlled, and at ease.
and are always attentive to it in the correct manner—those individuals who follow the vehicle of the bodhisattvas will exclusively pass away among humankind and be reborn among humankind.
“Su­bhūti, the emptiness of internal phenomena is neither fettered nor liberated.
“Therefore, Samantabhadra, one should stand up for bhikṣus who hold this Dharma teaching, even when they are far away.
Should we go after the prince? Will we be able to make him return?”
and then said, “Sir, game does not eat other game.
“Some said, ‘She is very loving toward me.’
Monks, as the Bodhisattva was walking toward the Bodhi tree,
One who does not abide in mind, mentality, and consciousness does not form mental constructs or concepts.
I shall indeed abstain from killing living creatures, and
they went to see him and asked,
“He may manifest to living beings the ways of the sick and the unhappy, yet he has entirely conquered and transcended the fear of death.
He outshines Śakra and Brahmā.
he gave medicine to the sick,
In the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, the emptiness of essential nature is not discerned.
He then came into the presence of the compassionate Jina Accompanied by eighty quintillion others. {30}
“Whoever casts off all conceptual identification Brings to an end the identification of existence.
The nāgas, yakṣas, garuḍas, gandharvas,
They learn the teachings of the vinaya for the sake of beings.
Is thus resolved.
“Thus the understanding of fools Is a conceptualization of empty phenomena.
I salute you, guide for the exhausted world.
Through this merit, may I also swiftly Turn the wheel of Dharma, most sublime!
The bhagavān tathāgata Śākyamuni then asked the fourfold assembly,
In this way the Bodhisattva spent six years, during which time his body became increasingly feeble, weak, and emaciated.
handsome,
“It is made of bones, teeth, and hair, and is covered by a hairy skin;
Then, while heating up the effigy over the embers of cutch tree wood at the three junctions of the day,
It has no coming. It has no going. No one makes it arise. It is not stopped by anybody.
“They who know that phenomena are always empty Are heroes who give away their sons, daughters, and slaves.
he placed in their center a lion throne of divine materials that surpassed the work of devas and humans.
when a person standing on the bank of a lotus pond sees some lotuses submerged in the water, some lotuses at water level, and some lotuses above the water,
That which is without a state of being self and a state of being other does not burn.
Oṁ, Yellow Acala, hūṁ, phaṭ!
The instructor then says: “This is the procedure.” At which point the lay devotee says: “It is excellent.”
without joy,
to the one who has perfect liberation;
Attaining great compassion and
Monks, such were the miraculous marvels that occurred while the Bodhisattva remained in his mother’s womb.
“Bhikṣus, the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Mahābhijñā­jñānābhi­bhū then gave to the sixteen mendicants the prophecy of their complete enlightenment.
for they enable one to relinquish all nonvirtuous qualities and to perfect all virtuous qualities.
The buddhas replied, “In the past, for hundreds of lives this Buddha strove diligently toward awakening and did better than many hundreds of thousands of bodhisattvas.
“Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara then left the island of Siṃhala
What is non-duality?
“ ‘ “The ācārya should not give it to those who are inappropriate.
To this Vimalatejā answered,
Prostrations to the tathāgata, Buddha Kanakamuni;
There are others who long for wisdom, self-control, and tranquility without having a teacher.
Those attributes [of the lower fruits] are indeed subsumed within it!’
Due to Mañjuśrī’s power, Māra Pāpīyān replied,
For so long he has regarded sentient beings, with his unhindered vision, as his mothers, fathers, and children. Looking at beggars as if they were his only children, he has been filled with love and compassion and has never disappointed them.
some words could be heard in my realm. From all my palaces with their windows and archways, from our jewel trees, and from all our delightful and enjoyable places, the following words rang out:
who are continuously playing music.
A woman from the priestly, warrior, or merchant caste,
“Recall the power of your vast store of merit And the illuminating knowledge of your boundless intelligence,
“They are the masters, the leaders of merchant caravans, Who are dedicated to protecting beings from misfortune.
“Act like that, and all will be accomplished; Karmic torment will come to an end.
It is impossible that they should be reborn among frontier tribesmen who do not engage in virtuous acts, or among barbarous human beings, or
My aim is fulfilled and goodness accomplished.
And conduct that is without arrogance,
or the features of a donkey’s physical form
(3) the power of recollection,
just as the element of space cannot be perceived.
Su­bhūti, it is because ordinary people lack the noble eightfold path,
Su­bhūti, in the same manner, great bodhisattva beings establish sentient beings, many hundreds of billion trillions in number, on the path of the ten virtuous actions,
They descended and settled on the ground, Where they saw the Bodhisattva, the Son of the Śākyas, As he sat cross-legged at the trunk of the rose apple tree, practicing concentration, Shining and brilliant like the glow of gold from the Jāmbū River.
The Blessed One replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of all things!”
It is being wise concerning the skandhas. It is being wise concerning the dhātus.
seven great abysses, seven hundred abysses,
He continued: “My lord, the light of the sun causes trees and walls to cast shadows;
Bodhisattvas know the absorptions of the hearers, they know the absorptions of the solitary buddhas, they know the absorptions of the bodhisattvas, and they know all absorptions of the thus-gone ones.
Listening to them as they teach the Dharma? Please therefore reveal this supreme Dharma to the world.
might allow me to live in robes provided by a preceptor for four months.’“
Similarly, they have a view concerning sights,
“Son of noble family, at that time, at that point, the world of Sukhāvatī in the west was that world called Boundless Accumulation of Precious Qualities and Full Display of Happiness.”
Divine being, frightened by the levels of the hearers and solitary buddhas, beginner bodhisattvas turn back from stinginess, flawed discipline, hostility, laziness, distraction, and misguided intelligence.
along with the sounds of the vīṇā, ektara, balari, mahāti, and the sughoṣak. The two boys exclaimed,
Their minds always remain like a mountain. These are distinctive qualities of the third patience. {21}
Su­bhūti, it is because the natural expression of their future limits, though without entity, is still omniscience [and the rest].
“Moreover: He who is proud and ignorant does not have much acumen;
“Then, noble ones, in the middle of the sky King Śubhavyūha
Then he asked, “Venerable Lord! What is the refined eye of clairvoyance, possessed by great bodhisattva beings?”
In the same way, Śāriputra, those among monks and nuns, and male and female lay devotees, who do not correctly know the shortcomings of the sense pleasures are tormented by lust.
and liberates them from great suffering.
“Once he is seated upon the Bodhimaṇḍa, All his conceptions are eliminated.
5) correct livelihood, (6) correct effort, (7) correct recollection, and (8) correct meditative stability.
“This thought is a great thought; It is the unsurpassable thought of the Dharma.
the pains of anger, the pains of dullness, the pains of any affliction,
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of meditation on the path. What are the four kinds of meditation on the path?
For many thousand quintillions Of eons, my eyes were gouged out.
The numerous yakṣas devour Those that are placed here and there.
“We are amazed to have seen such a sign As this, which is marvelous and immeasurable.
the meditative stability free from ideation and merely endowed with scrutiny,
The quantity of merit that a bodhisattva who arouses the mind of awakening for the first time comes to possess is far greater still, immeasurably greater.
These people who do not follow the training, Why will they have shaved their heads? {16}
They teach them the Dharma in accordance with their inclinations.
and valuable than the single drop.
the sensory element of odors,
They defeat the māras And are greatly famed buddhas. {72}
and should offer divine food made of white flour.
“In the past when we have gone out on rounds, many hundreds of thousands of creatures would follow after us.
an unsurpassed charioteer who trained beings,
The bodhisattvas who possess this sūtra
This tree had supported the mothers of previous victorious ones,
Next the god Dharmacārin said,
‘Father, grant me leave. I wish to go forth in the well-proclaimed Dharma and Vinaya.’ “
May we get along and not disagree.
and, in the same vein, just as the light of the gods of the Trayas­triṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇa­rata, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin realms
This concludes “Samantabhadra’s Encouragement,” the twenty-sixth chapter of the Dharma teaching of “The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.”
Monks, this is how a benighted man acts who turns his back on such a fine and well-proclaimed Dharma and Vinaya
Śārisuta, I have truly taught to you This very meaning that I see.
who cried out from being cut, sliced, crushed, and hacked to pieces.
Some had ugly eyes, rolling and blazing.
Koṣṭhila, who had taken the name Dīrghanakha when he became a wanderer, went to see the Blessed One.
extending from those of the Catur­mahā­rāja­kāyika realm as far as the Bṛhat­phala realm,
“Master, where do you live?”
They will not develop a covetous or greedy attitude toward others’ valuables.
who has a form like a mountain of gold;
She adheres to what is true, controlled in body and mind.
So it is, Su­bhūti, that great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom will perfect the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline that is without defining characteristics,
the gods will flourish and the demigods will be on the wane.
or it is crystal, or is crystal-colored, or is like crystal, or shines with crystal light;
Similarly, they are fixated on the sensory elements.
Son of noble family, some may be able to apprehend the expanse of the whole of the infinite, limitless space in the ten directions, but
then prostrated at the feet of the Bhagavān and supplicated him with these words:
The supreme king became afraid and asked, “Why does the priest weep?
“Bhaiṣajyarāja, if a bodhisattva is frightened of this Dharma teaching, is afraid and terrified of it,
If he should ask, ‘Is the afterlife like that or not like that?’
The tathāgatas who are present in other world realms will see them and bless them.
“They who, desiring liberation, possess this stainless samādhi Do not quarrel or cause conflict when they speak.
The three buddha bodies and the five gnoses
But those who seek liberation
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who possess such attributes, indications, and signs
They made the pledge and set out on their journey. Going Forth.
You may hold a spear in each of your hands And use them all, yet that will bring you nothing.
that being will look at the three worlds
“Auntie! I must train in the great precepts prescribed by the Buddha.
“Ānanda, when some beings hear sūtras like this one, they become joyful, elated, and full of faith. Those beings obtain something wonderful.
Thus, they reside at trees that are agreeable to the body and delightful to the mind.
The bodhisattva Padmaśrīgarbha declared to the Blessed One,
It will form a boundary.
what is present is very little, like that of volition.
A pregnant woman will also give birth easily
Those who have engaged in and accrued deeds that obscure wisdom
“If you ask how they correctly perceive formative predispositions,
Nakṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña, that bodhisattva mahāsattva, having attained receptivity to the birthlessness of phenomena,
“What is being wise concerning the skandhas, wise concerning the dhātus, and wise concerning the āyatanas?
in the same way above,
He had no harmful wishes, never did any damage,
In order to listen to the elucidation from the great being. {66}
Dear boy! Kolita! Come home. There is pleasure to be had while living here, too.
Free from attachment and anger, he lives from alms.”
Future thus-gone ones, who have not yet arrived, will also attain complete awakening and go entirely beyond suffering through this very training.
and please keep the bodhisattva great beings in your protection.
[5] they have no hypocrisy or boasting; [6] they do not praise themselves; [7] they do not criticize others;
‘Son, do you wish to go forth?’“
“O King, the boy’s eyes lingered upon the daughter of Daṇḍapāṇi Śākya, the Śākya girl named Gopā, and there was a brief conversation between them.”
This is an offering to all the buddhas, An inconceivable offering of the Dharma. {142}
“Son of noble family, is there a system according to which relying on the true meaning is to rely on all phenomena?”
Those who have incorrect conduct should not dwell among those who receive offerings.
Similarly, there are great bodhisattva beings who perceive all within range of the clairvoyance of the gods from the Trayas­triṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇa­rata, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin realms as far as the Akaniṣṭha realm.
Similarly, the world with its god realms will rejoice in them.
‘In accordance with the aspirations expressed and taught by the thus-gone ones, through this generosity of relinquishing my male and female slaves, staff, and workers may I cause all beings to perfect their freedom, independence, and self-arisen wisdom!’
for that is a brahmin’s duty.”
I have attained the qualities of a monk, which is my second crossing.
“Consider, noble son, how the shining sun clearly reveals both the equal and the unequal to the people of Jambu­dvīpa.
Will overcome and defeat Tens of millions of māras. {14}
There is only unhappiness and suffering there.
It was also named The Very Extensive Sūtra, And he taught it to billions of beings. {60}
Blow the great conch of the Dharma!
Conclusion of the twentieth chapter, “Indra­ketu­dhvaja­rāja.”
The properties of virtue and non-virtue should be viewed in a similar way.
They will speak no ill of other individuals of the Bodhisattva­yāna. They will not malign them and will not criticize them.
I rejoice in all meritorious acts.
Venerable Lord! The non-arising of what is without foundation?
“Noble son, there are beings who must be trained by means of taking rebirth.
means,
the way they are, their characteristics and their nature just as those dharmas are, the way those dharmas are,
whenever they do not engage with the notions that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness arise or that they are non-arising.
The same refrain should be extensively applied here, as before
The fine city of Kapilavastu trembled in six ways.
Noble son, there is no one to be seen within the realms of sentient beings who can break the command of a bodhisattva, except when that would serve as a skillful means.
Likewise, you turned the wheel of the sacred doctrine that is equal to the unequaled.
“On a piece of birch bark or rind, Draw a wheel With twenty-one sections.
“What is preserving the teaching? It is the determined seeking of the Dharma and practicing the Dharma in accord with the Dharma.
But they will be uncontrolled, untrained, And disrespectful to each other. {19}
a hundred thousand eons. I have experienced all these unbearable, horrible, painful sensations.
And bees also seek out flowers because of suffering from hunger and thirst.
It arises from the afflictions that result from unreal mental constructions, and hence ultimately nothing is perceived which can be said to be sick.
not perceiving touchable things, the body-consciousness has no ground to stand upon.
Similarly, the non-arising, non-affliction, and non-purification of the sensory element of the eyes are without foundation
I know the nature of the mind, So that henceforth wisdom will arise. {19}
“No, my lord, it is still the middle of the night.”
heart, spleen, lungs, liver, stomach,
If you ask why, it is because they attain the unsurpassed state.
with seething throngs of thousands of merchants,
At the time of the bodhisattvas’ complete buddhahood,
“ ‘The mind has no object’ Is also itself a concept.
and who was to take his last body, died and passed from the lofty heights of a god and entered Śārikā’s womb.
Ānanda, it is because the genuinely perfect buddhas of the past indeed attained omniscience having trained in this transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Similarly, you should not misconstrue it as feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, or consciousness!
The strength of ten bodhisattvas who have been definitively emerged for one hundred million eons is the same as the strength of one bodhisattva who has been definitively emerged for one billion eons.
owing to the emptiness of all things,
“Ordinary sentient beings, however, became very disheartened, so he then showed a great display, created on the level of relative truth, in order to bring all sentient beings to complete maturity.
What deva’s son has been born today? Through whose power has there appeared Today this kind of unprecedented event?
powders,
‘Ultimate truth is like this.’ Divine son, the Thus-gone, worthy, perfect Buddha also says that ultimately all phenomena
But you are neither proud nor overwhelmed.”
that the ripened fruit of his action has led the Blessed One to declare him as the greatest and most powerful miracle worker?”
In the middle of great battles They remain impartial to both sides;
“Because of those roots of merit, They all saw ten thousand million buddhas
who desires the abundant resources of gods and humans should behave in conformity with the path of ten virtuous actions;
“Having heard such Dharma as this, The wise ones will at that time protect it well.
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ aspiration free of weariness consist in?
Mindfulness of the body is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
To those who have taken refuge in and revere Nārāyaṇa, Śakra, a cakravartin, the sun, the moon, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Virūḍhaka, Virupākṣa, or Vaiśravaṇa, or who have taken refuge in various objects such as devas, mountains, trees, fountains, ponds, and pools, he will show himself accordingly.
Likewise five thousand maidens carrying fans made of peacock feathers walked ahead.
This is the tantra on essence-extraction.
Then he decreed, “That being the case, monks should not allow persons under fifteen years old to go forth.
sunrise, an eighth of the sun’s passage,
They who are thus trained in the restraint of the body Have become liberated from all misfortune. {26}
“There are hundreds of diseases, and being struck by sickness Brings torment to beings, like deer tormented by forest fire.
What are those ten? They are the excellent power of not being subjugated, the excellent power of invincibility, the excellent power of merit, the excellent power of insight, the excellent power of their retinue, the excellent power of miracles, the excellent power of mastery, the excellent power of retention, the excellent power of unshakable blessings, and the excellent power of an unbreakable command.
Reciting this king of the heart mantras of the four sisters 400,000 times,
“Since this girl has eyes like a śārī, this girl should be given the name Śārikā.”
let alone after the Tathāgata has passed into nirvāṇa.
gave the prophecy of the highest, complete enlightenment to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Śrīgarbha
The afflicted mind in its pure state is the wisdom of equality
the one who has obtained ultimate tranquility, the one who has obtained perfect discipline and tranquility,
tended to them as one does an irrigation channel, and emerged without indecision.
And where it was cut open, inside the body Were symbols, such as śrīvatsas and wheels. {i}
Nor does the season think, ‘I transform the seed.’
“Similarly, divine princes, individual enlightenment and unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, too, are like a dream, like a magical display.”
“They have profound realization, continuous endless realization, A vast realization, a realization that is incalculably beneficial.
the phenomenon that arises is also dependent origination, and so are the conditions due to which it arises.
The newly ordained monk responds: “I will delight in living so.”
Moreover, noble children, when sentient beings within such a world of rampant afflictions
who practice [the causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas
“For example, Su­bhūti, space is neither virtuous nor non-virtuous, and it is neither determinate nor indeterminate.
Similarly, how should they train in the first meditative concentration? How should they train in the second meditative concentration? How should they train in the third meditative concentration, and how should they train in the fourth meditative concentration?
Their sustenance will be provided.
If you seek the Dharma that he discovered, You should come in a hurry To listen to the Dharma.
they do not apprehend and do not consider [any attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience.
were to encourage all the sentient beings of Jambu­dvīpa, as many as they are, to acquire unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, and
“ ‘I questioned whatever bhikṣus Had understood this samādhi.
I have explained
If, upon hearing this eloquent utterance, They do not quickly exclaim it, They will be incinerated, Like butter and white mustard seeds poured into a fire.
Just as, when setting off to battle, a rider contacts no one else in the army, but grabs his saddle and
After undertaking and maintaining this training, they examine the conduct of all sentient beings.
and if all the men, women, boys, and girls who live in the four continents were to become scribes, and if they were to write on the limitless, endless extent of Mount Sumeru as birch bark, I would be able to count every single letter, but, noble son, I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
It occurs to pacify all the misfortunes, troubles, and afflictions of the gods of the Thirty-Three.
and the elder Śāradvatīputra and Māra Pāpīyān both resumed their usual form.
the whole assembly, including the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya, the monks, the bodhisattvas, and the ranks of the gods, such as Śakra, were overjoyed and full of praise for what the Blessed One had taught.
“What is finding no joy in the three realms? It is seeing the realms for what they truly are.
In the world of Brahmā, in the world of gods,
Attain great equanimity, the fearlessnesses, And the state of great compassion. {62}
Similarly, they do not engage with the notion that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are a self, or the notion that these are not a self.
desire to abide firmly in meditative concentration, gain wisdom, be famous, or learn crafts;
Sons and daughters will encircle them.
Are you not in segregation? Are you not fallen?
Because of those transgressions, they are very frightened and terrified. They disclose the transgressions, give them up, and reject them.
Teach the Dharma in the ten directions!
establishing the path of the pure states of Brahmā by cultivating the four immeasurables;
At that time, Tathāgata Amitābha, who knew the present and the future,
He attained knowledge, clairvoyance, and discerning wisdom. He turned his back on worldly gain,
Yet the names are false and hollow, and that which is false and hollow has no ultimate reality.
I myself am old and infirm, and thus I grieve for myself.
Within the city of Vaiśālī, the brahmins, householders, and even the Licchavi chieftain Candracchattra, having noticed this fragrance,
he stood up from his seat, pulled his shawl from one shoulder, bowed to Upatiṣya with his palms pressed together,
Warm pus and blood Will flow from his mouth.
Venerable Lord, if this world system of the great trichiliocosm were completely filled with tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas, like a grove of reeds, a grove of bamboo, a grove of sugar cane, a paddy field, or a grove of wild licorice;
and beautiful to behold,
“In what way, you may wonder, are bodhisattvas vessels of powerful medicinal plants?
Moreover, Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
adorned with strings of little bells,
“Noble ones, King Śubhavyūha had two sons. One was named Vimalagarbha and one was named Vimalanetra.
and being physically, verbally, and mentally at peace, understand that awakening is at peace;
Those who listen to the Dharma
After dousing a new pot repeatedly with the sap of giant milkweed,
He established the thousand sons of the king in irreversible progress toward the highest enlightenment.
Having been attentive to it in the correct manner, they will consequently behold the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas who reside in all the innumerable world systems of the ten directions.
Monk, as all phenomena are devoid of afflicted concepts, they are unfettered.
Today you will conquer Māra’s army and attain your desired state.
Such diligence is said to be unshared by any hearer, solitary buddha, or non-Buddhist.
From the right side, Puṅyālaṃkāra said:
reject it, thinking, ‘Whence comes this teaching never before heard?’
Ajita, not to mention someone who in my presence hears and rejoices in this Dharma teaching.
Trillions of divine and human musical instruments played sweet sounds without even being touched or played.
Their face will not be crooked, thin, or long, And they will never have a flat nose.
“Whoever has no thought or concept has found the true way; Whoever has found the true way has no ignorance.
Your Highness, that man is overcome by old age;
Having become fixated, they will [at the time of their rebirth] generate physical forms,
They will not acquire degenerate morality.
such as: ‘All phenomena are peace from the beginning, all phenomena are by nature the transcendence of suffering.’
and then while in the air, the lower half of their bodies emitted streams of water, and the upper half of their bodies blazed with fire,
Monks, for a long time—many uncountable eons—
He then rose from his seat,
the marrow dripped out, he felt no regret in his mind.
that the ripened fruit of that action has led him to be born into a rich household with ample wealth and possessions,
Then the gods said to the Blessed One
knowledge, apprehension, understanding, and realization arose.
—all the gods in the heaven of the Thirty-Three are roused, scared, alarmed, and very distressed.
In reciting and saying prayers,
(26) The Blessed One is endowed with the divine voice of Brahmā.
“Those who hear that praise Become guides of the worlds.
Then one should visualize the disciple as a universal emperor,
There he saw that his preceptor had been reborn among the gods in the realm of the Four Great Kings and,
Blessed One, please explain this absorption that encapsulates all merit so that bodhisattvas can indeed attain the absorption that encapsulates all merit.”
“Noble son, because they possess ten qualities bodhisattvas are like a lion.
Monks, through considering and ruminating over these factors that had never before been heard, there dawned in the Bodhisattva wisdom,
Su­bhūti, you should know that these great bodhisattva beings will not turn back from unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
and the same goes for [the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path.
the one who shows the path,
As a comparison, I can count each drop in the vast extent of the ocean, but,
They will not become killers of living creatures, and so on.
Facing the Bhagavān, gazing solely upon the Bhagavān, he said to the Bhagavān,
Thereafter they all praised the Thus-Gone One with these fitting verses
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of poverty concerning purification. Those are the four.
for it enables one to accomplish absorption.
Abandons the cycle of rebirth And ends suffering once and for all!”
Blessed One, I will protect them and make them highly venerable in every kingdom.
“Nārāyaṇa, set aside the quantity of merit made by Great Brahmā, lord of the great billionfold universe, in engendering love.
At that time they rose from their seats and stood with palms together in homage.
“Reverends, eat of the food of the Tathāgata! It is ambrosia perfumed by the great compassion. But do not fix your minds in narrow-minded attitudes,
I am one who has compassion for the poor and the wretched. I am one who shows them the path to enlightenment.
They never have an aspiration For the wisdom of the śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha. {29}
I reached it and on reaching it, I saw aging and death,
They will not construe the notion that physical forms are signless, and that signlessness is physical forms.
yielding, wielding a hook,
“When faced by the light from the body of the Blissful One,
they taught the Dharma that has the four truths of the āryas and dependent origination,
It is the knowledge that analyzes and realizes the nature of all phenomena.
May the wise always long for liberation And venerate the supreme person, the Buddha!
Vinayavastu.
Puruṣa­kārā­śrayā (She Who Relies on Virile Action)
other sentient beings will no longer behold that thus-gone one.
Reaching ultimate acceptance, you learnt that all objects and phenomena Are without essence, fictitious, and impure.
The strength of ten white-lotus elephants is the same as the strength of one red-lotus elephant.
Maitreya, this wheel of Dharma has the nature of the essence of all phenomena. It is a wheel with the power to teach.
The one who was previously known as Varapuṣpasa Became the Lord of humans Padmottara. {69}
the arhat’s love that has eliminated its enemy;
Thus a birth takes place.
“Bhadrapāla, ask, then, whatever you wish,
being content with little desire in order to uphold the Dharma;
“Divine being, the blessed buddhas do not teach the Dharma for the sake of attainment and realization.”
In the center, place and affix A hūṃ and the name of the target. “The remaining twelve are placed on the spokes.
“Blessed One, of these three accumulations—the accumulation of generosity, the accumulation of discipline, and the accumulation of learning—which is superior, which is foremost?”
in doing so I have become capable of actualizing the noble wisdom vision that is much supreme to the highest human teaching.”
because it is a non-entity, this supreme Great Vehicle does overpower and attain emancipation from the world with its gods, humans, and antigods.
he taught the
All were mendicants from places named Kapilavastu. {13}
To illustrate that, consider how the wind element absorbs a flower’s scent and carries it along;
but I would be unable to propagate it.
“If they know of the incorrect view of beings They say, ‘This is not the path to deathlessness!’
Su­bhūti, it is because the first level has not been, is not, and will not be apprehended by anyone,
“Without being displaced from his seat, His body was unharmed.
not moving means being without any abode.
“Just as the previous ones attained sublime awakening on the lion throne, You have followed in their footsteps; you awakened and became the same as them.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena as a self or not a self constitute a bodhisattva?”
so the radiance of all the gods, originating through the ripening of their past actions, neither shone, nor gleamed, nor sparkled alongside the natural effulgence of the Tathā­gata’s body.
The goddess crowned with Amitābha And arisen from the gnosis of the syllable hrīṁ.
Upatiṣya began to attend the master and Kolita went off in search of medicine.
they do not consider anything at all that should be acquired or stolen.
They will not mention or disclose that such [forms] are the creations of demonic forces.
“ ‘ “Draw Amitābha in the center of the maṇḍala.
“Monks, within this teaching that I had not heard previously, I have practiced the path that leads to the cessation of suffering. This I did by focusing intently on the path that leads to the cessation of suffering. In this way my wisdom, vision, understanding, intellect, intelligence, knowledge, and insight became manifest.
They establish some in the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth, and they establish some in the fruit of no longer being subject to rebirth, some in arhatship, and some in individual enlightenment.
“The non-attachment to the world of those of the inferior vehicle Gives as much light as fireflies in the night.
In your buddha realm there will not be the word desire,
“Mañjuśrī, let the bodhisattvas be seated on these thrones, having transformed their bodies to a suitable size!”
“They are joyfully teaching the Dharma And are inspiring many bodhisattvas.
‘Noble son, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara is coming from the realm of Sukhāvatī.
He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of flowing water!”
I shall bring to fruition those acts that have not borne fruit, and in facing those acts that have borne fruit, purify them.’
This, Maitreya, is how the bodhisattva mahāsattvas have excellent application.
Here we have arrived at this most excellent mountain To worship the one who is equal to space.
Bhaiṣajyarāja, many bodhisattvas, both householders and renunciants, even though they have practiced bodhisattva conduct, have never encountered listening to, writing, or making offerings to this kind of Dharma teaching.
which you think are delightful, desirable, pleasing, beautiful, charming, and pleasant,
May their minds be full of mutual affection, And may they enjoy themselves together, like gods in pleasure groves.
for our brethren would denounce us if it were said,
those who are indolent,
With the wind of compassion, they are truly exalted.
great spiritual heroes who were universally acclaimed. They were dedicated through the penetrating activity of their great superknowledges
As he arrived in the Blessed One’s presence,
Su­bhūti, when certain great bodhisattva beings, lacking the transcendent perfection of wisdom, over eons equal in number to the sands of the River Ganges, offer their worldly gifts and their gifts of the sacred doctrine,
The upper chain ignites and is made to flow downward,
Some transformed into garuḍas and pounced at snakes.
At that time, there shall only be bodhisattvas Numbering tens of millions.
In that way, all other yogas are like husks,
Take no delight in avarice, And always have correct conduct. {101}
Prostrations to the bodhisattvas, mahāsattvas, illuminators;
These gifts, however, will for long provide meaning, benefit, and happiness.’
‘By observing ethics, a vow, asceticism, or celibacy,
he set in place, consecrated, and protected his buddha realm.
when they saw the might of the power of his miracles, the might of the power of his commitment, the might of the power of his eloquence, and the great might of the power of his wisdom,
Similarly, it should be applied to the emptiness of internal phenomena and to the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities.
He then very respectfully seated him on a cushion. Once he saw that the sage was sitting comfortably, he respectfully addressed him,
As they unite with reality, nothing will impede their mind.
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is immeasurable.
Consider, Nārāyaṇa, how a highly precious gem such as beryl might be placed in any type of vessel without losing its nature as a precious gem.
“If he does not show himself to them directly, the beginner bodhisattvas who pray to him and who have erred in their ways should rise during the watch of dawn, stand facing the eastern direction,
For them bodhisattvas will demonstrate going to the seat of awakening.
“In the southeast corner, one should draw A white knife, marked with a wheel.
‘In accordance with the aspirations taught by the buddhas, through this offering of lamps may I cause the divine eye of all beings to be purified!’
he went toward Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara, accompanied by his queens, his retinue, and many asuras such as Kubja and Vāmanaka with their retinues. Bali bowed down at his feet and said these words:
Similarly, have the applications of mindfulness, and [the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path, not been taught?
“For example, Su­bhūti, just as space does not disrupt space,
Come back!” Grabbing him with both hands, she dragged him home.
Bhagavat, to what dharma do the terms ‘non-arising’ and ‘non-cessation’ refer?”
His merit will indeed be immeasurable, And he shall obtain awakening, in accordance with his wish.
Śāradvatī­putra, the mind neither has desire, nor is it without desire.
“ ‘Father, just like a fig-tree flower is only seen A few times in many millions of eons,
When will it be digested?
He will have a pure body, and pure food, adornments, bedding, cushions, and utensils.
“It will not occur to these foolish beings, such thieves of the Dharma, to think, ‘This being is inconceivable and we cannot judge him.’
That which is the same as nirvāṇa neither roams within saṃsāra nor passes into complete nirvāṇa.
“My son, you are asking for the impossible; I am powerless here.
Śakra and Brahmā also manifested themselves in the form of young priests within that gathering of priests and, sitting at the head of the line, they sang these verses of auspiciousness:
These childish beings are trapped, like a monkey tangled in a snare.
binds it to the hair
“Su­bhūti, if individuals who have attained the level of buddha nature were entities and not non-entities,
While he is digging, but sees that the soil being dug out is dry and pale,
“What is the knowledge of presentation? It is the knowledge of correct engagement.
In their separate buddha realms in the ten directions they are teaching the Dharma to many hundred thousand quintillions of śrāvakas and bodhisattvas.
These bodhisattvas will regress, and those will not.
and from his own mind sent this verse to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya:
and that you should consequently attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment
Here, through the medicine of wisdom most sublime, I purged myself of the root of conflict That induces the nausea of the lower realms— Namely, disparaging remarks made toward noble ones.
“They will speak ill of us, Saying that we are tīrthikas.
He always remains and does not pass into nirvāṇa, but creates the appearance of passing into nirvāṇa in order to benefit his students.
“The Bhagavān says, ‘samādhi, samādhi.’ What kind of Dharma does this word designate?”
Why is that? Because, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have completely pure physical conduct
The sun has the nature of the five elements. Through the meeting of these two,
Vajra Holder, listen well, And I will teach you the arrangement of mantras.
If one offers a homa of red flowers, the person whose name one uses in the homa will become enthralled.
“As soon as one attains this absorption, one emanates whatever bodies in whatever way will perfect sentient beings’ roots of virtue, and one teaches the Dharma according to sentient beings’ inclinations.
They crush pride as they think, ‘By means of my conduct, personal associations, and deportment I shall please the ones who maintain pure conduct.’
‘Oṁ, blessed lord Black Acala, you are an accomplished being! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
owing to their skill in means,
Mañjuśrī, how do bodhisattvas maintain their conduct?
I will establish them in peace and happiness without disease.’ Saying this, you have always trained in forbearance.
living peacefully in this glorious and heavenly abode, he respectfully approached them.
“Blessed One,” replied the bodhisattvas,
Therefore, how can Pāṇḍarā Be regarded as the queen of speech?
O Blessed One, the Thus-Gone One has taught how the female body is inferior and enjoys desire. That was astonishing. But,
