He understands: ‘It is impossible, it cannot happen that a person possessing right view could treat anything as self—there is no such possibility.’
He understands: ‘It is impossible, it cannot happen that a person possessing right view could, with a mind of hate, shed a Tathāgata’s blood—there is no such possibility.’
He understands: ‘It is impossible, it cannot happen that a woman could be a Wheel-turning Monarch…that a woman could occupy the position of Sakka …that a woman could occupy the position of Māra…that a woman could occupy the position of Brahmā—there is no such possibility.’
He understands: ‘It is impossible, it cannot happen that two Wheel-turning Monarchs could arise contemporaneously in one world-system…It is possible that one Wheel-turning Monarch might arise in one world-system—there is such a possibility.’
He understands: ‘On the dissolution of the body, with the ending of life, all that is felt, not being delighted in, will become cool right here.’
He understands: ‘On the dissolution of the body, with the ending of life, all that is felt, not being delighted in, will become cool right here.’
He understands: ‘This field of perception is void of the perception of earth; this field of perception is void of the perception of the base of infinite space.
He understands: ‘This field of perception is void of the perception of forest; this field of perception is void of the perception of earth.
He understands: ‘This field of perception is void of the perception of people; this field of perception is void of the perception of forest.
He understands: ‘This field of perception is void of the perception of the base of infinite consciousness; this field of perception is void of the perception of the base of nothingness.
He understands: ‘This field of perception is void of the perception of the base of infinite space; this field of perception is void of the perception of the base of infinite consciousness.
He understands: ‘This field of perception is void of the perception of the base of nothingness; this field of perception is void of the perception of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
He understands: ‘This field of perception is void of the perception of village; this field of perception is void of the perception of people.
He understands: ‘This field of perception is void of the taint of sensual desire; this field of perception is void of the taint of being; this field of perception is void of the taint of ignorance.
He understands: “Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.”
He understood thus: ‘So indeed, these states, not having been, come into being; having been, they vanish.’
He understood thus:…and with the cultivation of that, he confirmed that there is.
He understood thus:…and with the cultivation of that, he confirmed that there is.
He understood thus:…and with the cultivation of that, he confirmed that there is.
He understood thus:…and with the cultivation of that, he confirmed that there is.
He understood thus:…and with the cultivation of that, he confirmed that there is.
He understood thus:…and with the cultivation of that, he confirmed that there is.
He understood: ‘There is an escape beyond,’ and with the cultivation of that, he confirmed that there is.
He understood: ‘There is an escape beyond,’ and with the cultivation of that, he confirmed that there is.
He understood: ‘There is no escape beyond,’ and with the cultivation of that, he confirmed that there is not.
He walks confidently, stands confidently, sits confidently, lies down confidently.
He walks neither too quickly nor too slowly.
He walks without his ankles knocking together.
He walks without his knees knocking together.
He walks without raising or lowering his thighs, or bringing them together or keeping them apart.
He wants to discredit the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha.
He wants to see Master Gotama.’”
He was a master of the Three Vedas with their vocabularies, liturgy, phonology, and etymology, and the histories as a fifth; skilled in philology and grammar, he was fully versed in natural philosophy and in the marks of a Great Man, and was teaching the recitation of the hymns to three hundred brahmin students.
He was a master of the Three Vedas with their vocabularies, liturgy, phonology, and etymology, and the histories as a fifth; skilled in philology and grammar, he was fully versed in natural philosophy and in the marks of a Great Man.
He was a master of the Three Vedas, with their vocabularies, liturgy, phonology, and etymology, and the histories as the fifth; skilled in philology and grammar, he was fully versed in natural philosophy and in the marks of a Great Man.
He was a righteous king who ruled by the Dhamma, a great king who was established in the Dhamma.
He was a righteous king who ruled by the Dhamma, a great king who was established in the Dhamma.
He was associating so much with bhikkhunīs that if any bhikkhu spoke dispraise of those bhikkhunīs in his presence, he would become angry and displeased and would make a case of it; and if any bhikkhu spoke dispraise of the venerable Moliya Phagguna in those bhikkhunīs’ presence, they would become angry and displeased and would make a case of it.
He was constantly murdering people and he wore their fingers as a garland.
He was making this statement before the Vesālī assembly: “I see no recluse or brahmin, the head of an order, the head of a group, the teacher of a group, even one claiming to be accomplished and fully enlightened, who would not shake, shiver, and tremble, and sweat under the armpits if he were to engage in debate with me.
He was making this statement before the Vesālī assembly: “The recluse Gotama does not have any superhuman states, any distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
He was old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, and come to the last stage; he was in his hundred and twentieth year.
He was reciting the summary and exposition of “One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night.”
He was the last man among them.
He washes the bowl without making a splashing noise.
He washes the bowl without making a splashing noise.
He washes the bowl without turning it round.
He washes the bowl without turning it round.
He went over to the venerable Angulimāla and said: “Venerable sir, is the noble lord really Angulimāla?”
He went thus as far as the road was passable for carriages and then dismounted from his carriage and entered the park on foot.
He went thus as far as the road was passable for carriages, and then he dismounted from his carriage and entered the park on foot.
He went thus as far as the road was passable for carriages, and then he got down from his carriage and went forward on foot to the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened.
He went thus as far as the road was passable for carriages, and then he got down from his carriage and went forward on foot to the venerable Mahā Kaccāna.
He went to his parents and told them: “Mother and father, as I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not easy while living in a home to lead the holy life, utterly perfect and pure as a polished shell.
He went to Sañjaya, the brahmin of the Ākāsa clan, and told him: “Venerable sir, King Pasenadi of Kosala calls you.”
He went to the bank of the river Aciravatī and sat down at the root of a tree on a seat made ready.
He went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he stood at one side and delivered his message.
He will be able to dispute with the recluse Gotama about this assertion.”
He will think whatever thought he wishes to think and he will not think any thought that he does not wish to think.
He will understand it quickly.’
He will understand it quickly.’
He would abandon his desire and lust for that woman.
He would ask that man whether the people of that village or town were safe, prosperous, and healthy, and that man would tell him whether the people of that village or town were safe, prosperous, and healthy.
He would come to the conclusion: ‘Indeed, this is a big bull elephant.’
He would cut down and throw out the crooked saplings that robbed the sap, and he would clean up the interior of the grove and tend the straight well-formed saplings, so that the sāla-tree grove later on would come to growth, increase, and fulfilment.
He would dig here and there, strew the soil here and there, spit here and there, and urinate here and there, saying: ‘Be without earth, be without earth!’ What do you think, bhikkhus?
He would eat only suitable food, and the wound would not suppurate.
He would eat unsuitable food, and the wound would suppurate.
He would exercise it, Master Gotama, and he would be worthy to exercise it.”
He would not pursue the sight of unsuitable forms with the eye, he would not pursue unsuitable sounds with the ear, unsuitable odours with the nose, unsuitable flavours with the tongue, unsuitable tangibles with the body, or unsuitable mind-objects with the mind.
He would not take care of his wound, nor would he see to it that the wound heals.
He would not walk around in the wind and sun, and dust and dirt would not infect the opening of the wound.
He would not wash the wound from time to time nor would he anoint its opening from time to time, and pus and blood would cover the opening of the wound.
He would take care of his wound and would see to it that the wound heals.
He would walk around in the wind and sun, and dust and dirt would infect the opening of the wound.
Hear also from me what kind of bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood.
Hear me relate the names of these, the greatest
Hell, the animal realm, the realm of ghosts, human beings, and gods.
Helps me in turning this wheel.
Her relatives wanted to divorce her from her husband and give her to another whom she did not want.
Here a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of the five hindrances.
Here a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
Here a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
Here a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth; so above, below, around, and everywhere, and to all as to himself, he abides pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.
Here a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth; so above, below, around, and everywhere, and to all as to himself, he abides pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.
Here a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth; so above, below, around, and everywhere, and to all as to himself, he abides pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility, and without ill will.
Here a bhikkhu abides resolved upon an area the size of one village, pervading it as exalted……an area the size of two or three villages…an area the size of one major kingdom… an area the size of two or three major kingdoms…an area the size of the earth bounded by the ocean, pervading it as exalted: this too is called the exalted deliverance of mind.
Here a bhikkhu abides resolved upon an area the size of the root of one tree, pervading it as exalted: this is called the exalted deliverance of mind.
Here a bhikkhu abides resolved upon an area the size of the roots of two or three trees, pervading it as exalted: this too is called the exalted deliverance of mind.
Here a bhikkhu awakens zeal for the non-arising of unarisen evil unwholesome states and he makes effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and strives.
Here a bhikkhu awakens zeal for the non-arising of unarisen evil unwholesome states, and he makes effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and strives.
Here a bhikkhu awakens zeal for the non-arising of unarisen evil unwholesome states, and he makes effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and strives.
Here a bhikkhu awakens zeal for the non-arising of unarisen evil unwholesome states…for the continuance, non-disappearance, strengthening, increase, and fulfilment by development of arisen wholesome states, and he makes effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and strives.
Here a bhikkhu awakens zeal for the non-arising of unarisen evil unwholesome states…for the continuance, non-disappearance, strengthening, increase, and fulfilment by development of arisen wholesome states, and he makes effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and strives.
Here a bhikkhu awakens zeal for the non-arising of unarisen evil unwholesome states…for the continuance, non-disappearance, strengthening, increase, and fulfilment by development of arisen wholesome states, and he makes effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and strives.
Here a bhikkhu develops right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
Here a bhikkhu develops the basis for spiritual power consisting in concentration due to zeal and determined striving.
Here a bhikkhu develops the faculty of faith, which leads to peace, leads to enlightenment.
Here a bhikkhu develops the mindfulness enlightenment factor, which is supported by seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and results in relinquishment.
Here a bhikkhu develops the power of faith, which leads to peace, leads to enlightenment.
Here a bhikkhu does not go from time to time to those bhikkhus who have learned much, who are well versed in the tradition, who maintain the Dhamma, the Discipline, and the Codes, and he does not enquire and ask questions of them thus: ‘How is this, venerable sir?
Here a bhikkhu does not maintain bodily acts of loving-kindness both openly and privately towards those elder bhikkhus; he does not maintain verbal acts of loving-kindness towards them both openly and privately; he does not maintain mental acts of loving-kindness towards them both openly and privately.
Here a bhikkhu does not teach others in detail the Dhamma as he has learned it and mastered it.
Here a bhikkhu does not understand as it actually is thus: ‘A fool is characterised by his actions; a wise man is characterised by his actions.’
Here a bhikkhu does not understand as it actually is thus: ‘All material form of whatever kind consists of the four great elements and the material form derived from the four great elements.’
Here a bhikkhu does not understand the four foundations of mindfulness as they actually are.
Here a bhikkhu does not understand the Noble Eightfold Path as it actually is.
Here a bhikkhu goes from time to time to such bhikkhus who have learned much, who are well versed in the tradition, who maintain the Dhamma, the Discipline, and the Codes, and he enquires and asks questions of them thus: ‘How is this, venerable sir?
Here a bhikkhu has abandoned the conceit ‘I am,’ has cut it off at the root …so that it is no longer subject to future arising.
Here a bhikkhu has evil wishes and is dominated by evil wishes; this is a quality that makes him difficult to admonish.
Here a bhikkhu has faith, he places his faith in the Tathāgata’s enlightenment thus: ‘That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.’
Here a bhikkhu has faith, he places his faith in the Tathāgata’s enlightenment thus: ‘The Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.’
Here a bhikkhu has knowledge of form, he is skilled in characteristics, he picks out flies’ eggs, he dresses wounds, he smokes out the sheds, he knows the ford, he knows what it is to have drunk, he knows the road, he is skilled in pastures, he does not milk dry, and he shows extra veneration to those elder bhikkhus of long-standing who have long since gone forth, the fathers and leaders of the Sangha.
Here a bhikkhu has no evil wishes and is not dominated by evil wishes; this is a quality that makes him easy to admonish.
Here a bhikkhu has no knowledge of form, he is unskilled in characteristics, he fails to pick out flies’ eggs, he fails to dress wounds, he fails to smoke out the sheds, he does not know the ford, he does not know what it is to have drunk, he does not know the road, he is unskilled in pastures, he milks dry, and he shows no extra veneration to those elder bhikkhus of long-standing who have long gone forth, the fathers and leaders of the Sangha.
Here a bhikkhu is doubtful, uncertain, undecided, and unconfident about the Teacher, and thus his mind does not incline to ardour, devotion, perseverance, and striving.
Here a bhikkhu is free from lust, desire, affection, thirst, fever, and craving for sensual pleasures, and thus his mind inclines to ardour, devotion, perseverance, and striving.
Here a bhikkhu is not doubtful, uncertain, undecided, or unconfident about the Teacher, and thus his mind inclines to ardour, devotion, perseverance, and striving.
Here a bhikkhu is not free from lust, desire, affection, thirst, fever, and craving for sensual pleasures, and thus his mind does not incline to ardour, devotion, perseverance, and striving.
Here a bhikkhu maintains bodily acts of loving-kindness both openly and privately towards those elder bhikkhus; he maintains verbal acts of loving-kindness towards them both openly and privately; he maintains mental acts of loving-kindness towards them both openly and privately.
Here a bhikkhu possesses the right view of one beyond training, the right intention of one beyond training, the right speech of one beyond training, the right action of one beyond training, the right livelihood of one beyond training, the right effort of one beyond training, the right mindfulness of one beyond training, the right concentration of one beyond training, the right knowledge of one beyond training, and the right deliverance of one beyond training.
Here a bhikkhu teaches others in detail the Dhamma as he has learned it and mastered it.
Here a bhikkhu understands as it actually is thus: ‘A fool is characterised by his actions; a wise man is characterised by his actions.’
Here a bhikkhu understands as it actually is thus: ‘All material form of whatever kind consists of the four great elements and the material form derived from the four great elements.’
Here a bhikkhu understands as it actually is: ‘This is suffering’; he understands as it actually is: ‘This is the origin of suffering’; he understands as it actually is: ‘This is the cessation of suffering’; he understands as it actually is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
Here a bhikkhu understands mind affected by lust as mind affected by lust, and mind unaffected by lust as mind unaffected by lust.
Here a bhikkhu understands the eye, he understands forms, and he understands the fetter that arises dependent on both; and he also understands how there comes to be the arising of the unarisen fetter, and how there comes to be the abandoning of the arisen fetter, and how there comes to be the future non-arising of the abandoned fetter.
Here a bhikkhu understands the four foundations of mindfulness as they actually are.
Here a bhikkhu understands the Noble Eightfold Path as it actually is.
Here a bhikkhu understands: ‘Such is material form, such its origin, such its disappearance; such is feeling, such its origin, such its disappearance; such is perception, such its origin, such its disappearance; such are the formations, such their origin, such their disappearance; such is consciousness, such its origin, such its disappearance.’
Here a bhikkhu, gone to the forest or to the root of a tree or to an empty hut, reflects thus: ‘This is void of a self or of what belongs to a self.’
Here a bhikkhu, gone to the forest or to the root of a tree or to an empty hut, sits down; having folded his legs crosswise, set his body erect, and established mindfulness in front of him, ever mindful he breathes in, mindful he breathes out.
Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, abides with the eye faculty restrained.
Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, avoids a wild elephant, a wild horse, a wild bull, a wild dog, a snake, a stump, a bramble patch, a chasm, a cliff, a cesspit, a sewer.
Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, bears cold and heat, hunger and thirst, and contact with gadflies, mosquitoes, wind, the sun, and creeping things; he endures ill-spoken, unwelcome words and arisen bodily feelings that are painful, racking, sharp, piercing, disagreeable, distressing, and menacing to life.
Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, develops the mindfulness enlightenment factor, which is supported by seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and ripens in relinquishment.
Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, does not tolerate an arisen thought of sensual desire; he abandons it, removes it, does away with it, and annihilates it.
Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, uses the robe only for protection from cold, for protection from heat, for protection from contact with gadflies, mosquitoes, wind, the sun, and creeping things, and only for the purpose of concealing the private parts.
Here a bhikkhu, whether reproved or unreproved, remembers an offence, reveals it, and discloses it.
Here a brahmin might be holding a great sacrifice, and two other brahmins would go there thinking to take part in that great sacrifice.
Here a certain assembly lusts after jewels and earrings and seeks wives and children, men and women slaves, fields and land, gold and silver.
Here a certain kind of person does not torment himself or pursue the practice of torturing himself, and he does not torment others or pursue the practice of torturing others.
Here a certain kind of person does not torment himself or pursue the practice of torturing himself, and he does not torment others or pursue the practice of torturing others.
Here a certain kind of person torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself, and he also torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others.
Here a certain kind of person torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself, and he also torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others.
Here a certain kind of person torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself.
Here a certain kind of person torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself.
Here a certain kind of person torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others.
Here a certain kind of person torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others.
Here a certain person goes naked, rejecting conventions, licking his hands, not coming when asked, not stopping when asked; he does not accept food brought or food specially made or an invitation to a meal; he receives nothing from a pot, from a bowl, across a threshold, across a stick, across a pestle, from two eating together, from a pregnant woman, from a woman giving suck, from a woman in the midst of men, from where food is advertised to be distributed, from where a dog is waiting, from where flies are buzzing; he accepts no fish or meat, he drinks no liquor, wine, or fermented brew.
Here a certain person goes naked, rejecting conventions……Thus in such a variety of ways he dwells pursuing the practice of tormenting and mortifying the body.
Here a certain person goes naked...
Here a certain person is a butcher of sheep, a butcher of pigs, a fowler, a trapper of wild beasts, a hunter, a fisherman, a thief, an executioner, a prison warden, or one who follows any other such bloody occupation.
Here a certain person is a butcher of sheep……or one who follows any other such bloody occupation.
Here a cowherd has knowledge of form, he is skilled in characteristics, he picks out flies’ eggs, he dresses wounds, he smokes out the sheds, he knows the ford, he knows what it is to have drunk, he knows the road, he is skilled in pastures, he does not milk dry, and he shows extra veneration to those bulls who are fathers and leaders of the herd.
Here a cowherd has no knowledge of form, he is unskilled in characteristics, he fails to pick out flies’ eggs, he fails to dress wounds, he fails to smoke out the sheds, he does not know the ford, he does not know what it is to have drunk, he does not know the road, he is unskilled in pastures, he milks dry, and he shows no extra veneration to those bulls who are fathers and leaders of the herd.
Here a fool is one who thinks bad thoughts, speaks bad words, and does bad deeds.
Here a noble disciple considers thus: ‘I am practising the way to the abandoning and cutting off of those fetters because of which I might be arrogant.
Here a noble disciple considers thus: ‘I am practising the way to the abandoning and cutting off of those fetters because of which I might kill living beings.
Here a noble disciple has faith; he places his faith in the Tathāgata’s enlightenment thus: ‘The Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.’
Here a noble disciple is virtuous, he dwells restrained with the restraint of the Pātimokkha, he is perfect in conduct and resort, and seeing fear in the slightest fault, he trains by undertaking the training precepts.
Here a noble disciple, having abandoned wrong livelihood, earns his living by right livelihood—this is called right livelihood.
Here a Tathāgata appears in the world, accomplished and fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.
Here a true man abstains from false speech, from malicious speech, from harsh speech, and from gossip.
Here a true man abstains from killing living beings, from taking what is not given, and from misconduct in sensual pleasures.
Here a true man does not counsel for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both.
Here a true man does not will for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both.
Here a true man gives a gift carefully, gives it with his own hand, gives it showing respect, gives a valuable gift, gives it with the view that something will come of it.
Here a true man has faith, shame, and fear of wrongdoing; he is learned, energetic, mindful, and wise.
Here a true man has for his friends and companions those recluses and brahmins who have faith, shame, and fear of wrongdoing; who are learned, energetic, mindful, and wise.
Here a true man holds such a view as this: ‘There is what is given and what is offered and what is sacrificed; there is fruit and result of good and bad actions; there is this world and the other world; there is mother and father; there are beings who are reborn spontaneously; there are good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have realised for themselves by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.’
Here a well-taught noble disciple who has regard for noble ones and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, who has regard for true men and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, does not regard material form as self, or self as possessed of material form, or material form as in self, or self as in material form.
Here a Wheel-turning Monarch is handsome, comely, and graceful, possessing the supreme beauty of complexion, and he surpasses other human beings in that respect.
Here a wise man is one who thinks good thoughts, speaks good words, and does good deeds.
Here an untaught ordinary person who has no regard for noble ones and is unskilled and undisciplined in their Dhamma, who has no regard for true men and is unskilled and undisciplined in their Dhamma, regards material form as self, or self as possessed of material form, or material form as in self, or self as in material form.
Here an untrue man counsels for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, and for the affliction of both.
Here an untrue man gives a gift carelessly, gives it not with his own hand, gives it without showing respect, gives what is to be discarded, gives it with the view that nothing will come of it.
Here an untrue man has for friends and companions those recluses and brahmins who have no faith, no shame, no fear of wrongdoing; who are unlearned, lazy, forgetful, and unwise.
Here an untrue man has no faith, no shame, no fear of wrongdoing; he is unlearned, lazy, forgetful, and unwise.
Here an untrue man holds such a view as this: ‘There is nothing given, nothing offered, nothing sacrificed; no fruit or result of good and bad actions; no this world, no other world; no mother, no father; no beings who are reborn spontaneously; no good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have realised for themselves by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.’
Here an untrue man kills living beings, takes what is not given, and misconducts himself in sensual pleasures.
Here an untrue man speaks false speech, malicious speech, harsh speech, and gossip.
Here an untrue man who has gone forth from an aristocratic family considers thus: ‘I have gone forth from an aristocratic family; but these other bhikkhus have not gone forth from aristocratic families.’
Here an untrue man wills for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, and for the affliction of both.
Here bhikkhus are disputing: ‘It is Dhamma,’ or ‘It is not Dhamma,’ or ‘It is Discipline,’ or ‘It is not Discipline.’
Here birth makes no distinctive mark
Here comes the carpenter Pañcakanga, a disciple of the recluse Gotama, one of the recluse Gotama’s white-clothed lay disciples staying at Sāvatthī.
Here comes the recluse Gotama.
Here comes the recluse Ānanda, a disciple of the recluse Gotama, one of the recluse Gotama’s disciples staying in Kosambī.
Here disciples of the Teacher who lives secluded do not train in seclusion; they do not abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon; they are luxurious and careless, leaders in backsliding, neglectful of seclusion.
Here disciples of the Teacher who lives secluded train in seclusion; they abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon; they are not luxurious and careless, they are keen to avoid backsliding, and are leaders in seclusion.
Here he does no evil bodily actions, he utters no evil speech, he has no evil intentions, and he does not make his living by any evil livelihood.
Here he does no evil bodily actions, he utters no evil speech, he has no evil intentions, and he does not make his living by any evil livelihood.
Here I addressed the bhikkhus thus: ‘Bhikkhus, I eat at a single session.
Here I have fallen into bewilderment, Master Gotama, here I have fallen into confusion, and the measure of confidence I had gained through previous conversation with Master Gotama has now disappeared.”
Here one bhikkhu reproves another bhikkhu for such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat: ‘Does the venerable one remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
Here one bhikkhu reproves another bhikkhu for such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat: ‘Does the venerable one remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
Here one bhikkhu reproves another for such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat: ‘Does the venerable one remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
Here one who has faith visits him; when he visits him, he pays respect to him; when he pays respect to him, he gives ear; one who gives ear hears the Dhamma; having heard the Dhamma, he memorises it; he examines the meaning of the teachings he has memorised; when he examines their meaning, he gains a reflective acceptance of those teachings; when he has gained a reflective acceptance of those teachings, zeal springs up in him; when zeal has sprung up, he applies his will; having applied his will, he scrutinises; having scrutinised, he strives; resolutely striving, he realises with the body the supreme truth and sees it by penetrating it with wisdom.
Here Sakka, ruler of gods, came to me, and after paying homage to me, he stood at one side and asked: ‘Venerable sir, how in brief is a bhikkhu liberated in the destruction of craving, one who has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate security from bondage, the ultimate holy life, the ultimate goal, one who is foremost among gods and humans?’
Here some clansman goes forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness, considering: ‘I am a victim of birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering.
Here some clansman goes forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness, considering: ‘I am a victim of birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering.
Here some clansman goes forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness, considering: ‘I am a victim of birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering.
Here some clansman goes forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness, considering: ‘I am a victim of birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering.
Here some Nigaṇṭha might be afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill and he might refuse cold water and use only hot water.
Here some Nigaṇṭha might be restrained with four checks—curbed by all curbs, clamped by all curbs, cleansed by all curbs, and claimed by all curbs —and yet when going forward and returning he brings about the destruction of many small living beings.
Here some person contacts with the body and abides in those liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, and his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom.
Here some person contacts with the body and abides in those liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, and some of his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom.
Here some person does not contact with the body and abide in those liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, and his taints are not yet destroyed by his seeing with wisdom, but those teachings proclaimed by the Tathāgata are accepted by him after reflecting on them sufficiently with wisdom.
Here some person does not contact with the body and abide in those liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, and his taints are not yet destroyed by his seeing with wisdom, yet he has sufficient faith in and love for the Tathāgata.
Here some person does not contact with the body and abide in those liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, but his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom.
Here some person does not contact with the body and abide in those liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, but some of his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom, and he has reviewed and examined with wisdom the teachings proclaimed by the Tathāgata.
Here some person does not contact with the body and abide in those liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, but some of his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom, and his faith is planted, rooted, and established in the Tathāgata.
Here some person is a head-anointed noble king or a well-to-do brahmin.
Here some person is a head-anointed noble king or a well-to-do brahmin… …And then his slaves, messengers, and servants make preparations, weeping with tearful faces, being spurred on by threats of punishment and by fear.
Here some person kills living beings, takes what is not given, misconducts himself in sensual pleasures, speaks falsehood, speaks maliciously, speaks harshly, gossips; he is covetous, has a mind of ill will, and holds wrong view.
Here some person with a blemish does not understand it as it actually is thus: ‘I have a blemish in myself.’
Here some person with a blemish understands it as it actually is thus: ‘I have a blemish in myself.’
Here some person with no blemish does not understand it as it actually is thus: ‘I have no blemish in myself.’
Here some person with no blemish understands it as it actually is thus: ‘I have no blemish in myself.’
Here some teacher resorts to a secluded resting place: the forest, the root of a tree, a mountain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a jungle thicket, an open space, a heap of straw.
Here someone abides resolved upon and pervading ‘defiled radiance’; on the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in the company of the gods of Defiled Radiance.
Here someone abides resolved upon and pervading ‘immeasurable radiance’; on the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in the company of the gods of Immeasurable Radiance.
Here someone abides resolved upon and pervading ‘limited radiance’; on the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in the company of the gods of Limited Radiance.
Here someone abides resolved upon and pervading ‘pure radiance’; on the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in the company of the gods of Pure Radiance.
Here someone being himself subject to birth seeks what is also subject to birth; being himself subject to ageing, he seeks what is also subject to ageing; being himself subject to sickness, he seeks what is also subject to sickness; being himself subject to death, he seeks what is also subject to death; being himself subject to sorrow, he seeks what is also subject to sorrow; being himself subject to defilement, he seeks what is also subject to defilement.
Here someone being himself subject to birth, having understood the danger in what is subject to birth, seeks the unborn supreme security from bondage, Nibbāna; being himself subject to ageing, having understood the danger in what is subject to ageing, he seeks the unageing supreme security from bondage, Nibbāna; being himself subject to sickness, having understood the danger in what is subject to sickness, he seeks the unailing supreme security from bondage, Nibbāna; being himself subject to death, having understood the danger in what is subject to death, he seeks the deathless supreme security from bondage, Nibbāna; being himself subject to sorrow, having understood the danger in what is subject to sorrow, he seeks the sorrowless supreme security from bondage, Nibbāna; being himself subject to defilement, having understood the danger in what is subject to defilement, he seeks the undefiled supreme security from bondage, Nibbāna.
Here someone generates a bodily formation that is both afflictive and unafflictive, a verbal formation that is both afflictive and unafflictive, a mental formation that is both afflictive and unafflictive.
Here someone generates an afflictive bodily formation, an afflictive verbal formation, an afflictive mental formation.
Here someone generates an unafflictive bodily formation, an unafflictive verbal formation, an unafflictive mental formation.
Here someone holds such a view as this: ‘There is nothing given, nothing offered, nothing sacrificed; no fruit or result of good and bad actions; no this world, no other world; no mother, no father; no beings who are reborn spontaneously; no good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have realised for themselves by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.’
Here someone holds such a view as this: ‘There is what is given and what is offered and what is sacrificed; there is fruit and result of good and bad actions; there is this world and the other world; there is mother and father; there are beings who are reborn spontaneously; there are good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have realised for themselves by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.’
Here someone is covetous and abides with his mind imbued with covetousness; he has ill will and abides with his mind imbued with ill will; he is cruel and abides with his mind imbued with cruelty.
Here someone is covetous and abides with his perception imbued with covetousness; he has ill will and abides with his perception imbued with ill will; he is cruel and abides with his perception imbued with cruelty.
Here someone is covetous; he covets the wealth and property of others thus: ‘Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!’ Or he has a mind of ill will and intentions of hate thus: ‘May these beings be slain and slaughtered, may they be cut off, perish, or be annihilated!’ Or he has wrong view, distorted vision, thus: ‘There is nothing given, nothing offered, nothing sacrificed; no fruit or result of good and bad actions; no this world, no other world; no mother, no father; no beings who are reborn spontaneously; no good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have themselves realised by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.’
Here someone is covetous; he covets the wealth and property of others thus: ‘Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!’ Or he has a mind of ill will and intentions of hate thus: ‘May these beings be slain and slaughtered, may they be cut off, perish, or be annihilated!’ Such mental conduct causes unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who cultivates it.
Here someone is not covetous; he does not covet the wealth and property of others thus: ‘Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!’ His mind is without ill will and he has intentions free from hate thus: ‘May these beings be free from enmity, affliction and anxiety!
Here someone is not covetous; he does not covet the wealth and property of others thus: ‘Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!’ His mind is without ill will and he has intentions free from hate thus: ‘May these beings be free from enmity, affliction, and anxiety!
Here someone is uncovetous and abides with his mind detached from covetousness; he is without ill will and abides with his mind detached from ill will; he is uncruel and abides with his mind detached from cruelty.
Here someone is uncovetous and abides with his perception detached from covetousness; he is without ill will and abides with his perception detached from ill will; he is uncruel and abides with his perception detached from cruelty.
Here someone kills living beings; he is murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to living beings.
Here someone kills living beings; he is murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to living beings.
Here someone may have formerly enjoyed himself with forms cognizable by the eye that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire and provocative of lust.
Here someone may have formerly enjoyed himself with sounds cognizable by the ear…with odours cognizable by the nose…with flavours cognizable by the tongue…with tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire and provocative of lust.
Here someone speaks falsehood; when summoned to a court, or to a meeting, or to his relatives’ presence, or to his guild, or to the royal family’s presence, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ not knowing, he says, ‘I know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I do not know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I do not see’; in full awareness he speaks falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
Here someone speaks falsehood; when summoned to a court, or to a meeting, or to his relatives’ presence, or to his guild, or to the royal family’s presence, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ not knowing, he says, ‘I know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I do not know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I do not see’; in full awareness he speaks falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
Here someone, abandoning false speech, abstains from false speech; when summoned to a court, or to a meeting, or to his relatives’ presence, or to his guild, or to the royal family’s presence, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ not knowing, he says, ‘I do not know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I do not see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I see’; he does not in full awareness speak falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
Here someone, abandoning false speech, abstains from false speech; when summoned to a court, or to a meeting, or to his relatives’ presence, or to his guild, or to the royal family’s presence, and questioned as a witness thus: ‘So, good man, tell what you know,’ not knowing, he says, ‘I do not know,’ or knowing, he says, ‘I know’; not seeing, he says, ‘I do not see,’ or seeing, he says, ‘I see’; he does not in full awareness speak falsehood for his own ends, or for another’s ends, or for some trifling worldly end.
Here someone, abandoning the killing of living beings, abstains from killing living beings; with rod and weapon laid aside, gentle and kindly, he abides compassionate to all living beings.
Here someone, abandoning the killing of living beings, abstains from killing living beings; with rod and weapon laid aside, gently and kindly, he abides compassionate to all living beings.
Here the bhikkhu has abandoned craving, has cut it off at the root…so that it is no longer subject to future arising.
Here the bhikkhu has abandoned ignorance, has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, done away with it, so that it is no longer subject to future arising.
Here the bhikkhu has abandoned the five lower fetters, has cut them off at the root…so that they are no longer subject to future arising.
Here the bhikkhu has abandoned the round of births that brings renewed being, has cut it off at the root…so that it is no longer subject to future arising.
Here the giver is immoral, of evil character, and the receiver is immoral, of evil character.
Here the giver is immoral, of evil character, and the receiver is virtuous, of good character.
Here the giver is virtuous, of good character, and the receiver is immoral, of evil character.
Here the giver is virtuous, of good character, and the receiver is virtuous, of good character.
Here these three hundred bhikkhus stand
Here when bhikkhus have taken to quarreling and brawling and are deep in disputes, they may have said and done many things improper for a recluse.
Here, Aggivessana, before my enlightenment, while I was still only an unenlightened Bodhisatta, I thought: ‘Household life is crowded and dusty; life gone forth is wide open.
Here, Aggivessana, pleasant feeling arises in a well-taught noble disciple.
Here, Aggivessana, pleasant feeling arises in an untaught ordinary person.
Here, Bhaddāli, a bhikkhu possesses the right view of one beyond training, the right intention of one beyond training, the right speech of one beyond training, the right action of one beyond training, the right livelihood of one beyond training, the right effort of one beyond training, the right mindfulness of one beyond training, the right concentration of one beyond training, the right knowledge of one beyond training, and the right deliverance of one beyond training.
Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu resorts to a secluded resting place: the forest, the root of a tree, a mountain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a jungle thicket, an open space, a heap of straw.
Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is not overwhelmed with suffering does not overwhelm himself with suffering; and he does not give up the pleasure that accords with Dhamma, yet he is not infatuated with that pleasure.
Here, bhikkhus, a noble disciple abandons wrong livelihood and gains his living by right livelihood: this is right livelihood that is affected by taints…ripening in the acquisitions.
Here, bhikkhus, a well-taught noble disciple, who has regard for noble ones and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, who has regard for true men and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, does not regard material form as self, or self as possessed of material form, or material form as in self, or self as in material form.
Here, bhikkhus, an untaught ordinary person, who has no regard for noble ones and is unskilled and undisciplined in their Dhamma, who has no regard for true men and is unskilled and undisciplined in their Dhamma, does not understand what things are fit for attention and what things are unfit for attention.
Here, bhikkhus, an untaught ordinary person, who has no regard for noble ones and is unskilled and undisciplined in their Dhamma, who has no regard for true men and is unskilled and undisciplined in their Dhamma, regards material form as self, or self as possessed of material form, or material form as in self, or self as in material form.
Here, bhikkhus, an untaught ordinary person, who has no regard for noble ones and is unskilled and undisciplined in their Dhamma, who has no regard for true men and is unskilled and undisciplined in their Dhamma, regards material form thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self.ʹ He regards feeling thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self.’
Here, bhikkhus, in different localities they call the same thing a ‘dish’, a ‘bowl’, a ‘vessel’, a ‘saucer’, a ‘pan’, a ‘pot’, or a ‘basin’.
Here, bhikkhus, in different localities they call the same thing a ‘dish’…or a ‘basin.’
Here, bhikkhus, on account of the craft by which a clansman makes a living—whether checking or accounting or calculating or farming or trading or husbandry or archery or the royal service, or whatever craft it may be—he has to face cold, he has to face heat, he is injured by contact with gadflies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and creeping things; he risks death by hunger and thirst.
Here, bhikkhus, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
Here, bhikkhus, someone by nature does not have strong lust, and he does not constantly experience pain and grief born of lust; by nature he does not have strong hate, and he does not constantly experience pain and grief born of hate; by nature he does not have strong delusion, and he does not constantly experience pain and grief born of delusion.
Here, bhikkhus, someone by nature has strong lust, and he constantly experiences pain and grief born of lust; by nature he has strong hate, and he constantly experiences pain and grief born of hate; by nature he has strong delusion, and he constantly experiences pain and grief born of delusion.
Here, bhikkhus, someone goes naked, rejecting conventions, licking his hands, not coming when asked, not stopping when asked… …He dwells pursuing the practice of bathing in water three times daily including the evening.
Here, bhikkhus, someone in pain and grief abstains from killing living beings, and he experiences pain and grief that have abstention from killing living beings as condition.
Here, bhikkhus, someone in pain and grief kills living beings, and he experiences pain and grief that have killing of living beings as condition.
Here, bhikkhus, someone in pleasure and joy abstains from killing living beings, and he experiences pleasure and joy that have abstention from killing living beings as condition.
Here, bhikkhus, someone in pleasure and joy kills living beings, and he experiences pleasure and joy that have killing of living beings as condition.
Here, bhikkhus, when that man got across and had arrived at the far shore, he might think thus: ‘This raft has been very helpful to me, since supported by it and making an effort with my hands and feet, I got safely across to the far shore.
Here, brahmin, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna…With the stilling of applied and sustained thought, he enters upon and abides in the second jhāna…With the fading away as well of rapture…he enters upon and abides in the third jh̄na...With the abandoning of pleasure and pain...he enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna…The Blessed One praised that kind of meditation.”
Here, brahmin, someone abides with his mind obsessed by sensual lust, a prey to sensual lust, and he does not understand as it actually is the escape from arisen sensual lust.
Here, Dhānañjāni, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth; so above, below, around, and everywhere, and to all as to himself, he abides pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.
Here, during the day, while walking back and forth and sitting, a noble disciple purifies his mind of obstructive states.
Here, friend, right view is assisted by virtue, learning, discussion, serenity, and insight.
Here, Kandaraka, a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
Here, Master Raṭṭhapāla, someone has many friends and companions, kinsmen and relatives.
Here, Master Raṭṭhapāla, someone is afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill.
Here, Master Raṭṭhapāla, someone is old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, come to the last stage.
Here, Master Raṭṭhapāla, someone is rich, of great wealth, of great possessions.
Here, on seeing a form with the eye, a bhikkhu does not grasp at its signs and features.
Here, on seeing a form with the eye, a bhikkhu grasps at its signs and features.
Here, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
Here, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
Here, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
Here, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
Here, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna…If his consciousness does not follow after the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, is not tied and shackled by gratification in the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, is not fettered by the fetter of gratification in the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, then his mind is called ‘not stuck internally.’
Here, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
Here, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a noble disciple enters upon and abides in the first jhāna…With the stilling of applied and sustained thought, he enters upon and abides in the second jhāna…With the fading away as well of rapture…he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna…With the abandoning of pleasure and pain…he enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
Here, reflecting wisely, a noble disciple takes food neither for amusement nor for intoxication nor for the sake of physical beauty and attractiveness, but only for the endurance and continuance of this body, for ending discomfort, and for assisting the holy life, considering: ‘Thus I shall terminate old feelings without arousing new feelings and I shall be healthy and blameless and shall live in comfort.’
Here, sisters, a bhikkhu develops the mindfulness enlightenment factor, which is supported by seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and ripens in relinquishment.
Here, student, a bhikkhu is a speaker of truth.
Here, student, a bhikkhu is an ascetic…one who is celibate…one who engages in study…one who engages in generosity.
Here, Sāriputta, when a bhikkhu has returned from his almsround, after his meal, he sits down, folds his legs crosswise, sets his body erect, and establishing mindfulness in front of him, resolves: ‘I shall not break this sitting position until through not clinging my mind is liberated from the taints.’
Here, there being sensual desire in him, a bhikkhu understands: ‘There is sensual desire in me’; or there being no sensual desire in him, he understands: ‘There is no sensual desire in me’; and he also understands how there comes to be the arising of unarisen sensual desire, and how there comes to be the abandoning of arisen sensual desire, and how there comes to be the future non-arising of abandoned sensual desire.’
Here, there being the mindfulness enlightenment factor in him, a bhikkhu understands: ‘There is the mindfulness enlightenment factor in me’; or there being no mindfulness enlightenment factor in him, he understands: ‘There is no mindfulness enlightenment factor in me’; and he also understands how there comes to be the arising of the unarisen mindfulness enlightenment factor, and how the arisen mindfulness enlightenment factor comes to fulfilment arisen mindfulness enlightenment factor comes to fulfilment by development.
Here, there is the union of the mother and father, and the mother is in season, and the gandhabba is present.
Here, there is the union of the mother and father, and the mother is in season, but the gandhabba is not present—in this case too no descent of the embryo takes place.
Here, there is the union of the mother and father, but the mother is not in season, and the gandhabba MA: The gandhabba is the being arriving there.
Here, venerable sir, we abide contemplating the body as a body…feelings as feelings…mind as mind…mind-objects as mind-objects, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
Here, venerable sir, whenever we want, by completely surmounting the base of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite,’ we enter upon and abide in the base of infinite consciousness…By completely surmounting the base of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing,’ we enter upon and abide in the base of nothingness…By completely surmounting the base of nothingness, we enter upon and abide in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
Here, venerable sir, whenever we want, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, we enter upon and abide in the cessation of perception and feeling.
Here, venerable sir, whenever we want, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, we enter upon and abide in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
Here, venerable sir, whenever we want, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite,’ we enter upon and abide in the base of infinite space.
Here, venerable sir, whenever we want, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, we enter upon and abide in the second jhāna…With the fading away as well of rapture…we enter upon and abide in the third jhāna…With the abandoning of pleasure and pain…we enter upon and abide in the fourth jhāna…Venerable sir, this is another superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones, a comfortable abiding, which we have attained by surmounting the preceding abiding, by making that abiding subside.”
Here, when a bhikkhu has entered upon the first jhāna, sensual desire is abandoned, ill will is abandoned, sloth and torpor are abandoned, restlessness and remorse are abandoned, and doubt is abandoned; and there occur applied thought, sustained thought, rapture, pleasure, and unification of mind.
Here, when a bhikkhu has entered upon the first jhāna, there occur applied thought, sustained thought, rapture, pleasure, and unification of mind.
Here, when a bhikkhu has seen a form with the eye, if his consciousness does not follow after the sign of form, is not tied and shackled by gratification in the sign of form, is not fettered by the fetter of gratification in the sign of form, then his consciousness is called ‘not distracted and scattered externally.’ 
Here, when a bhikkhu has seen a form with the eye, if his consciousness follows after the sign of form, is tied and shackled by gratification in the sign of form, is fettered by the fetter of gratification in the sign of form, then his consciousness is called ‘distracted and scattered externally.’
Here, when a head-anointed noble king has bathed his head on the Uposatha day of the fifteenth and has ascended to the upper palace chamber for the Uposatha, there appears to him the divine wheel-treasure with its thousand spokes, its tire, and its nave, complete in every aspect.
Here, when a thought of sensual desire has arisen, a bhikkhu does not tolerate it; he abandons it, removes it, does away with it, and annihilates it.
Here, when a thought of sensual desire has arisen, a bhikkhu tolerates it; he does not abandon it, remove it, do away with it, and annihilate it.
Here, when faithful householders invite a bhikkhu to take as much as he likes of robes, almsfood, resting places, and medicinal requisites, the bhikkhu does not know moderation in accepting.
Here, when faithful householders invite a bhikkhu to take as much as he likes of robes, almsfood, resting places, and medicinal requisites, the bhikkhu knows moderation in accepting.
Here, when feeling a pleasant feeling, a bhikkhu understands: ‘I feel a pleasant feeling’; when feeling a painful feeling, he understands: ‘I feel a painful feeling’; when feeling a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, he understands: ‘I feel a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.’
Here, when someone feels a certain kind of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, unwholesome states increase in him and wholesome states diminish; but when someone feels another kind of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, unwholesome states diminish in him and wholesome states increase’?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”
Here, when someone feels a certain kind of painful feeling, unwholesome states increase in him and wholesome states diminish; but when someone feels another kind of painful feeling, unwholesome states diminish in him and wholesome states increase.
Here, when the Dhamma and Discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata is being taught, a bhikkhu does not gain inspiration in the meaning, does not gain inspiration in the Dhamma, does not gain gladness connected with the Dhamma.
Here, when the Dhamma and Discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata is being taught, a bhikkhu gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains gladness connected with the Dhamma.
Here, with non-attention to all signs, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the signless concentration of mind.
Here, with seclusion from the acquisitions,  with the abandoning of unwholesome states, with the complete tranquillization of bodily inertia, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
Here, with the complete surmounting of the base of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness.
Here, Ānanda, a bhikkhu is angry and resentful.
Here, Ānanda, by completely surmounting the base of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness.
Here, Ānanda, by completely surmounting the base of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite consciousness.
Here, Ānanda, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the cessation of perception and feeling.
Here, Ānanda, by completely surmounting the base of nothingness, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
Here, Ānanda, compassionate and seeking their welfare, the Teacher teaches the Dhamma to the disciples out of compassion: ‘This is for your welfare, this is for your happiness.’
Here, Ānanda, compassionate and seeking their welfare, the Teacher teaches the Dhamma to the disciples out of compassion: ‘This is for your welfare, this is for your happiness.’
Here, Ānanda, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
Here, Ānanda, when a bhikkhu sees a form with the eye, there arises in him what is agreeable, there arises what is disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable and disagreeable.
Here, Ānanda, when a bhikkhu sees a form with the eye… hears a sound with the ear…smells an odour with the nose…tastes a flavour with the tongue…touches a tangible with the body…cognizes a mind-object with the mind, there arises in him what is agreeable, there arises what is disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable and disagreeable; he is repelled, humiliated, and disgusted by the agreeable that arose, by the disagreeable that arose, and by the both agreeable and disagreeable that arose.
Here, Ānanda, when a bhikkhu sees a form with the eye…hears a sound with the ear…smells an odour with the nose…tastes a flavour with the tongue…touches a tangible with the body…cognizes a mind-object with the mind, there arises in him what is agreeable, there arises what is disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable and disagreeable.
Here, Ānanda, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
Here, Ānanda, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite space.
Here, Ānanda, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu abides in equanimity, mindful and fully aware, and still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna, on account of which noble ones announce: ‘He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.’
Here, Ānanda, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
Herein, bhikkhus, you should train thus: ‘Our minds will remain unaffected, and we shall utter no evil words; we shall abide compassionate for their welfare, with a mind of loving-kindness, without inner hate.
Herein, bhikkhus, you should train thus: ‘Our minds will remain unaffected, and we shall utter no evil words; we shall abide compassionate for their welfare, with a mind of loving-kindness, without inner hate.
Herein, bhikkhus, you should train thus: ‘Our minds will remain unaffected, and we shall utter no evil words; we shall abide compassionate for their welfare, with a mind of loving-kindness, without inner hate.
Herein, the person with a blemish who understands it as it actually is thus: ‘I have a blemish in myself’ is called the superior of these two persons with a blemish.
Herein, the person with no blemish who understands it as it actually is thus: ‘I have no blemish’ is called the superior of these two persons with no blemish.”
Herein, what kind of faith do the venerable Nigaṇṭhas have in a teacher who speaks about the past?
Hid in a sheath, greatest of men?
Him I call undeluded who has abandoned the taints that defile, bring renewal of being, give trouble, ripen in suffering, and lead to future birth, ageing, and death; for it is with the abandoning of the taints that one is undeluded.
His bodily inertia has fully subsided, his sloth and torpor have been fully eliminated, his restlessness and remorse have been fully removed; because of this he meditates, as it were, brightly.
His bodily inertia has not fully subsided, his sloth and torpor have not been fully eliminated, his restlessness and remorse have not been fully removed; because of this he meditates, as it were, dimly.
His body-hairs grow singly, each body-hair growing alone in a hair socket…
His children, who exceed a thousand, are brave and heroic and crush the armies of others; over this earth bounded by the ocean he rules without a rod, without a weapon, by means of the Dhamma.
His children, who exceed a thousand, are brave and heroic, and crush the armies of others; over this earth bounded by the ocean, he rules without a rod, without a weapon, by means of the Dhamma.
His disciples do not want to hear or give ear or exert their minds to understand; they err and turn aside from the Teacher’s Dispensation.
His disciples do not want to hear or give ear or exert their minds to understand; they err and turn aside from the Teacher’s Dispensation.
His disciples want to hear and give ear and exert their minds to understand; they do not err and turn aside from the Teacher’s Dispensation.
His disciples will hear and give ear and exert their minds to understand; they do not err and turn aside from the Teacher’s Dispensation.
His efforts to the Buddha’s teaching, He illuminates this world
His eggs are unspoiled; he is capable of breaking out, capable of enlightenment, capable of attaining the supreme security from bondage.
His eggs are unspoiled; he is capable of breaking out, capable of enlightenment, capable of attaining the supreme security from bondage.
His eyes are deep blue…
His father went to him and said: “Raṭṭhapāla, my dear, surely there is…and you will be eating old porridge!
His feet are arched…
His hands and feet are soft and tender…
His head is shaped like a turban—this is a mark of a Great Man in Master Gotama.
His heart cleansed, a master of discourse, he lives ever tranquil, the finder of knowledge;
His intention is right intention, his effort is right effort, his mindfulness is right mindfulness, his concentration is right concentration.
His male organ is enclosed in a sheath…
His mind enters into that perception of earth and acquires confidence, steadiness, and resolution.
His mind enters into that perception of earth and acquires confidence, steadiness, and resolution.
His mind enters into that perception of forest and acquires confidence, steadiness, and resolution.
His mind enters into that perception of the base of infinite consciousness and acquires confidence, steadiness, and resolution.
His mind enters into that perception of the base of infinite space and acquires confidence, steadiness, and resolution.
His mind enters into that perception of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception and acquires confidence, steadiness, and resolution.
His mind enters into that perception of the base of nothingness and acquires confidence, steadiness, and resolution.
His mind enters into that signless concentration of mind and acquires confidence, steadiness, and resolution.
His mind enters into that signless concentration of mind and acquires confidence, steadiness, and resolution.
His mindfulness may be slow in arising, but he quickly abandons them, removes them, does away with them, and annihilates them.
His neck and his shoulders are even…
His relatives lament and rend their hair, Crying, ‘Ah me!
His taste is supremely acute...
His teeth are even…
His teeth are quite white…
His teeth are without gaps…
His wife, who had faith and came from a clan with faith, has died and he has taken another wife, a woman without faith who comes from a clan without faith.”
Honour these sages who, having gone beyond all ties, Have attained final Nibbāna, past all measure.”
Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened!
Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened!
Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened!
Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened!
Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened!
Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened!
Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened!”
Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened!”
Horner too follows the latter text in MLS.
Horses, cattle, donkeys, goats, and deer, and any other such animals.
Householder, you have been converted by the recluse Gotama with his converting magic!”
How am I?
How am I?
How can she become angry and displeased with her only maid for getting up late?
How can she take a rolling-pin, give her a blow on the head, and cut her head?’
How could sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair not arise in me?”
How could sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair not arise in me?”
How could you understand this Dhamma and Discipline?
How could you understand this Dhamma and Discipline?
How does one become an arahant?
How does one preserve truth?
How does the venerable one know, how does he see, regarding these five aggregates affected by clinging, so that through not clinging his mind is liberated from the taints?’
How does the venerable one know, how does he see, regarding these four kinds of expression, so that through not clinging his mind is liberated from the taints?’
How does the venerable one know, how does he see, regarding these six elements, so that through not clinging his mind is liberated from the taints?’
How does the venerable one know, how does he see, regarding these six internal and external bases, so that through not clinging his mind is liberated from the taints?’
How has one the triple knowledge?
How healthy the recluse’s state is!
How healthy the recluse’s state is!
How is it now, while she does not show anger, is it nevertheless actually present in her or is it absent?
How is it that you have stopped and I have not?”
How is one a silent sage?
How many pleasant states has the Blessed One brought us!
How many pleasant states has the Blessed One brought us!
How many unwholesome states has the Blessed One rid us of!
How many unwholesome states has the Blessed One rid us of!
How many wholesome states has the Blessed One brought us!’”
How many wholesome states has the Blessed One brought us!”
How may I explain in accordance with the Dhamma in such a way that nothing which provides a ground for censure can be legitimately deduced from my assertion?”
How shall I be in the future?
How shall we be in the future?
How should the meaning of that statement be understood?”
How should the meaning of that statement be understood?”
How should the meaning of that statement be understood?”
How should the meaning of that statement be understood?”
How should the meaning of these statements be regarded?”
How then should King Pasenadi of Kosala answer in order to answer correctly?”
How was I in the past?
How we should recognise a brahmin.”
How were we in the past?
How would you treat him?”
How would you treat him?”
However, as I approached, those bhikkhus found themselves unable to keep their pact.
However, he is not firmly attached to his view and he relinquishes easily, and I can make that person emerge from the unwholesome and establish him in the wholesome.
However, I did not go forth from the home life into homelessness for the sake of robes, almsfood, resting place, and medicinal requisites.
However, I did not go forth from the home life into homelessness for the sake of robes, almsfood, resting place, and medicinal requisites.
However, I have heard from elder aged brahmins who speak according to the lineage of teachers that those who are the Accomplished Ones, Fully Enlightened Ones, reveal themselves as such when their praise is spoken.
However, if one makes an aspiration and one leads the holy life wisely, one is able to procure fruit; if one makes no aspiration and one leads the holy life wisely, one is still able to procure fruit; if one both makes an aspiration and makes no aspiration and one leads the holy life wisely, one is still able to procure fruit; if one neither makes an aspiration nor makes no aspiration and one leads the holy life wisely, one is still able to procure fruit.’
However, their discussion was interrupted; for the Blessed One rose from meditation when it was evening, went to the assembly hall, and sat down on a seat made ready.
However, their discussion was interrupted; for the Blessed One rose from meditation when it was evening, went to the assembly hall, and sat down on a seat made ready.
However, this reading apparently predates the commentaries, for MA accepts anupādā as correct and offers the following explanation: “In what sense is there agitation due to non-clinging?
However, when the Blessed One comes, then both I and this assembly sit looking up to the Blessed One, thinking: ‘We shall hear the Dhamma that the Blessed one will expound to us.’”
Humankind is a tangle but the animal is open enough.
I alone am a Fully Enlightened One
I am consistent.
I am consistent.
I am far indeed, venerable sir, from that cutting off of affairs in the Noble One’s Discipline when it has been achieved entirely and in all ways.
I am going to see the recluse Gotama.”
I am not able to dispute with the recluse Gotama about this assertion.
I am not able to dispute with the recluse Gotama about this assertion.”
I am not able to dispute with the recluse Gotama about this assertion.”
I am not getting well, I am not comfortable.
I am not getting well, I am not comfortable.
I am not getting well…Just as if a skilled butcher or his apprentice were to carve up an ox’s belly with a sharp butcher’s knife, so too, violent winds are carving up my belly.
I am not getting well…Just as if a skilled butcher or his apprentice were to carve up an ox’s belly with a sharp butcher’s knife, so too, violent winds are carving up my belly.
I am not getting well…Just as if a strong man were tightening a tough leather strap around my head as a headband, so too, there are violent pains in my head.
I am not getting well…Just as if a strong man were tightening a tough leather strap around my head as a headband, so too, there are violent pains in my head.
I am not getting well…Just as if two strong men were to seize a weaker man by both arms and roast him over a pit of hot coals, so too, there is a violent burning in my body.
I am not getting well…Just as if two strong men were to seize a weaker man by both arms and roast him over a pit of hot coals, so too, there is a violent burning in my body.
I am now old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, and come to the last stage: my years have turned eighty.
I am one who is completely intent on Nibbāna.’
I am one who is completely intent on Nibbāna.’
I am one who is completely intent on Nibbāna.’
I am one who is completely intent upon Nibbāna.’
I am one who shows the way.”
I am possessed of wisdom.
I am purified in bodily conduct.
I am sitting on my own mat.”
I am sitting on my own mat.”
I am the Accomplished One in the world, I am the Teacher Supreme.
I am the holy one, without an equal, Who has crushed all Māra’s teeming hordes;
I am the one whose presence in the world
I ask you now, O recluse, about the meaning:
I asked them: ‘Friends, why do you practise continuous standing, rejecting seats, and experience painful, racking, piercing feelings due to exertion?’
I chose to lead the homeless life, O King.
I clothed myself in hemp, in hemp-mixed cloth, in shrouds, in refuse rags, in tree bark, in antelope hide, in strips of antelope hide, in kusagrass fabric, in bark fabric, in wood-shavings fabric, in head-hair wool, in animal wool, in owls’ wings.
I consider: ‘Why should I not set aside what I wish to do and do what these venerable ones wish to do?’
I consider: ‘Why should I not set aside what I wish to do and do what these venerable ones wish to do?’
I considered: ‘If I claim to be completely fasting while these deities infuse heavenly food into the pores of my skin and I live on that, then I shall be lying.’
I considered: ‘This is an agreeable piece of ground, this is a delightful grove with a clear-flowing river with pleasant, smooth banks and nearby a village for alms resort.
I directly knew as it actually is: ‘These are the taints’; I directly knew as it actually is: ‘This is the origin of the taints’; I directly knew as it actually is: ‘This is the cessation of the taints’; I directly knew as it actually is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of the taints.’ 
I directly knew as it actually is: ‘This is suffering’; I directly knew as it actually is: ‘This is the origin of suffering’; I directly knew as it actually is: ‘This is the cessation of suffering’; I directly knew as it actually is: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
I directly knew as it actually is: ‘This is suffering’;…‘This is the origin of suffering’;…‘This is the cessation of suffering’;…‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering’;…‘These are the taints’;…‘This is the origin of the taints’;…‘This is the cessation of the taints’;…‘This is the way leading to the cessation of the taints.’
I directly knew as it actually is: “These are the taints”…“This is the origin of the taints”…“This is the cessation of the taints”…“This is the way leading to the cessation of the taints.”
I directly knew as it actually is: “This is suffering”…“This is the origin of suffering”…“This is the cessation of suffering”…“This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.”
I directly knew: ‘Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.’
I directly knew: ‘Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.’ 
I directly knew: “Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.”
I do not advise or blame them about such matters but merely live on food and clothing.
I do not call a bhikkhu easy to admonish who is easy to admonish and makes himself easy to admonish only for the sake of getting robes, almsfood, a resting place, and medicinal requisites.
I do not know how to climb a tree, so let me cut this tree down at its root, eat as much fruit as I want, and fill my bag.’
I do not know these, I do not see these, therefore these do not exist.’
I do not praise the wrong way of practice on the part either of a householder or one gone forth; for whether it be a householder or one gone forth, one who has entered on the wrong way of practice, by reason of his wrong way of practice, is not accomplishing the true way, the Dhamma that is wholesome.
I do not remember, I was mad when I did that.’
I do not say of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence.
I do not say of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence.
I do not say that one is better because one is of great beauty, nor do I say that one is worse because one is of great beauty.
I do not say that one is better because one is of great wealth, nor do I say that one is worse because one is of great wealth.
I do not say that there is the development of mindfulness of breathing for one who is forgetful, who is not fully aware.
I do not see any other assembly elsewhere with such concord.
I do not see anyone who could equal me in strength.”
I dwelt pursuing the practice of bathing in water three times daily including the evening.
I follow here BBS and SBJ, which add the qualification “wise” to the phrase “recluses and brahmins”.
I go along with Ñā˚ananda in taking sankhā to mean concept or notion rather than portion.
I go now to the city of Kāsi
I go to beat the drum of the Deathless.’
I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
I go to Master Kaccāna for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
I go to Master Udena for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
I go to the Blessed One for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
I go to the Blessed One for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
I had three palaces, one for the rainy season, one for the winter, and one for the summer.
I had to ask the name and clan of a woman or a man, that is why I asked.
I had to ask the name of a village or a town and the way to go there, that is why I asked.’
I had to be bitten by a dog, that is why I was bitten.
I had to get no almsfood, that is why I did not get any.
I had to meet with a wild elephant, a wild horse, a wild bull, that is why I met with them.
I have attained the triple knowledge
I have been an ascetic—a supreme ascetic; I have been coarse—supremely coarse; I have been scrupulous—supremely scrupulous; I have been secluded—supremely secluded.
I have done what is evil, I have done what is cruel, I have done what is wicked.
I have done what is good, I have done what is wholesome, I have made myself a shelter from anguish.
I have enjoyed human sensual pleasures; now it is time to seek divine sensual pleasures.
I have enough.
I have gone forth under that Blessed One; that Blessed One is my teacher; I profess the Dhamma of that Blessed One.”
I have heard this, venerable sir: ‘Brahmā abides in equanimity.’
I have heard this, venerable sir: ‘Brahmā abides in loving-kindness.’
I have no teacher, and one like me
I have not heard and learned this from the Blessed One’s own lips, prince, but it is possible that the Blessed One would answer as I have stated.”
I have stated that sensual pleasures provide little gratification, much suffering and despair, and that the danger in them is still more.
I have stated that sensual pleasures provide little gratification, much suffering and despair, and that the danger in them is still more.
I have stated two kinds of feeling in one presentation; I have stated three kinds of feeling in another presentation; I have stated five kinds of feeling in another presentation; I have stated six kinds of feeling in another presentation; I have stated eighteen kinds of feeling in another presentation; I have stated thirty-six kinds of feeling in another presentation; I have stated one hundred and eight kinds of feeling in another presentation.
I have thought: ‘Surely these venerable ones are leading the holy life in discontent, or they have done some evil deed and are concealing it, so lean and wretched are they…such that people would not want to look at them again.’
I have thought: ‘Surely these venerable ones perceive successive states of lofty distinction in the Blessed One’s Dispensation, since they abide thus smiling and cheerful…with mind as a wild deer’s.’
I have to feel that pain alone.”
I have vanquished all evil states, Therefore, Upaka, I am a victor.’
I have wondered, venerable sir, what state is still unabandoned by me internally, owing to which at times these states of greed, hate, and delusion invade my mind and remain.” 
I heard and learned this from my mother’s lips: There was an occasion when the Blessed One was living at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park.
I hold that it is good to see that Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened.’
I hold that it is good to see that Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened.’
I hold that it is good to see that Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened.’
I hold that it is good to see that Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened.’
I hold that it is good to see that Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened.’
I hope I explained in accordance with the Dhamma in such a way that nothing which provides a ground for censure can be legitimately deduced from my assertion.” 
I hope that you all abide diligent, ardent, and resolute.”
I hope that you all abide diligent, ardent, and resolute.” 
I hope your painful feelings are subsiding and not increasing, and that their subsiding, not their increase, is apparent.”
I hope your painful feelings are subsiding and not increasing, and that their subsiding, not their increase, is apparent.”
I hope your painful feelings are subsiding and not increasing, and that their subsiding, not their increase, is apparent.”
I hurt no living being at all.
I instituted that good practice and later generations continued that good practice instituted by me.
I instruct him, I teach him the Dhamma in such a way that by practising as instructed he will soon know and see for himself: ‘Thus, indeed, there rightly comes to be liberation from the bond, that is, from the bond of ignorance.’
I keep going to the charnel ground and crying: ‘My only son, where are you?
I kept to one house, to one morsel; I kept to two houses, to two morsels;…I kept to seven houses, to seven morsels.
I knew, Ānanda, that this misguided man Udāyin would unduly interfere right now.
I know how to climb a tree, so let me climb this tree, eat as much fruit as I want, and fill my bag.’
I lived in the rains’ palace for the four months of the rainy season, enjoying myself with musicians, none of whom were men, and I did not go down to the lower palace.
I lived on forest roots and fruits; I fed on fallen fruits.
I lived on one saucerful a day, on two saucerfuls a day…on seven saucerfuls a day; I took food once a day, once every two days…once every seven days; thus even up to once every fortnight, I dwelt pursuing the practice of taking food at stated intervals.
I maintain bodily acts of loving-kindness towards these venerable ones both openly and privately; I maintain verbal acts of loving-kindness towards them both openly and privately; I maintain mental acts of loving-kindness towards them both openly and privately.
I maintain bodily acts of loving-kindness towards those venerable ones both openly and privately; I maintain verbal acts of loving-kindness towards them both openly and privately; I maintain mental acts of loving-kindness towards them both openly and privately.
I may clash with these two, and when there is a clash, there are disputes; when there are disputes, there are quarrels; when there are quarrels, there is vexation.’
I may clash with these two, and when there is a clash, there are disputes; when there are disputes, there are quarrels; when there are quarrels, there is vexation.’
I may clash with these two, and when there is a clash, there are disputes; when there are disputes, there are quarrels; when there are quarrels, there is vexation.’
I placed confidence in the Teacher thus: ʺThe Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha is Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha is practising the good way.”’
I praise the right way of practice on the part either of a householder or one gone forth; for whether it be a householder or one gone forth, one who has entered on the right way of practice, by reason of his right way of practice, is accomplishing the true way, the Dhamma that is wholesome.”
I recall, Master Gotama, engaging Makkhali Gosāla…Ajita Kesakambalin…Pakudha Kaccāyana…Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta… the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta in debate, and then he prevaricated, led the talk aside, and showed anger, hate, and bitterness.
I recall, Master Gotama, engaging Pūraṇa Kassapa in debate, and then he prevaricated, led the talk aside, and showed anger, hate, and bitterness.
I recollected my manifold past lives, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many aeons of world-contraction, many aeons of world-expansion, many aeons of world-contraction and expansion: ‘There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my nutriment, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life-term; and passing away from there, I reappeared elsewhere; and there too I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my nutriment, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life-term; and passing away from there, I reappeared here.’
I recollected my manifold past lives, that is, one birth, two births……Thus with their aspects and particulars I recollected my manifold past lives.
I regard the ear…the nose…the tongue…the body…the mind, mind-consciousness, and things cognizable through mind-consciousness thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’”
I remember adherence to rules and observances as a lower fetter taught by the Blessed One.
I remember doubt as a lower fetter taught by the Blessed One.
I remember ill will as a lower fetter taught by the Blessed One.
I remember sensual desire as a lower fetter taught by the Blessed One.
I replied to the brahmin Gopaka Moggallāna: ‘There is no single bhikkhu, brahmin, who possesses in each and every way all those qualities that were possessed by the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened.
I replied to the Ājīvaka Upaka in stanzas:
I resort to remote jungle-thicket resting places in the forest as one of the noble ones possessed of wisdom.’
I resort to remote jungle-thicket resting places in the forest as one of the noble ones with bodily conduct purified.’
I resort to remote jungle-thicket resting places in the forest as one of the noble ones with livelihood purified.’
I saw them coming in the distance and said to the venerable Ānanda: ‘Let the venerable Ānanda come, welcome to the venerable Ānanda…Friend Ānanda, the Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood is delightful…What kind of bhikkhu, friend Ānanda, could illuminate this Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood?’
I say of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence.
I say of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence.
I say of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence.
I say of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence.
I say of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence.
I say of this kind of pleasure that it should be pursued, that it should be developed, that it should be cultivated, and that it should not be feared.
I say of this kind of pleasure that it should be pursued, that it should be developed, that it should be cultivated, that it should not be feared.
I say of this kind of pleasure that it should not be pursued, that it should not be developed, that it should not be cultivated, and that it should be feared.
I say of this kind of pleasure that it should not be pursued, that it should not be developed, that it should not be cultivated, that it should be feared.
I say that meat may be eaten in these three instances.
I say that meat should not be eaten in these three instances.
I say that on their part this is an abiding in delusion.
I say that such a bhikkhu’s going forth is comparable to that.
I say that there are three instances in which meat may be eaten: when it is not seen, not heard, and not suspected.
I say that this is a certain body among the bodies, namely, in-breathing and out-breathing.
I say that this is a certain feeling among the feelings, namely, giving close attention to in-breathing and out-breathing.
I say that this person is like the man needing heartwood, who came to a great tree standing possessed of heartwood, and passing over its heartwood, its sapwood, its inner bark, and its outer bark, cut off its twigs and leaves and took them away thinking they were heartwood; and so whatever it was he had to make with heartwood, his purpose will not have been served.
I say that this person is like the man needing heartwood…who passing over its heartwood and its sapwood, cut off its inner bark and took it away thinking it was heartwood; and so whatever it was he had to make with heartwood, his purpose will not have been served.
I say that this person is like the man needing heartwood…who passing over its heartwood, cut off its sapwood and took it away thinking it was heartwood; and so whatever it was he had to make with heartwood, his purpose will not have been served.
I say that this person is like the man needing heartwood…who passing over its heartwood, its sapwood, and its inner bark, cut off its outer bark and took it away thinking it was heartwood; and so whatever it was he had to make with heartwood, his purpose will not have been served.
I say, it must be understood thus: ‘These are unwholesome habits,’ and thus: ‘Unwholesome habits originate from this,’ and thus: ‘Unwholesome habits cease without remainder here,’ and thus: ‘One practising in this way is practising the way to the cessation of unwholesome habits.’
I see other beings who are not free from lust for sensual pleasures being devoured by craving for sensual pleasures, burning with fever for sensual pleasures, indulging in sensual pleasures, and I do not envy them nor do I delight therein.
I see other beings who are not free from lust for sensual pleasures being devoured by craving for sensual pleasures, burning with fever for sensual pleasures, indulging in sensual pleasures, and I do not envy them, nor do I delight therein.
I see the difference in this last case, but I see no difference in either of the former cases.”
I shall be at the root of that tree for the day’s abiding.
I shall govern.’
I shall instruct you, I shall teach you the Dhamma.
I shall instruct you, I shall teach you the Dhamma.
I shall make it rustle and crackle.’
I shall provide robes, almsfood, resting place, and medicinal requisites for the noble lord Gagga Mantāṇiputta.”
I shall put him down, venerable sir.”
I shall question the bhikkhus on this matter.”
I shall question the bhikkhus on this matter.”
I shall recite it to you, bhikkhus.
I shall refute the Blessed One’s doctrine in my own house tomorrow.”
I shall send a chariot harnessed to a thousand thoroughbreds for you, great king.
I shall shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness.
I shall sit here next to the recluse Gotama.”
I shall so act that doubt will not arise in me again.’
I shall so act that neither doubt nor inattention nor sloth and torpor will arise in me again.’
I shall so act that neither doubt nor inattention will arise in me again.’
I shall so act that neither doubt nor inattention…nor deficiency of energy nor longing will arise in me again.’
I shall so act that neither doubt nor inattention…nor elation nor inertia will arise in me again.’
I shall so act that neither doubt nor inattention…nor longing nor perception of diversity will arise in me again.’
I shall so act that neither doubt nor inattention…nor perception of diversity nor excessive meditation upon forms will arise in me again.’
I shall take care of your monetary affairs.’
I shall teach you the Dhamma, brahmin.
I shall teach you the Dhamma: When this exists, that comes to be; with the arising of this, that arises.
I shall teach you the Dhamma: When this exists, that comes to be; with the arising of this, that arises.
I shall tell you, bhikkhus, the names of the paccekabuddhas, I shall relate to you the names of the paccekabuddhas, I shall teach you the names of the paccekabuddhas.
I shall use the knife, friend Sāriputta; I have no desire to live.”
I shall wait here at S̄āvatthī for the Komudī full moon of the fourth month.” 
I soon quickly learned that Dhamma.
I soon quickly learned that Dhamma.
I still do not see two of these
I take the pattern to represent the diverse ways in which the ordinary person attempts to give positive being to his imagined sense of egohood by positing,below the threshold of reflection, a relationship between himself as the subject of cognition and the perceived phenomenon as its object.
I tell you this as something that I have actually known, seen, and discovered by myself.” 
I thought, venerable sir: ‘Let no dispute arise in the Sangha when the Blessed One has gone.
I thought: ‘I am not afraid of that pleasure since it has nothing to do with sensual pleasures and unwholesome states.’ 
I thought: ‘It is wonderful, it is marvellous how an assembly can be so well disciplined without force or weapon!’ Indeed, I do not see any other assembly elsewhere so well disciplined.
I thought: ‘It is wonderful, it is marvellous!
I thought: ‘Uddaka Rāmaputta’s loss is a great one.
I thought: ‘What is the cause and condition for this?’
I thought: ‘What is the cause and condition for this?’
I thought: ‘What is the cause and condition why the light and the vision of forms have disappeared?’
I thought: ‘What is the cause and condition why the light and the vision of forms have disappeared?’
I thought: ‘What now if this is the fear and dread coming?’
I thought: ‘Why do I dwell always expecting fear and dread?
I thought: ‘Āḷāra Kālāmaʹs loss is a great one.
I too do not see any doctrine of self that would not arouse sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair in one who clings to it.
I too do not see any possession that is permanent, everlasting, eternal, not subject to change, and that might endure as long as eternity.
I too do not see any support of views that would not arouse sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair in one who takes it as a support.
I too have faith, energy, mindfulness, concentration, and wisdom.
I too have faith, energy, mindfulness, concentration, and wisdom.
I too have never seen or heard of a king or a king’s minister enjoying himself, provided and endowed with the five cords of sensual pleasure who, without abandoning craving for sensual pleasures, without removing fever for sensual pleasures, was able to abide free from thirst, with a mind inwardly at peace, or who is able or who will be able to so abide.
I understand Brahmā, student, and I understand the Brahma-world, and I understand the way leading to the Brahma-world, and I understand how one should practise to reappear in the Brahma-world.” 
I understand how beings pass on according to their actions thus: ‘These worthy beings who were well conducted in body, speech, and mind, not revilers of noble ones, right in their views, giving effect to right views in their actions, on the dissolution of the body, after death, have reappeared in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
I understand the detailed meaning of it to be as follows.
I understand the detailed meaning of this summary to be thus.
I understand this consciousness to be, not Nibbāna itself, but the arahant’s consciousness during the meditative experience of Nibb̄na.
I understand this Dhamma and Discipline.
I understand this Dhamma and Discipline.
I understood how beings pass on according to their actions thus: ‘These worthy beings who were ill conducted in body, speech, and mind, revilers of noble ones, wrong in their views, giving effect to wrong view in their actions, on the dissolution of the body, after death, have reappeared in a state of deprivation, in a bad destination, in perdition, even in hell; but these worthy beings who were well conducted in body, speech, and mind, not revilers of noble ones, right in their views, giving effect to right view in their actions, on the dissolution of the body, after death, have reappeared in a good destination, even in the heavenly world.’
I understood thus: ‘This thought of cruelty has arisen in me.
I understood thus: ‘This thought of non-cruelty has arisen in me.
I understood thus: ‘This thought of renunciation has arisen in me.
I understood thus: ‘This thought of sensual desire has arisen in me.
I was an eater of greens or millet or wild rice or hide-parings or moss or ricebran or rice-scum or sesamum flour or grass or cowdung.
I was full of pity even in regard to a drop of water thus: ‘Let me not hurt the tiny creatures in the crevices of the ground.’
I was joking, I was raving, when I said that I did not remember having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat.’
I was King Makhādeva on that occasion.
I was one who pulled out hair and beard, pursuing the practice of pulling out hair and beard.
I was one who squatted continuously, devoted to maintaining the squatting position.
I was one who stood continuously, rejecting seats.
I was one who used a mattress of spikes; I made a mattress of spikes my bed.
I was the brahmin student Jotipāla on that occasion.”
I went up to them and asked: ‘Why are you venerable ones so lean and wretched…such that people would not want to look at you again?’
I will not cling to the world beyond, and my consciousness will not be dependent on the world beyond.’
I will rest it.”
I wish to see the venerable Ānanda.” “The venerable Ānanda is living at Beluvagāmaka near Vesālī, householder.”
I wish to shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness.
I would receive the full admission.”
I would receive the going forth under Master Gotama, I would receive the full admission.” 
I would receive the going forth under Master Gotama, I would receive the full admission.” 
I would receive the going forth under Master Gotama.
I would receive the going forth under the Blessed One, I would receive the full admission.”
I would receive the going forth under the Blessed One, I would receive the full admission.”
I would receive the going forth under the Blessed One, venerable sir, I would receive the full admission.”
If a bhikkhu delights in them, welcomes them, and remains holding to them, delight arises in him.
If a bhikkhu delights in them, welcomes them, and remains holding to them, delight arises in him.
If a bhikkhu does not delight in them, welcome them, and remain holding to them, delight ceases in him.
If a bhikkhu is absorbed in speculation about the other world, then his mind is obsessed.
If a bhikkhu is absorbed in speculation about this world, then his mind is obsessed.
If a bhikkhu is obsessed by sensual lust, then his mind is obsessed.
If a bhikkhu of middle status dies with his taints destroyed, then he is considered a bhikkhu of middle status who has died a tamed death.
If a bhikkhu of middle status dies with his taints undestroyed, then he is considered a bhikkhu of middle status who has died an untamed death.
If a bhikkhu remembers an offence or a transgression while the Pātimokkha is being recited, we make him act in accordance with the Dhamma, in accordance with the instructions.
If a bhikkhu takes to quarrelling and brawling and is deep in disputes, stabbing others with verbal daggers, then his mind is obsessed.
If a brahmin prospers in wealth, grain, silver, or gold, will there be brahmins who rise before him and retire after him, who are eager to serve him, who seek to please him and speak sweetly to him, and will there also be merchants, workers, and nobles who do likewise?”
If a fool is seated in an assembly or along a street or in a square and people there are discussing certain pertinent and relevant matters, then, if the fool is one who kills living beings, takes what is not given, misconducts himself in sensual pleasures, speaks falsehood, and indulges in wine, liquor, and intoxicants, which are the basis of negligence, he thinks: ‘These people are discussing certain pertinent and relevant matters; these things are found in me, and I am seen engaging in those things.’
If a fool were not so, how would the wise know him thus: ‘This person is a fool, an untrue man’?
If a man, scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came from the east or from the west or from the north or from the south or from where you will, having come upon the pond he would quench his thirst and his hot-weather fever.
If a merchant prospers in wealth, grain, silver, or gold, will there be merchants who rise before him and retire after him, who are eager to serve him, who seek to please him and speak sweetly to him, and will there also be workers, nobles, and brahmins who do likewise?”
If a newly ordained bhikkhu dies with his taints destroyed, then he is considered a newly ordained bhikkhu who has died a tamed death.”
If a newly ordained bhikkhu dies with his taints undestroyed, then he is considered a newly ordained bhikkhu who has died an untamed death.
If a noble prospers in wealth, grain, silver, or gold, will there be nobles who rise before him and retire after him, who are eager to serve him, who seek to please him and speak sweetly to him, and will there also be brahmins, merchants, and workers who do likewise?”
If a wise man is seated in an assembly or along a street or in a square and people there are discussing certain pertinent and relevant matters, then, if the wise man is one who abstains from killing living beings, from taking what is not given, from misconduct in sensual pleasures, from false speech, from wine, liquor, and intoxicants, which are the basis of negligence, he thinks: ‘These people are discussing certain pertinent and relevant matters; those things are not found in me, and I am not seen engaging in them.’
If a wise man were not so, how would the wise know him thus: ‘This person is a wise man, a true man’?
If a worker prospers in wealth, grain, silver, or gold, will there be workers who rise before him and retire after him, who are eager to serve him, who seek to please him and speak sweetly to him, and will there also be nobles, brahmins, and merchants who do likewise?” “There will be, Master Kaccāna.”
If all brahmins…all merchants… all workers were to be converted by this conversion, it would lead to the welfare and happiness of the workers for a long time.
If all brahmins…all merchants…all workers should remember those three clansmen with confident heart, that would lead to the welfare and happiness of the workers for a long time.
If all brahmins…all merchants…all workers understood thus the meaning of my utterance, which I spoke in brief, it would lead to their welfare and happiness for a long time.
If all nobles should remember those three clansmen with confident heart, that would lead to the welfare and happiness of the nobles for a long time.
If all nobles were to be converted by this conversion, it would lead to the welfare and happiness of the nobles for a long time.
If an iron spike were stuck in a man’s throat, he would not be able either to throw it up or to gulp it down; so too, prince, when the recluse Gotama is posed this two-horned question by you, he will not be able either to throw it up or to gulp it down.”
If any Nigaṇṭha comes, then tell him thus: ‘Wait, venerable sir, do not enter.
If any recluse or brahmin thinks that this Dhamma discourse on the Great Forty should be censured and rejected, then these are ten legitimate deductions from his assertions that would provide grounds for censuring him here and now.
If any recluses or brahmins describe the entering upon this base to come about through a measure of formations regarding what is seen, heard, sensed, and cognized, that is declared to be a disaster for entering upon this base.
If anyone should develop these four foundations of mindfulness in such a way for seven days, one of two fruits could be expected for him: either final knowledge here and now, or if there is a trace of clinging left, non-return.
If anyone should develop these four foundations of mindfulness in such a way for seven months…for six months…for five months…for four months…for three months…for two months…for one month…for half a month, one of two fruits could be expected for him: either final knowledge here and now, or if there is a trace of clinging left, non-return.
If anyone should develop these four foundations of mindfulness in such a way for six years…for five years…for four years…for three years…for two years…for one year, one of two fruits could be expected for him: either final knowledge here and now, or if there is a trace of clinging left, non-return.
If anyone, when asked a reasonable question up to the third time by the Tathāgata, still does not answer, his head splits into seven pieces there and then.”
If change and alteration took place in Kāsi and Kosala, would sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair arise in you?”
If change and alteration took place in Princess Vajīrī, would sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair arise in you?”
If faith does not arise, one will not visit him; but because faith arises, one visits him.
If he agrees, then stay as long as you like, venerable sir.” 
If he declares to me either ‘the world is eternal’ or ‘the world is not eternal’…or ‘after death a Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist,’ then I will lead the holy life under him; if he does not declare these to me, then I will abandon the training and return to the low life.” 
If he does not guard the doors of his sense faculties, there will be those who would say of him: ‘What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since he does not guard the doors of his sense faculties?’
If he enters the village too early and returns late in the day, there will be those who would say of him: ‘What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since he enters the village too early and returns late in the day?’
If he feels a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, he understands: ‘It is impermanent; there is no holding to it; there is no delight in it.’
If he feels a painful feeling, he understands: ‘It is impermanent; there is no holding to it; there is no delight in it.’
If he frequently thinks and ponders thoughts of sensual desire.
If he frequently thinks and ponders upon thoughts of ill will…upon thoughts of cruelty, he has abandoned the thought of non-cruelty to cultivate the thought of cruelty, and then his mind inclines to thoughts of cruelty.
If he frequently thinks and ponders upon thoughts of non-ill will…upon thoughts of non-cruelty, he has abandoned the thought of cruelty to cultivate the thought of non-cruelty, and then his mind inclines to thoughts of non-cruelty.
If he frequently thinks and ponders upon thoughts of renunciation, he has abandoned the thought of sensual desire to cultivate the thought of renunciation, and then his mind inclines to thoughts of renunciation.
If he frequently thinks and ponders upon thoughts of sensual desire, he has abandoned the thought of renunciation to cultivate the thought of sensual desire, and then his mind inclines to thoughts of sensual desire.
If he goes before the meal or after the meal to visit families, there will be those who would say of him: ‘Surely this venerable forest-dweller, while dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, must be used to making untimely visits, since he behaves thus when he has come to the Sangha.’
If he had faith, he could achieve what can be achieved by one who has faith; if he was free from illness, he could achieve what can be achieved by one who is free from illness; if he was honest and sincere, he could achieve what can be achieved by one who is honest and sincere; if he was energetic, he could achieve what can be achieved by one who is energetic; if he was wise, he could achieve what can be achieved by one who is wise.
If he had heard this Dhamma, he would have understood it quickly.’
If he had heard this Dhamma, he would have understood it quickly.’
If he had no faith, he could not achieve what can be achieved by one who has faith; if he had much illness, he could not achieve what can be achieved by one who is free from illness; if he was fraudulent and deceitful, he could not achieve what can be achieved by one who is honest and sincere; if he was lazy, he could not achieve what can be achieved by one who is energetic; if he was not wise, he could not achieve what can be achieved by one who is wise.
If he had sat a while longer until I had expounded for him in detail these four kinds of persons, he would have greatly benefited.
If he is asked like this, he will answer like this, and so we will refute his doctrine in this way; and if he is asked like that, he will answer like that, and so we will refute his doctrine in that way.’
If he is asked like this, he will answer like this, and so we will refute his doctrine in this way; and if he is asked like that, he will answer like that, and so we will refute his doctrine in that way.’
If he is difficult to correct and associates with bad friends, there will be those who would say of him: ‘What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since he is difficult to correct and associates with bad friends?’
If he is disrespectful and undeferential towards his companions in the holy life, there will be those who would say of him: ‘What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since he is disrespectful and undeferential towards his companions in the holy life?’
If he is haughty and personally vain, there will be those who would say of him: ‘Surely this venerable forest-dweller, while dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, must generally be haughty and personally vain, since he behaves thus when he has come to the Sangha.’
If he is not concentrated, there will be those who would say of him: ‘What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since he is not concentrated?’
If he is not devoted to wakefulness, there will be those who would say of him: ‘What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since he is not devoted to wakefulness?’
If he is not energetic, there will be those who would say of him: ‘What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since he is lazy?’
If he is not moderate in eating, there will be those who would say of him: ‘What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since he is not moderate in eating?’
If he is not skilled in good behaviour regarding seats, there will be those who would say of him: ‘What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since he does not even know what pertains to good behaviour?’
If he is not wise, there will be those who would say of him: ‘What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since he is not wise?’
If he is obsessed by doubt, then his mind is obsessed.
If he is obsessed by ill will, then his mind is obsessed.
If he is obsessed by restlessness and remorse, then his mind is obsessed.
If he is obsessed by sloth and torpor, then his mind is obsessed.
If he is reborn in a clan of nobles, he is reckoned as a noble; if he is reborn in a clan of brahmins, he is reckoned as a brahmin; if he is reborn in a clan of merchants, he is reckoned as a merchant; if he is reborn in a clan of workers, he is reckoned as a worker.
If he is reborn…in a clan of workers, he is reckoned as a worker.
If he is rough-tongued and loose-spoken, there will be those who would say of him: ‘What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since he is rough-tongued and loose-spoken?’
If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints.
If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints.
If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints.
If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints.
If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints.
If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints.
If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints.
If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints.
If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints.
If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints.
If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints.
If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints.
If he is steady in that, he attains the destruction of the taints.
If he is unmindful, there will be those who would say of him: ‘What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since he is unmindful?’
If he lacks a proper attendant, I will attend on him.
If he lacks suitable food, I will go in search of suitable food for him.
If he lacks suitable medicine, I will go in search of suitable medicine for him.
If he likes, he may sit down.’
If he lives the home life he becomes a Wheel-turning Monarch, a righteous king who rules by the Dhamma, master of the four quarters, all-victorious, who has stabilised his country and possesses the seven treasures.
If he lives the home life, he becomes a Wheel-turning Monarch, a righteous king who rules by the Dhamma, master of the four quarters, all-victorious, who has stabilised his country and possesses the seven treasures.
If he should wish: ‘May I abide perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive and the repulsive,’ he abides perceiving the repulsive in that.
If he should wish: ‘May I abide perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,’ he abides perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive.
If he should wish: ‘May I abide perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive and the unrepulsive,’ he abides perceiving the unrepulsive in that.
If he should wish: ‘May I abide perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive,’ he abides perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive.
If he should wish: ‘May I, avoiding both the repulsive and unrepulsive, abide in equanimity, mindful and fully aware,’ he abides in equanimity towards that, mindful and fully aware.
If his consciousness follows after the equanimity…then his mind is called ‘stuck internally.’
If his consciousness follows after the neither-pain-nor-pleasure, is tied and shackled by gratification in the neither-pain-nor-pleasure, is fettered by the fetter of gratification in the neither-pain-nor-pleasure, then his mind is called ‘stuck internally.’
If his consciousness follows after the rapture and pleasure born of concentration…then his mind is called ‘stuck internally.’
If his consciousness follows after the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, is tied and shackled by gratification in the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, then his mind is called ‘stuck internally.’
If his consciousness is not distracted and scattered externally nor stuck internally, and if by not clinging he does not become agitated, then for him there is no origination of suffering—of birth, ageing, and death in the future,’ I understand the detailed meaning of this summary to be thus.
If his consciousness is not distracted and scattered externally nor stuck internally, and if by not clinging he does not become agitated, then for him there is no origination of suffering—of birth, ageing, and death in the future.”
If I can understand the meaning of his words, that will be good.
If I cannot understand the meaning, then I will leave it at that and I will not question him about it further.”
If I could not take it out at once, I would take his head in my left hand, and crooking a finger of my right hand, I would take it out even if it meant drawing blood.
If I think and ponder upon this thought even for a night, even for a day, even for a night and day, I see nothing to fear from it.
If I think and ponder upon this thought even for a night, even for a day, even for a night and day, I see nothing to fear from it.
If I were to adhere to my own views, hold on to them tenaciously, and relinquish them with difficulty, I would be displeasing and disagreeable to others.’
If I were to be arrogant, I would blame myself for this; the wise, having investigated, would censure me for this; and on the dissolution of the body, after death, because of being arrogant an unhappy destination would be expected.
If I were to direct this equanimity, so purified and bright, to the base of infinite consciousness…to the base of nothingness…to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception and to develop my mind accordingly, this would be conditioned.’
If I were to direct this equanimity, so purified and bright, to the base of infinite consciousness……to the base of nothingness…to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception and to develop my mind accordingly, then this equanimity of mine, supported by that base, clinging to it, would remain for a very long time.’
If I were to have evil wishes and be dominated by evil wishes, I would be displeasing and disagreeable to others.’
If I were to kill living beings, I would blame myself for doing so; the wise, having investigated, would censure me for doing so; and on the dissolution of the body, after death, because of killing living beings an unhappy destination would be expected.
If I were to teach the Dhamma, others would not understand me, and that would be wearying and troublesome for me.’
If I will hold to earth, I shall be close to you, within your domain, for you to work your will upon and punish.
If I will hold to water…to fire…to air…to beings…to gods…to Pajāpati…to Brahmā, I shall be close to you, within your domain, for you to work your will upon and punish.
If impediments still lurk in him, He is just one who says ‘Sir.’ 
If internally the eye is intact and external forms come into its range, but there is no corresponding engagement, then there is no manifestation of the corresponding section of consciousness.
If internally the mind is intact and external mind-objects come into its range, but there is no corresponding engagement, then there is no manifestation of the corresponding section of consciousness.
If it is approved by the Sangha, then for the good of these venerable ones and for my own good, in the midst of the Sangha I shall confess, by the method of covering over with grass, any offences of these venerable ones and any offences of my own, except for those which call for serious censure and those connected with the laity.’
If it is approved by the Sangha, then for the good of these venerable ones and for my own good, in the midst of the Sangha I shall confess, by the method of covering over with grass, any offences of these venerable ones and any offences of my own, except for those which call for serious censure and those connected with the laity.’ 
If nothing in the process of cognition is found to delight in, to welcome, or to hold to, the underlying tendencies of the defilements will come to an end.
If one can find a worthy friend, A virtuous, steadfast companion, Then overcome all threats of danger
If one does not apply one’s will, one will not scrutinise; but because one applies one’s will, one scrutinises.
If one does not arouse zeal, one will not apply one’s will; but because one arouses zeal, one applies one’s will.
If one does not examine their meaning, one will not gain a reflective acceptance of the teachings; but because one examines their meaning, one gains a reflective acceptance of the teachings.
If one does not gain a reflective acceptance of the teachings, zeal will not spring up; but because one gains a reflective acceptance of the teachings, zeal springs up.
If one does not give ear, one will not hear the Dhamma; but because one gives ear, one hears the Dhamma.
If one does not hear the Dhamma, one will not memorise the teachings; but because one hears the Dhamma, one memorises the teachings.
If one does not memorise a teaching, one will not examine its meaning; but because one memorises a teaching, one examines its meaning.”
If one does not pay respect, one will not give ear; but because one pays respect, one gives ear.
If one does not scrutinise, one will not strive; but because one scrutinises, one strives.
If one does not strive, one will not finally arrive at truth; but because one strives, one does finally arrive at truth.
If one does not visit, one will not pay respect to him; but because one visits, one pays respect to him.
If one sticks to the actual wording of the text it seems that Channa was already an arahant when he made his declaration, the dramatic punch being delivered by the failure of his two brother-monks to recognise this.
If one were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving gifts and making others give gifts, making offerings and making others make offerings, because of this there would be merit and the outcome of merit.
If one were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving gifts and making others give gifts, making offerings and making others make offerings, because of this there would be no merit and no outcome of merit.
If one were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving gifts and making others give gifts, making offerings and making others make offerings, because of this there would be no merit and no outcome of merit.
If one were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing and slaughtering, mutilating and making others mutilate, torturing and making others inflict torture, because of this there would be evil and the outcome of evil.
If one were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing and slaughtering, mutilating and making others mutilate, torturing and making others inflict torture, because of this there would be no evil and no outcome of evil.
If one were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing and slaughtering, mutilating and making others mutilate, torturing and making others inflict torture, because of this there would be no evil and no outcome of evil.
If only a householder or householder’s son might serve me with such good almsfood in the future!’ He does not think thus.
If only I could shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness!’ And being able to abandon his vast number of gold ingots, his vast number of granaries, his vast number of fields, his vast amount of land, his vast number of wives, and his vast number of men and women slaves, he is able to shave off his hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness.
If only I could shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness!’ But being unable to abandon his one dilapidated hovel open to the crows, not the best kind, and his one dilapidated wicker bedstead, not the best kind, and his grain and pumpkin seeds in a pot, not the best kind, and his hag of a wife, not the best kind, he is unable to shave off his hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness.
If only Master Gotama and bhikkhus were accomplished in this Dhamma, but no bhikkhunīs were accomplished, then this holy life would be deficient in that respect; but because Master Gotama, bhikkhus, and bhikkhunīs are accomplished in this Dhamma, this holy life is thus complete in that respect.
If only Master Gotama, bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs, and men lay followers clothed in white leading lives of celibacy were accomplished in this Dhamma, but no men lay followers clothed in white enjoying sensual pleasures were accomplished, then this holy life would be deficient in that respect; but because Master Gotama, bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs, and men lay followers clothed in white, both those leading lives of celibacy and those enjoying sensual pleasures, are accomplished in this Dhamma, this holy life is thus complete in that respect.
If only Master Gotama, bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs, and men lay followers clothed in white…were accomplished in this Dhamma, but no women lay followers clothed in white leading lives of celibacy were accomplished, then this holy life would be deficient in that respect; but because Master Gotama, bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs, men lay followers clothed in white…and women lay followers clothed in white leading lives of celibacy are accomplished in this Dhamma, this holy life is thus complete in that respect.
If only Master Gotama, bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs, men lay followers clothed in white…and women lay followers clothed in white leading lives of celibacy were accomplished in this Dhamma, but no women lay followers clothed in white enjoying sensual pleasures were accomplished, then this holy life would be deficient in that respect; but because Master Gotama, bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs, men lay followers clothed in white, both those leading lives of celibacy and those enjoying sensual pleasures, and women lay followers clothed in white, both those leading lives of celibacy and those enjoying sensual pleasures, are accomplished in this Dhamma, this holy life is thus complete in that respect.
If only Master Gotama, bhikkhus, and bhikkhunīs were accomplished in this Dhamma, but no men lay followers clothed in white leading lives of celibacy were accomplished, then this holy life would be deficient in that respect; but because Master Gotama, bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs, and men lay followers clothed in white leading lives of celibacy are accomplished in this Dhamma, this holy life is thus complete in that respect.
If others abuse, revile, scold, and harass the Tathāgata for that, the Tathāgata on that account feels no annoyance, bitterness, or dejection of the heart.
If others honour, respect, revere, and venerate the Tathāgata for that, the Tathāgata on that account thinks thus: ‘They perform such services as these for me in regard to this which earlier was fully understood.ʹ 
If others honour, respect, revere, and venerate you, on that account you should think thus: ‘They perform such services as these for us in regard to this which earlier was fully understood.’
If people carried off the grass, sticks, branches, and leaves in this Jeta Grove, or burned them, or did what they liked with them, would you think: ‘People are carrying us off or burning us or doing what they like with us’?”—“No, venerable sir.
If someone with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, should see beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate…and understand how beings pass on according to their actions, then either he might ask me a question about the future or I might ask him a question about the future, and he might satisfy my mind with his answer to my question or I might satisfy his mind with my answer to his question.
If such occurs to you, bhikkhus, it is proper to speak.
If such occurs to you, bhikkhus, it is proper to speak.
If such occurs to you, bhikkhus, it is proper to speak.
If such occurs to you, bhikkhus, it is proper to speak.
If that first man who had climbed the tree doesn’t come down quickly, when the tree falls, wouldn’t he break his hand or his foot or some other part of his body, so that he might incur death or deadly suffering because of that?”
If that is so, did the statement made by the brahmin Pokkharasāti accord with worldly convention or flaunt worldly convention?”—“It flaunted worldly convention, Master Gotama.”—“Was the statement made thoughtful or thoughtless?”—“Thoughtless, Master Gotama.”—“Was the statement made after reflecting or without reflecting?”—“Without reflecting, Master Gotama.”—“Was the statement made beneficial or unbeneficial?”—“Unbeneficial, Master Gotama.” 
If that is so, isn’t what you say empty and false?” 
If that is so, then are these four castes all the same, or are they not, or how does it appear to you in this case?”
If that is so, then are these four castes all the same, or are they not, or how does it appear to you in this case?”
If that is so, then are these four castes all the same, or are they not, or how does it appear to you in this case?” 
If that is so, then are these four castes all the same, or are they not, or how does it appear to you in this case?” 
If that is so, then are these four castes all the same, or are they not, or how does it appear to you in this case?” 
If that man does not quickly let go of that blazing grass torch, wouldn’t that blazing grass torch burn his hand or his arm or some other part of his body, so that he might incur death or deadly suffering because of that?”
If that vulture, heron, or hawk does not quickly let go of that piece of meat, wouldn’t it incur death or deadly suffering because of that?”
If that were so, carpenter, then a young tender infant lying prone is accomplished in what is wholesome…according to the wanderer Uggāhamāna’s statement.
If that worthy one censures right intention, then he would honour and praise those recluses and brahmins who are of wrong intention.
If that worthy one censures right speech… right action…right livelihood…right effort…right mindfulness…right concentration…right knowledge…right deliverance, then he would honour and praise those recluses and brahmins who are of wrong deliverance.
If that worthy one censures right view, then he would honour and praise those recluses and brahmins who are of wrong view.
If the Blessed One does not know either ‘after death a Tathāgata both exists and does not exist’ or ‘after death a Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist,’ then it is straightforward for one who does not know and does not see to say: ‘I do not know, I do not see.’”
If the Blessed One does not know either ‘the world is eternal’ or ‘the world is not eternal,’ then it is straightforward for one who does not know and does not see to say: ‘I do not know, I do not see.’
If the Blessed One had described purification of mind … purification of view … purification by over coming doubt…purification by knowledge and vision of what is the path doubt...purification by knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not the path…purification by knowledge and vision of the way…purification by knowledge and vision as final Nibbāna without clinging, he would have described what is still accompanied by clinging as final Nibbāna without clinging.
If the Blessed One knows ‘the world is eternal,’ let the Blessed One declare to me ‘the world is eternal’; if the Blessed One knows ‘the world is not eternal,’ let the Blessed One declare to me ‘the world is not eternal.’
If the king’s elephant dies when middle-aged untamed and undisciplined, then he is considered a middle-aged elephant that has died an untamed death.
If the king’s elephant dies when middle-aged well tamed and well disciplined, then he is considered a middle-aged elephant that has died a tamed death.
If the king’s elephant dies when young untamed and undisciplined, then he is considered a young elephant that has died an untamed death.
If the king’s elephant dies when young well tamed and well disciplined, then he is considered a young elephant that has died a tamed death.
If the recluse Gotama maintains before me what the venerable Dīgha Tapassī made him maintain, then just as a strong man might seize a long-haired ram by the hair and drag him to and drag him fro and drag him round about, so in debate I will drag the recluse Gotama to and drag him fro and drag him round about.
If the recluse Gotama maintains before me what was maintained before me by one of his famous disciples, the bhikkhu named Assaji, then just as a strong man might seize a long-haired ram by the hair and drag him to and drag him fro and drag him round about, so in debate I will drag the recluse Gotama to and drag him fro and drag him round about.
If the recluse Gotama, on being asked thus, answers: ‘The Tathāgata, prince, would utter speech that would be unwelcome and disagreeable to others,’ then say to him: ‘Then, venerable sir, what is the difference between you and an ordinary person?
If the Recluse knew, would he censure that?’
If the Recluse knew, would he censure that?’
If the Tathāgata guides disciples he is such, Evil One, and if the Tathāgata does not guide disciples he is such.
If the Tathāgata teaches the Dhamma to disciples he is such, Evil One, and if the Tathāgata does not teach the Dhamma to disciples he is such.
If the world with its gods, its Māras, and its Brahmās, this generation with its recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people, understood thus the detailed meaning of my utterance, which I spoke in brief, it would lead to the welfare and happiness of the world for a long time.” 
If the world with its gods, its Māras, and its Brahmās, this generation with its recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people, were to be converted by this conversion, it would lead to the welfare and happiness of the world for a long time.
If the world with its gods, its Māras, and its Brahmās, this generation with its recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people, should remember those three clansmen with confident heart, that would lead to the welfare and happiness of the world for a long time.
If they abuse and threaten you, what will you think then?”
If they are too heavy for him, he calls someone else by a signal of the hand and they move it by joining hands, but because of this we do not break out into speech.
If they are too heavy for him, he calls someone else by a signal of the hand and they move it by joining hands, but because of this we do not break out into speech.
If they get no opportunity to see the Blessed One, there may take place in them some change or alteration.
If they get no opportunity to see the Blessed One, there may take place in them some change or alteration.
If they get no opportunity to see the Blessed One, there may take place in them some change or alteration.
If this good teacher’s words are true, then both of us are exactly equal here, we stand on the same level: I who have not practised here and he who has practised it; I who have not lived here and he who has lived it.
If this good teacher’s words are true, then both of us are exactly equal here, we stand on the same level: I who have not practised here and he who has practised it; I who have not lived here and he who has lived it.
If this good teacher’s words are true, then both of us are exactly equal here, we stand on the same level: I who have not practised here and he who has practised it; I who have not lived here and he who has lived it.
If this good teacher’s words are true, then both of us are exactly equal here, we stand on the same level: I who have not practised here and he who has practised it; I who have not lived here and he who has lived it.
If those bhikkhus cannot settle that litigation in that dwelling place, they should go to a dwelling place where there is a greater number of bhikkhus.
If vital formations were things that can be felt, then a bhikkhu who has entered upon the cessation of perception and feeling would not be seen to emerge from it.
If we had known that this was the venerable Sāriputta, we should not have said so much.
If we heard that Master Gotama was within twenty leagues…thirty leagues…forty leagues…fifty leagues…a hundred leagues, we would go a hundred leagues in order to see that Master Gotama, accomplished and fully enlightened.
If we heard that that Blessed One was within twenty leagues…thirty leagues…forty leagues...fifty leagues...a hundred leagues, we would go a hundred leagues in order to see that Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened.
If what you said referred to that, then I allow it to you.”
If what you said referred to that, then I allow it to you.” 
If what you say is true, you are no longer a slave!”
If you are my heirs in material things, not my heirs in Dhamma, you will be reproached thus: ‘The Teacher’s disciples live as his heirs in material things, not as heirs in Dhamma’; and I will be reproached thus: ‘The Teacher’s disciples live as his heirs in material things, not as his heirs in Dhamma.’
If you bear a boy, then I will go to the market and buy a young male monkey and bring it back to you as a playmate for your little boy; but if you bear a girl, then I will go to the market and buy a young female monkey and bring it back to you as a playmate for your little girl.’
If you can understand the meaning of my words, that will be good.
If you do so, we shall infuse heavenly food into the pores of your skin and you will live on that.’
If you had asked me the meaning of this, I would have explained it to you in the same way that Mahā Kaccāna has explained it.
If you had asked me the meaning of this, I would have explained it to you in the same way that Mahā Kaccāna has explained it.
If you had asked me the meaning of this, I would have explained it to you in the same way that Mahā Kaccāna has explained it.
If you had asked me the meaning of this, I would have explained it to you in the same way that the bhikkhunī Dhammadinnā has explained it.
If you hold to water…to fire…to air…to beings…to gods…to Pajāpati…to Brahmā, you will be close to me, within my domain, for me to work my will upon and punish.’
If you knew that Blessed One’s virtue and wisdom, my dear sir, you would never think of abusing and reviling him.”
If you overstep the word of the Brahmā, bhikkhu, then, like a man using a stick to chase away the goddess of luck when she approaches, or like a man missing the earth with his hands and feet as he slips into a deep chasm, so it will befall you, bhikkhu.
If you were to see him thus, how would you treat him?”
If you will hold to earth, you will be close to me, within my domain, for me to work my will upon and punish.
If you wish, friend Visākha, go to the Blessed One and ask him about the meaning of this.
If, by reviewing, he knows thus: ‘On the path by which I went to the village for alms…there was desire, lust, hate, delusion, or aversion in my mind regarding mind-objects cognizable by the mind,’ then he should make an effort to abandon those evil unwholesome states.
If, by reviewing, he knows thus: ‘Serenity and insight are not developed in me,’ then he should make an effort to develop them.
If, by reviewing, he knows thus: ‘The five aggregates affected by clinging are not fully understood by me,’ then he should make an effort to fully understand those five aggregates affected by clinging.
If, by reviewing, he knows thus: ‘The five cords of sensual pleasure are not abandoned in me,’ then he should make an effort to abandon those five cords of sensual pleasure.
If, by reviewing, he knows thus: ‘The five hindrances are not abandoned in me,’ then he should make an effort to abandon those five hindrances.
If, by reviewing, he knows thus: ‘The four foundations of mindfulness are not developed in me,’ then he should make an effort to develop those four foundations of mindfulness.
If, by reviewing, he knows thus: ‘True knowledge and deliverance are not realised by me,’ then he should make an effort to realise true knowledge and deliverance.
If, by so reviewing, he knows thus: ‘On the path by which I went to the village for alms, or in the place where I wandered for alms, or on the path by which I returned from the almsround, there was desire, lust, hate, delusion, or aversion in my mind regarding forms cognizable by the eye,’ then he should make an effort to abandon those evil unwholesome states.
If, on reviewing his mind, the bhikkhu understands: ‘Mental excitement concerning a certain base among these five cords of sensual pleasure does arise in me,’ then he understands: ‘Desire and lust for the five cords of sensual pleasure are unabandoned in me.’
If, when he reviews himself, he knows: ‘I adhere to my own views…,’ then he should make an effort to abandon those evil unwholesome states.
If, when he reviews himself, he knows: ‘I have evil wishes, I am dominated by evil wishes,’ then he should make an effort to abandon those evil unwholesome states.
If, when so asked, he fails to reply, there will be those who would say of him: ‘What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since he does not even know the purpose for the sake of which he went forth?’
If, when so asked, he fails to reply, there will be those who would say of him: ‘What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since when he is asked a question about the higher Dhamma and the higher Discipline he fails to reply?’
If, when so asked, he fails to reply, there will be those who would say of him: ‘What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since when he is asked a question about those liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, he fails to reply?’
If, when they are asked thus, the Nigaṇṭhas admit this and say ‘Yes,’ I say to them:
If, while the Tathāgata is abiding thus, he is visited by bhikkhus or bhikkhunīs, by men or women lay followers, by kings or kings’ ministers, by other sectarians or their disciples, then with a mind leaning to seclusion, tending and inclining to seclusion, withdrawn, delighting in renunciation, and altogether done away with things that are the basis for taints, he invariably talks to them in a way concerned with dismissing them.
If, while you or your nurse were not attending to him, this child were to put a stick or a pebble in his mouth, what would you do to him?”
If, with a razor-rimmed wheel, one were to make the living beings on this earth into one mass of flesh, into one heap of flesh, because of this there would be evil and the outcome of evil.
If, with a razor-rimmed wheel, one were to make the living beings on this earth into one mass of flesh, into one heap of flesh, because of this there would be no evil and no outcome of evil.
If, with a razor-rimmed wheel, one were to make the living beings on this earth into one mass of flesh, into one heap of flesh, because of this there would be no evil and no outcome of evil.
If, without knowing and seeing, I were to take one side and declare: “Only this is true, anything else is wrong,” that would not be fitting for me.
If, without knowing and seeing, I were to take one side and declare: “Only this is true, anything else is wrong,” that would not be fitting for me.
Ignorance and craving for being.
Ignorance was banished and true knowledge arose, darkness was banished and light arose, as happens in one who abides diligent, ardent, and resolute.
Ignorance was banished and true knowledge arose, darkness was banished and light arose, as happens in one who abides diligent, ardent, and resolute.
Ignorance was banished and true knowledge arose, darkness was banished and light arose, as happens in one who abides diligent, ardent, and resolute.
Ignorance was banished and true knowledge arose, darkness was banished and light arose, as happens in one who abides diligent, ardent, and resolute.
Ignorance was banished and true knowledge arose, darkness was banished and light arose, as happens in one who abides diligent, ardent, and resolute.
Ignorance was banished and true knowledge arose, darkness was banished and light arose, as happens in one who abides diligent, ardent, and resolute.
Ignorance was banished and true knowledge arose, darkness was banished and light arose, as happens in one who abides diligent, ardent, and resolute.
Ill will…anger…resentment…contempt… insolence...envy...avarice...deceit...fraud...obstinacy...
Impure teachings devised by those still stained.
In a bhikkhu whose taints are destroyed, these are abandoned, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, done away with so that they are no longer subject to future arising.
In a bhikkhu whose taints are destroyed, these are abandoned, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, done away with so that they are no longer subject to future arising.
In a bhikkhu whose taints are destroyed, these are abandoned, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, done away with so that they are no longer subject to future arising.
In a penetrative study, Concept and Reality in Early Buddhism, Bhikkhu Ñā˚ananda explains papañca as “conceptual proliferation,” and I follow him in substituting “proliferation” for Ñm’s “diversification.”
In a world that has become blind
In A.ii he proceeds from the judgement that the view is actually wrong and elicits additional negative consequences of its adoption.
In actual fact, they ask the Blessed One to allow them to go forth from the home life into homelessness, and he gives them the going forth.
In actual fact, they ask the recluse Gotama to allow them to go forth from the home life into homelessness, and he gives them the going forth.
In actual fact, they become his disciples.
In actual fact, they become his disciples.
In an elephant wood there are small she-elephants that leave a big footprint, and this might be one of their footprints.
In an elephant wood there are tall she-elephants that have prominent teeth and leave a big footprint, and this might be one of their footprints.
In an elephant wood there are tall she-elephants that have tusks and leave a big footprint, and this might be one of their footprints.
In B.i the Buddha describes the wholesome influence of this view on conduct.
In B.ii he elicits additional positive consequences of adopting such a view.
In battle he would perform his task with his forefeet and his hindfeet, with his forequarters and his hindquarters, with his head and his ears, with his tusks and his tail, yet he would keep back his trunk.
In brief, “purification of virtue” is the unbroken adherence to the moral precepts one has undertaken, explained by Vsm with reference to the moral training of a bhikkhu as the “fourfold purification of virtue.” “Purification of mind” is the overcoming of the five hindrances through the attainment of access concentration and the jhānas.
In complex, intricate rhythms.
In craving’s utter destruction?’
In dependence on a contact to be felt as neither-painful-nor-pleasant there arises a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.
In dependence on a contact to be felt as painful there arises a painful feeling.
In dependence on a contact to be felt as pleasant there arises a pleasant feeling.
In earlier editions of this translation I translated in accordance with the BBS reading, but the PTS-SBJ reading now seems to me more probable.
In his case removal of litigation on account of memory should be pronounced.
In his case removal of litigation on account of past insanity should be pronounced.
In human bodies in themselves
In one of right view, right intention comes into being; in one of right intention, right speech comes into being; in one of right speech, right action comes into being; in one of right action, right livelihood comes into being; in one of right livelihood, right effort comes into being; in one of right effort, right mindfulness comes into being; in one of right mindfulness, right concentration comes into being; in one of right concentration, right knowledge comes into being; in one of right knowledge, right deliverance comes into being.
In one of right view, wrong view is abolished, and the many evil unwholesome states that originate with wrong view as condition are also abolished, and the many wholesome states that originate with right view as condition come to fulfilment by development.
In one who generates thus a longing for the supreme liberations, grief arises with that longing as condition.
In one who thus generates a longing for the supreme liberations, grief arises with that longing as condition.
In one who thus generates a longing for the supreme liberations, grief arises with that longing as condition.
In order to answer correctly he should answer thus.”
In pain and grief he abstains from taking what is not given…from misconduct in sensual pleasures…from speaking falsehood…from speaking maliciously…from speaking harshly…from gossiping…he is not covetous…he does not have a mind of ill will……he holds right view, and he experiences pain and grief that have right view as condition.
In pain and grief he takes what is not given…misconducts himself in sensual pleasures…speaks falsehood…speaks maliciously… speaks harshly…gossips…is covetous…has a mind of ill will…holds wrong view, and he experiences pain and grief that have wrong view as condition.
In pleasure and joy he abstains from taking what is not given…he holds right view, and he experiences pleasure and joy that have right view as condition.
In pleasure and joy he takes what is not given… …holds wrong view, and he experiences pleasure and joy that have wrong view as condition.
In recent days, venerable sir, when recluses and brahmins of various sects have been gathering together and sitting together in the debating hall, this topic has arisen: ‘It is a gain for the people of Anga and Magadha, it is a great gain for the people of Anga and Magadha that these recluses and brahmins, heads of orders, heads of groups, teachers of groups, well-known and famous founders of sects regarded by many as saints, have come to spend the Rains at Rājagaha.
In regard to the eye and forms that are presently arisen, one’s consciousness is bound up with desire and lust for that which is presently arisen.
In regard to the eye and forms that are presently arisen, one’s consciousness is not bound up with desire and lust for that which is presently arisen.
In reply he declared the base of nothingness.
In retrospect, I find this rendering far from satisfactory and thus here offer my own.
In Sudhamma Hall in heaven:
In that case, Sunakkhatta, though the Tathāgata has thought: ‘I should teach them the Dhamma,’ he changes his mind.” 
In that Hell of Excrement needle-mouthed creatures bore through his outer skin and bore through his inner skin and bore through his flesh and bore through his sinews and bore through his bones and devour his marrow.
In that war the gods won and the titans were defeated.
In that way he has full awareness of that.
In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view, whose view is straight, who has unwavering confidence in the Dhamma, and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view, whose view is straight, who has unwavering confidence in the Dhamma, and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view, whose view is straight, who has unwavering confidence in the Dhamma, and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view… and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view… and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma.”
In the Bhesakaḷā thicket
In the case of a bhikkhu who has entered upon the cessation of perception and feeling, his bodily formations have ceased and subsided, his verbal formations have ceased and subsided, his mental formations have ceased and subsided, but his vitality is not exhausted, his heat has not been dissipated, and his faculties become exceptionally clear.
In the case of mindfulness of breathing, an additional condition is the physiological apparatus of respiration.
in the description of empty space as an unsuitable medium for painting pictures; thus the idea seems to be that of not making manifest.
In the destruction of birth and death.
In the Dhamma well proclaimed by me thus, which is clear, open, evident, and free of patchwork, there is no round for manifestation in the case of thosebhikkhus who are arahants with taints destroyed, who have lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached their own goal, destroyed the fetters of being, and are completely liberated through final knowledge.
In the Dhamma well proclaimed by me thus, which is clear, open, evident, and free of patchwork, those who have sufficient faith in me, sufficient love for me, are all headed for heaven.” 
In the Dhamma well proclaimed by me thus, which is clear…free of patchwork, those bhikkhus who are Dhamma-followers or faith-followers are all headed for enlightenment.
In the Dhamma well proclaimed by me thus, which is clear…free of patchwork, those bhikkhus who have abandoned the five lower fetters are all due to reappear spontaneously and there attain final Nibbāna, without ever returning from that world.
In the Dhamma well proclaimed by me thus, which is clear…free of patchwork, those bhikkhus who have abandoned three fetters and attenuated lust, hate, and delusion are all once-returners, returning once to this world to make an end of suffering.
In the Dhamma well proclaimed by me thus, which is clear…free of patchwork, those bhikkhus who have abandoned three fetters are all stream-enterers, no longer subject to perdition, bound and headed for enlightenment.
In the first edition I followed Ñm in rendering bhaddekaratta as “one fortunate attachment.”
In the first watch of the night, while walking back and forth and sitting, he purifies his mind of obstructive states.
In the first watch of the night, while walking back and forth and sitting, purify your mind of obstructive states.
In the first watch of the night, while walking back and forth and sitting, purify your mind of obstructive states.
In the first watch of the night, while walking back and forth and sitting, we will purify our minds of obstructive states.
In the last month of the hot season I would dwell by day in the open and by night in the grove.
In the middle watch of the night he lies down on the right side in the lion’s pose with one foot overlapping the other, mindful and fully aware, after noting in his mind the time for rising.
In the middle watch of the night we will lie down on the right side in the lion’s pose with one foot overlapping the other, mindful and fully aware, after noting in our minds the time for rising.
In the middle watch of the night you should lie down on the right side in the lion’s pose with one foot overlapping the other, mindful and fully aware, after noting in your mind the time for rising.
In the middle watch of the night you should lie down on the right side in the lion’s pose with one foot overlapping the other, mindful and fully aware, after noting in your mind the time for rising.
In the morning he abides in whatever abiding or attainment he wants to abide in during the morning; at midday he abides in whatever abiding or attainment he wants to abide in at midday; in the evening he abides in whatever abiding or attainment he wants to abide in during the evening.
In the morning he abides in whatever abiding or attainment he wants to abide in during the morning; at midday he abides in whatever abiding or attainment he wants to abide in at midday; in the evening he abides in whatever abiding or attainment he wants to abide in during the evening.”
In the morning he could put on whatever pair of garments he wanted to put on in the morning; at midday he could put on whatever pair of garments he wanted to put on at midday; in the evening he could put on whatever pair of garments he wanted to put on in the evening.
In the morning…at midday…in the evening he abides in whatever abiding or attainment he wants to abide in during the evening.
In the noble truth of suffering, in the noble truth of the origin of suffering, in the noble truth of the cessation of suffering, and in the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering.
In the past, when one was touched by bodily painful feeling, one’s thighs would become rigid, one’s heart would burst, hot blood would gush from one’s mouth, and one would go mad, go out of one’s mind.
In the past, when one was touched by mental painful feeling, one’s thighs would become rigid, one’s heart would burst, hot blood would gush from one’s mouth, and one would go mad, go out of one’s mind.
In these seven nights, O Blessed One, We have been tamed in your teaching.
In this case bhikkhus consider thus: ‘Friends, this bhikkhu progresses by a measure of faith and love.
In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who abide devoted to the development of mindfulness of breathing.
In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who abide devoted to the development of the four right kinds of striving…of the four bases for spiritual power…of the five faculties…of the five powers…of the seven enlightenment factors…of the Noble Eightfold Path—such bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus.
In this way a bhikkhu has a comfortable abiding.
In this way a bhikkhunī has a comfortable abiding.
In this way he has full awareness of that.
In this way he has full awareness of that.
In this way he has full awareness of that.
In this way he has full awareness of that.
In this way he has full awareness of that.
In this way he has full awareness of that.
In this way he has full awareness of that.
In this way he has full awareness of that.
In this way he has full awareness of that.
In this way he has full awareness of that.
In this way he has full awareness of that.
In this way he has full awareness of that.
In this way let us discuss this matter.”
In this way ten thingsis are unwholesome and the other ten things are wholesome.
In this way three things are unwholesome and the other three things are wholesome.
In this way too a bhikkhu has a comfortable abiding.
In this way too a bhikkhu has a comfortable abiding.
In this way too a bhikkhu has a comfortable abiding.
In this way too a bhikkhunī has a comfortable abiding.
In this way too a man lay follower has a comfortable abiding.
In this way too a woman lay follower has a comfortable abiding.
In this way too, Bhāradvāja, there is the preservation of truth; in this way he preserves truth; in this way we describe the preservation of truth.
In this way we can discuss this matter.”
In this way, Bhāradvāja, there is the discovery of truth; in this way one discovers truth; in this way we describe the discovery of truth.
In this way, Bhāradvāja, there is the final arrival at truth; in this way one finally arrives at truth; in this way we describe the final arrival at truth.”
In this way, Bhāradvāja, there is the preservation of truth; in this way he preserves truth; in this way we describe the preservation of truth.
In this way, our offering will overflow.
In this way, Ānanda, a bhikkhu can be called skilled in dependent origination.”
In those who do not harbour thoughts like these
In those who harbour thoughts like these
In virtue, peace, and wisdom’s ways;
In what four?
In what way does one discover truth?
In what way does one finally arrive at truth?
In what way does the Blessed One recall making that utterance?”
In what way is a noble disciple one of right view, whose view is straight, who has unwavering confidence in the Dhamma, and has arrived at this true Dhamma?” 
In which of the two kinds of assembly do you usually see this person, brahmin—in the assembly that lusts after jewels and earrings and seeks wives and children, men and women slaves, fields and land, gold and silver; or in the assembly that does not lust after jewels and earrings, but having abandoned wives and children…has gone forth from the home life into homelessness?”
Inclination of mind is of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.
Indeed I see the radiance
Indeed, he is scorned by the scorn shown to his Dhamma.’
Indeed, he is scorned by the scorn shown to his Dhamma.’ 
Indeed, how beings are afflicted!’”
Indeed, how beings are afflicted!” 
Indeed, I do not see any other holy life elsewhere as perfect and pure as this.
Indeed, many of his disciples left him after refuting his doctrine thus: “You do not understand this Dhamma and Discipline.
Indeed, Ānanda, it is not possible that a bhikkhu who delights in company, takes delight in company, and devotes himself to delight in company, who delights in society, takes delight in society, and rejoices in society, will ever obtain at will, without trouble or difficulty, the bliss of renunciation, the bliss of seclusion, the bliss of peace, the bliss of enlightenment.
Instead they learn the Dhamma only for the sake of criticising others and for winning in debates, and they do not experience the good for the sake of which they learned the Dhamma.
Instead with insight let him see
Instead with insight let him see
Instead with insight let him see
Instruct the bhikkhunīs, Nandaka.
Intention of renunciation, intention of non-ill will, and intention of non-cruelty—this is called right intention.
Is called a chaplain, Vāseṭṭha;
Is called a craftsman, Vāseṭṭha;
Is called a farmer, Vāseṭṭha;
Is called a merchant, Vāseṭṭha;
Is called a robber, Vāseṭṭha;
Is called a ruler, Vāseṭṭha;
Is called a servant, Vāseṭṭha;
Is called a soldier, Vāseṭṭha;
Is enough done, enough offered?’—‘This is enough, steward, enough is done, enough offered.’
Is eye-consciousness… … ear-consciousness…nose-consciousness…tongue-consciousness… body-consciousness…mind-consciousness permanent or impermanent?” —“Impermanent, venerable sir.”—“Is what is impermanent suffering or happiness?”—“Suffering, venerable sir.”— “Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change fit to be regarded thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self’?”—“No, venerable sir.
Is feeling permanent or impermanent?…Is perception permanent or impermanent?… Are formations permanent or impermanent?…Is consciousness permanent or impermanent?”—“Impermanent, Master Gotama.”—“Is what is impermanent suffering or happiness?”—“Suffering, Master Gotama.”—“Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change fit to be regarded thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self’?”—“No, Master Gotama.”
Is feeling…Is perception… Are formations…Is consciousness permanent or impermanent?” —“Impermanent, venerable sir.”—“Is what is impermanent suffering or happiness?”—“Suffering, venerable sir.”—“Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change, fit to be regarded thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self’?”—“No, venerable sir.”
Is her beauty and loveliness then at its height?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”—“Now the pleasure and joy that arise in dependence on that beauty and loveliness are the gratification in the case of material form.
Is it an unwholesome bodily action with painful consequences, with painful results?’
Is it an unwholesome bodily action with painful consequences, with painful results?’
Is it only now that that fire is painful to touch, hot, and scorching, or previously too was that fire painful to touch, hot, and scorching?”
Is it possible that an action is to be experienced as pleasant can, through exertion and striving, become one is to be experienced as painful?’—‘No, friend.’—‘But is it possible that an action is to be experienced as painful can, through exertion and striving, become one is to be experienced as pleasant?’—‘No, friend.’
Is it possible that an action is to be experienced can, through exertion and striving, become one is not to be experienced?’ —‘No, friend.’—‘But is it possible that an action is not to be experienced can, through exertion and striving, become one is to be experienced?’—‘No, friend.’
Is it possible that an action is to be experienced here and now can, through exertion and striving, become one is to be experienced in the next life?’—‘No, friend.’—‘But is it possible that an action is to be experienced in the next life can, through exertion and striving, become one is to be experienced here and now?’—‘No, friend.’
Is it possible that an action is to be experienced in a matured can, by exertion and striving, become one is to be experienced in an unmatured?’ —‘No, friend.’—‘But is it possible that an action is to be experienced in an unmatured can, by exertion and striving, become one is to be experienced in a matured personality?’—‘No, friend.’
Is it possible that an action is to be much experienced can, through exertion and striving, become one is to be little experienced?’—‘No, friend.’—‘But is it possible that an action is to be little experienced can, through exertion and striving, become one is to be much experienced?’—‘No, friend.’
Is King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha attacking you, or the Licchavis of Vesālī, or other hostile kings?”
Is made to suffer for his evil deed, So people after death, in the next world, Are made to suffer for their evil deeds.
Is material form permanent or impermanent?”—“Impermanent, venerable sir.”—“Is what is impermanent suffering or happiness?”—“Suffering, venerable sir.”—“Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change fit to be regarded thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self’?”—“No, venerable sir.”
Is material form permanent or impermanent?”—“Impermanent, venerable sir.”—“Is what is impermanent suffering or happiness?”—“Suffering, venerable sir.”—“Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change, fit to be regarded thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self’?”—“No, venerable sir.”
is not present—in this case no descent of an embryo takes place.
Is one a brahmin by birth or action?
Is only a brahmin capable of developing a mind of loving-kindness towards a certain region, without hostility and without ill will, and not a noble, or a merchant, or a worker?”
Is only a brahmin capable of developing a mind of loving-kindness towards this region, without hostility and without ill will, and not a noble, or a merchant, or a worker?”
Is only a brahmin capable of taking a loofah and bath powder, going to the river, and washing off dust and dirt, and not a noble, or a merchant, or a worker?”
Is only a brahmin capable of taking a loofah and bath powder, going to the river, and washing off dust and dirt, and not a noble, or a merchant, or a worker?”
Is Princess Vajīrī dear to you?”
Is purely verbal designation.
Is that brahmin Dhānañjāni well and strong?”
Is the ear permanent or impermanent?…Is the nose permanent or impermanent?…Is the tongue permanent or impermanent?…Is the body permanent or impermanent?…Is the mind permanent or impermanent?…Are mind-objects…Is mind-consciousness…Is mind-contact…Is anything comprised within the feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness that arise with mind-contact as condition permanent or impermanent?”—“Impermanent, venerable sir.”—“Is what is impermanent suffering or happiness?”—“Suffering, venerable sir.”—“Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change fit to be regarded thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self’?”—“No, venerable sir.”
Is the ear....the nose...the tongue...the body...the mind permanent or impermanent?”—“Impermanent, venerable sir.”—“Is what is impermanent suffering or happiness?”—“Suffering, venerable sir.”—“Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change fit to be regarded thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self’?”—“No, venerable sir.
Is the eye permanent or impermanent?” —“Impermanent, venerable sir.”—“Is what is impermanent suffering or happiness?”—“Suffering, venerable sir.”—“Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change fit to be regarded thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self’?”—“No, venerable sir.”
Is the eye permanent or impermanent?” —“Impermanent, venerable sir.”—“Is what is impermanent suffering or happiness?”—“Suffering, venerable sir.”—“Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change fit to be regarded thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self’?”—“No, venerable sir.”
Is the noble Queen Vāsabhā dear to you?…Is General Viḍūḍabha dear to you?……Am I dear to you?…Are Kāsi and Kosala dear to you?” 
Is the village of Naḷakāra near here, not far from here?”
Is there a practical way to realise an exclusively pleasant world?”
Is there a practical way to realise an exclusively pleasant world?” 
Is there any distinction or difference among them?”
Is there any distinction or difference among them?”
Is there not your own house to go to?”
Is this town of Nāḷandā successful and prosperous, is it populous and crowded with people?”
Is very rarely come upon, I am the Fully Enlightened One, I, O brahmin, am the supreme physician.
Is what should be concealed by cloth
Is yet unsated with the sea’s near shore
It burns his lips, it burns his mouth, it burns his throat, it burns his stomach, and it passes out below carrying with it his intestines and mesentery.
It burns his lips, it burns his mouth, it burns his throat, it burns his stomach, and it passes out below carrying with it his intestines and mesentery.
It burns up villages, towns, cities, districts, and countries.
It can also be understood from this how sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair are born from those who are dear, arise from those who are dear.”
It carries away villages, towns, cities, districts, and countries.
It cognizes: ‘ pleasant’; it cognizes: ‘ painful’; it cognizes: ‘ neither-painful-nor-pleasant.’ ‘It cognizes, it cognizes,’ friend; that is why ‘consciousness’ is said.” 
It consists purely of heartwood.
It feels pleasure, it feels pain, it feels neither-pain-nor-pleasure.
It goes out due to lack of fuel only when it comes to green grass, or to a road, or to a rock, or to water, or to a fair open space.
It happened that Pūraṇa Kassapa did not get his way, though he waved his arms and wailed: “Be quiet, sirs, make no noise, sirs.
It has four corners and is built
It has four corners and is built
It is a gain for his companions in the holy life, it is a great gain for them that they have the opportunity to see and honour the venerable Puṇṇa Mantāṇiputta.
It is a gain for his companions in the holy life, it is a great gain for them that they have the opportunity to see and honour the venerable Sāriputta.
It is a mere trifle that I shall be troubled and the other person hurt, but it is a much greater thing that I can make that person emerge from the unwholesome and establish him in the wholesome.’
It is a mere trifle that I shall be troubled, but it is a much greater thing that I can make that person emerge from the unwholesome and establish him in the wholesome.’
It is a mere trifle that the other person will be hurt, but it is a much greater thing that I can make that person emerge from the unwholesome and establish him in the wholesome.’
It is a state without suffering…and it is the right way.
It is action that distinguishes beings as inferior and superior.”
It is action that distinguishes beings as inferior and superior.”
It is allayed by non-hatred:
It is at this point that a noble disciple has come to the conclusion: ‘The Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha is practising the good way.
It is at this point that an exclusively pleasant world has been realised.”
It is bad news indeed to hear that the brahmin Dhānañjāni has become negligent.
It is because he does this that unwished for, undesired, disagreeable things diminish for him and wished for, desired, agreeable things increase.
It is because he does this that unwished for, undesired, disagreeable things increase for him and wished for, desired, agreeable things diminish.
It is because I see two benefits that I still resort to remote jungle-thicket resting places in the forest: I see a pleasant abiding for myself here and now, and I have compassion for future generations.” 
It is because that state is unabandoned by you internally that you are living the home life and enjoying sensual pleasures.
It is beset by suffering, by vexation, by despair, and by fever, and it does not lead to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna.
It is beset by suffering, by vexation, by despair, and by fever, and it does not lead to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna.
It is by knowing thus, seeing thus, regarding these four kinds of expression, that through not clinging my mind is liberated from the taints.’
It is by reason of conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, by reason of righteous conduct that some beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.” 
It is craving, which brings renewal of being, is accompanied by delight and lust, and delights in this and that; that is, craving for sensual pleasures, craving for being, and craving for non-being.
It is craving, which brings renewal of being, is accompanied by delight and lust, and delights in this and that; that is, craving for sensual pleasures, craving for being, and craving for non-being.
It is fitting for you clansmen who have gone forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness to sit together to discuss the Dhamma.
It is for the sake of final Nibbāna without clinging that the holy life is lived under the Blessed One.”
It is good for such well-known people like you to investigate thoroughly.’
It is good for such well-known people like you to investigate thoroughly.”
It is good that you have spoken to the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu about the disciple in higher training who has entered upon the way.” 
It is good that you understand the detailed meaning of my utterance, which I spoke in brief without expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus.
It is good that you understand the detailed meaning of my utterance, which I spoke in brief without expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus.
It is good that you understand the detailed meaning of my utterance, which I spoke in brief without expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus.
It is good that you understand the Dhamma taught by me thus.
It is good that you understand the Dhamma taught by me thus.
It is good that you were instructing, urging, rousing, and gladdening the bhikkhus with talk on the Dhamma thus, and reciting the summary and exposition of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night’ thus:
It is good to see such arahants.’”
It is greatness among the gods or greatness among human beings.”
It is hard for such a generation to see this truth, namely, specific conditionality, dependent origination.
It is hard for you to understand it when you hold another view, accept another teaching, approve of another teaching, pursue a different training, and follow a different teacher.
It is he, the Peaceful Sage has said, 
It is he, the Peaceful Sage has said, Who has had a single excellent night.’
It is he, the Peaceful Sage has said, Who has had a single excellent night.”
It is hell or the animal world.
It is here that these wholesome intentions cease without remainder.
It is here that unwholesome habits cease without remainder.
It is here that unwholesome intentions cease without remainder.
It is here, brahmin, that you should bathe, To make yourself a refuge for all beings.
It is impossible that he should not foresee the implications of an assertion or that he should not be able to confute with reasons the current doctrines of others.’
It is impossible, it cannot be, that an untrue man should know of a true man: ‘This person is a true man.’
It is impossible, it cannot be, that an untrue man should know of an untrue man: ‘This person is an untrue man.’
It is in this way that a bhikkhu is an arahant with taints destroyed, one who has lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached his own goal, destroyed the fetters of being, and is completely liberated through final knowledge.
It is in this way that a disciple of mine is one who carries out my instruction, who responds to my advice, who has crossed beyond doubt, become free from perplexity, gained intrepidity, and become independent of others in the Teacher’s Dispensation.”
It is in this way that a forest elephant comes out into the open; for the forest elephant clings to the elephant wood.
It is in this way that a noble disciple comes out into the open; for gods and humans cling to the five cords of sensual pleasure.
It is in this way, bhikkhu, that the term ‘aggregate’ applies to the aggregates.”
It is in this way, householder, that it can be understood how these states are different in meaning and different in name.
It is in this way, venerable sir, that I remember the five lower fetters as taught by the Blessed One.”
It is indeed so!
It is indeed so!
It is indeed so!
It is indeed so!”
It is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
It is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
It is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
It is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
It is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view…right concentration.
It is long since Master Ānanda found an opportunity to come here.
It is long since Master Ānanda found an opportunity to come here.
It is long since the Blessed One found an opportunity to come here.
It is long since the Blessed One found an opportunity to come here.
It is long, good sir Moggallāna, since you found an opportunity to come here.
It is long, good sir, since you found an opportunity to come here.
It is more likely to be a term coined by the Buddha himself to describe a certain aspect of development.”
It is no longer easy for me to acquire unacquired wealth or to augment wealth already acquired.
It is no longer easy for me to acquire unacquired wealth…into homelessness.’
It is no longer easy for me to acquire unacquired wealth……into homelessness.’
It is no longer easy for me to acquire unacquired wealth……into homelessness.’
It is not because you have been driven by kings that you have gone forth from the home life into homelessness, or because you have been driven by thieves, or owing to debt, fear, or want of a livelihood.
It is not easy for us now to give up gain, honour, and renown.”
It is not easy while living in a home to lead the holy life utterly perfect and pure as a polished shell.
It is not easy while living in a home to lead the holy life utterly perfect and pure as a polished shell.
It is not easy, while living in a home, to lead the holy life utterly perfect and pure as a polished shell.
It is not easy, while living in a home, to lead the holy life utterly perfect and pure as a polished shell.
It is not easy, while living in a home, to lead the holy life utterly perfect and pure as a polished shell.
It is not out of compassion for their welfare that you speak thus, it is without compassion for their welfare that you speak thus.
it is not proper for a wise man who preserves truth to come to the definite conclusion: ‘Only this is true, anything else is wrong.’” 
It is not proper, Master Cankī, for you to go to see the recluse Gotama; rather, it is proper for the recluse Gotama to come to see you.
It is not someone standing nearby watching the future parents having intercourse, but a being driven on by the mechanism of kamma, due to be reborn on that occasion.
It is not the case that all beings, all living things, all creatures, all souls are without mastery, power, and energy, or that moulded by destiny, circumstance, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in the six classes.’
It is not the worthy ones that make us act; it is the Dhamma that makes us act.” 
It is our Teacher, the Blessed One, who has come.”
It is our Teacher, the Blessed One, who has come.”
It is owing to the Blessed One that Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī abstains from killing living beings, from taking what is not given, from misconduct in sensual pleasures, from false speech, and from wine, liquor, and intoxicants, which are the basis of negligence.
It is owing to the Blessed One that Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha.
It is owing to the Blessed One that Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī is free from doubt about suffering, about the origin of suffering, about the cessation of suffering, and about the way leading to the cessation of suffering.
It is owing to the Blessed One that Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī possesses unwavering confidence in the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha, and that she possesses the virtues loved by noble ones.
It is possible that a true man would know of a true man: ‘This person is a true man.’
It is possible that a true man would know of an untrue man: ‘This person is an untrue man.’
It is proper for all you clansmen who have gone forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness to delight in the holy life.
It is that gladness connected with the wholesome that I call an equipment of the mind.
It is that gladness connected with the wholesome that I call an equipment of the mind.
It is the desire and lust in regard to the five aggregates affected by clinging that is the clinging there.”
It is the desire and lust in regard to the five aggregates affected by clinging that is the clinging there.” 
It is the four great elements and the material form derived from the four great elements.
It is the remainderless fading away and ceasing, the giving up, relinquishing, letting go, and rejecting of that same craving.
It is the remainderless fading away and ceasing, the giving up, relinquishing, letting go, and rejecting of that same craving.
It is the removal of desire and lust, the abandonment of desire and lust for feelings.
It is the removal of desire and lust, the abandonment of desire and lust for material form.
It is the removal of desire and lust, the abandonment of desire and lust for sensual pleasures.
It is this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
It is through seeing and directly knowing cessation in the ear…in the nose…in the tongue…in the body…in the mind, in mind-consciousness, and in things cognizable through mind-consciousness, that I regard them thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’”
It is thus they are abandoned; it is thus they are surmounted.
It is thus they are abandoned; it is thus they are surmounted.
It is thus they are abandoned; it is thus they are surmounted.
It is thus they are abandoned; it is thus they are surmounted.
It is thus they are abandoned; it is thus they are surmounted.
It is thus this is abandoned; it is thus this is surmounted.
It is thus this is abandoned; it is thus this is surmounted.
It is when one knows and sees thus that in regard to this body with its consciousness and all external signs there is no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit.”
It is wonderful, friend, it is marvellous!
It is wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous how amid man’s tangle, corruption, and deceptions, the Blessed One knows the welfare and harm of beings.
It is wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous how amid man’s tangle, corruption, and deceptions, the Blessed One knows the welfare and harm of beings.
It may beguile a fool, but not
It may beguile a fool, but not
It may beguile a fool, but not
It never occurred to me: ‘Oh, let me rub this dust and dirt off with my hand, or let another rub this dust and dirt off with his hand’—it never occurred to me thus.
It occurred to the venerable Ānanda: “What is the reason, what is the cause, for the Blessed One’s smile?
It occurred to the venerable Ānanda: “What is the reason, what is the cause, for the Blessed One’s smile?
It occurs to me, venerable sir, that the venerable Anuruddha certainly has previously associated with those deities and talked with them and held conversations with them.”
It perceives blue, it perceives yellow, it perceives red, and it perceives white.
It seems like it might be a recluse’s bed.”
It seems that at this point in the dialogue, the Buddha resorts to imagery to suggest what concepts cannot convey.
It seems, however, that the primary problem to which the term papañca points is not “diversification,” which may be quite in place when the sensory field itself displays diversity, but the propensity of the worldling’s imagination to erupt in an effusion of mental commentary that obscures the bare data of cognition.
It should be noted that this commentarial interpretation is imposed on the text from the outside, as it were.
It should be regarded as impermanent, as suffering, as a disease, as a tumour, as a dart, as a calamity, as an affliction, as alien, as disintegrating, as void, as not self.
It sweeps away villages, towns, cities, districts, and countries.
It then occurred to me: ‘The bhikkhus of the group of five who attended upon me while I was engaged in my striving were very helpful.
It then occurred to me: ‘Uddaka Rāmaputta is wise, intelligent, and discerning; he has long had little dust in his eyes.
It then occurred to me: ‘Āḷāra Kālāma is wise, intelligent, and discerning; he has long had little dust in his eyes.
It was here, in fact, that the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, had his monastery; it was here, in fact, that the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, sat and advised the Sangha of bhikkhus.
It was here, in fact, that the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, had his monastery; it was here, in fact, that the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, sat and advised the Sangha of bhikkhus.”
It was mere prattle, I think.
It will lead to the welfare and happiness for a long time of those who think they should listen to me and place faith in me.”
It would be good if Master Gotama would teach me in brief the wholesome and the unwholesome.”
It would be good if Master Gotama would teach me the Dhamma so that I might understand in detail the meaning of Master Gotama’s statement.”
It would be good if Master Gotama would teach me the path to the company of Brahmā.”
It would be good if Master Gotama would teach us the Dhamma so that we might understand the detailed meaning of his utterance.”
It would be good if Master Ānanda would give a talk on his own teacher’s Dhamma.”
It would be good if the Blessed One would explain the meaning of these words.
It would be good if the Blessed One would explain the meaning of these words.
It would be good if the Blessed One would explain the meaning of these words.
It would be good if the Blessed One would explain the meaning of these words.
It would be good if the Blessed One would sit down for a while out of compassion.”
It would be good if the venerable Sāriputta would explain the meaning of this statement.
It would be good if the venerable Sāriputta would explain the meaning of this statement.
It would be good if we could get to hear such a talk, friend Ānanda.”—“Then let the venerable ones go to the brahmin Rammaka’s hermitage.
It would be good if we might also get to hear that statement.”
It would be good if we might also get to hear that statement.”
It would be good if, out of compassion, Master Udena would expound to me in detail those four kinds of persons he mentioned in brief.”
It would be good, venerable sir, if the Blessed One would go to those bhikkhus out of compassion.”
It would be good, venerable sir, if the Blessed One would teach me the Dhamma, showing me how the cutting off of affairs in the Noble One’s Discipline is achieved entirely and in all ways.”
It would be good, venerable sir, if the Blessed One would teach me the Dhamma, showing what the cutting off of affairs is like in the Noble One’s Discipline.”
It would turn back on him and bite his hand or his arm or one of his limbs, and because of that he would come to death or deadly suffering.
Its feet adorned with henna dye
Its floor as well is made of iron
Its floor as well is made of iron
Its hair is dressed in eightfold plaits
Jeta, Jayanta, Paduma, and Uppala, Padumuttara, Rakkhita, and Pabbata, 
Jotipāla replied: ‘Enough, my dear Ghaṭīkāra, what is the use of seeing that bald-pated recluse?’
Just as a ball of string when thrown goes as far as the string unwinds, so too, by running and wandering through the round of rebirths, fools and the wise both will make an end of suffering.’
Just as a bhikkhu possessed of virtue, concentration, and wisdom would here and now enjoy final knowledge, so it will happen in this case, I say, that unless he abandons that assertion and that state of mind and relinquishes that view, then as carried off and put there he will wind up in hell.
Just as a bhikkhu possessed of virtue, concentration, and wisdom would here and now enjoy final knowledge, so it will happen in this case, I say, that unless he abandons that assertion and that state of mind and relinquishes that view, then as carried off and put there he will wind up in hell.
Just as a bird, wherever it goes, flies with its wings as its only burden, so too the bhikkhu becomes content with robes to protect his body and with almsfood to maintain his stomach, and wherever he goes, he sets out taking only these with him.
Just as a bird, wherever it goes, flies with its wings as its only burden, so too, the bhikkhu becomes content with robes to protect his body and with almsfood to maintain his stomach, and wherever he goes he sets out taking only these with him.
Just as a bull’s hide becomes free from folds when fully stretched with a hundred pegs; so too, a bhikkhu—not attending to any of the ridges and hollows of this earth, to the rivers and ravines, the tracts of stumps and thorns, the mountains and uneven places—attends to the singleness dependent on the perception of earth.
Just as a clean cloth with all marks removed would take dye evenly, so too, while the brahmin Brahmāyu sat there, the spotless immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in him: “All that is subject to arising is subject to cessation.”
Just as a clean cloth with all marks removed would take dye evenly, so too, while the householder Upāli sat there, the spotless immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in him: “All that is subject to arising is subject to cessation.”  Then the householder Upāli saw the Dhamma, attained the Dhamma, understood the Dhamma, fathomed the Dhamma; he crossed beyond doubt, did away with perplexity, gained intrepidity, and became independent of others in the Teacher’s Dispensation.
Just as a cloth that is defiled and stained becomes pure and bright with the help of clear water, or just as gold becomes pure and bright with the help of a furnace, so too, if a bhikkhu of such virtue…eats almsfood…that will be no obstacle for him.
Just as a cow with a new calf, while she grazes watches her calf, so too, that is the character of a person who possesses right view.
Just as a daughter-in-law is embarrassed and ashamed on seeing her father-in-law, so too, when the maids of Sakka saw the venerable Mahā Moggallāna coming, they were embarrassed and ashamed and they went each into their own rooms.
Just as a dog bound by a leash tied to a firm post or pillar keeps on running and circling around that same post or pillar; so too, these good recluses and brahmins, through fear of identity and disgust with identity, keep running and circling around that same identity.
Just as a father is dear and agreeable to his children, so too a Wheel-turning Monarch is dear and agreeable to brahmins and householders.
Just as a fine beryl gem of purest water, eight-faceted, well cut, lying on red brocade, glows, radiates, and shines, so the Brahmā of Ten Thousand abides resolved on pervading a world-system of ten thousand worlds, and he abides resolved on pervading the beings that have reappeared there.
Just as a fire that starts in a shed made of rushes or grass burns down even houses with peaked roofs, with walls plastered inside and outside, shut off, secured by bars, with shuttered windows; so too, bhikkhus, whatever fears arise…all arise because of the fool, not because of the wise man.
Just as a forest-bred deer, on seeing human beings, flees from grove to grove, from thicket to thicket, from hollow to hollow, from hillock to hillock, so too, when I saw a cowherd or a shepherd…Such was my seclusion.
Just as a man might go from his own village to another village and then back again to his own village, he might think: ‘I went from my own village to that village, and there I stood in such a way, sat in such a way, spoke in such a way, kept silent in such a way; and from that village I went to that other village, and there I stood in such a way, sat in such a way, spoke in such a way, kept silent in such a way; and from that village I came back again to my own village.’
Just as a man might go from his own village to another village and then back again to his own village.
Just as a man or a woman, young, youthful, and fond of ornaments, would be horrified, humiliated, and disgusted if the carcass of a snake or a dog or a human being were hung around his or her neck, so too…when a bhikkhu examines the danger in those thoughts…his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness, and concentrated.
Just as a man or a woman—young, youthful, and fond of ornaments—on viewing the image of his or her own face in a clean bright mirror or in a bowl of clear water, would know if there were a spot thus: ‘There is a spot,’ or would know if there were no spot thus: ‘There is no spot’; so too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to understand…an unliberated mind as unliberated.
Just as a man walking fast might consider: ‘Why am I walking fast?
Just as a man with good eyes who did not want to see forms that had come within range of sight would either shut his eyes or look away, so too…when a bhikkhu tries to forget those thoughts and does not give attention to them … his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness, and concentrated.
Just as a man with good sight might take a gall-nut in his hand and review it, so the Brahmā of a Thousand abides resolved on pervading a world-system of a thousand, and he abides resolved on pervading the beings that have reappeared there.
Just as a man with good sight might take five gallnuts in his hand and review them, so the Brahmā of Five Thousand abides resolved on pervading a world-system of five thousand worlds, and he abides resolved on pervading the beings that have reappeared there.
Just as a man with good sight, having opened his eyes might shut them or having shut his eyes might open them, so too concerning anything at all, the agreeable that arose, the disagreeable that arose, and the both agreeable and disagreeable that arose cease just as quickly, just as rapidly, just as easily, and equanimity is established.
Just as a man with good sight, when he has ascended to the upper palace chamber, might survey a thousand wheel-rims, so too, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, a bhikkhu surveys a thousand worlds.
Just as a merchant going to market thinks: ‘Through this, that will be mine; with this, I will get that’; so too, these good recluses and brahmins seem like merchants when they declare: ‘We shall be thus after death, we shall be thus after death.’
Just as a palm tree whose crown is cut off is incapable of further growth, so too, the Tathāgata has abandoned the taints that defilethem off at the root, made them like a palm stump, done away with them so that they are no longer subject to future arising.’”
Just as a palm tree whose crown is cut off is incapable of further growth, so too, the Tathāgata has abandoned the taints that defile…cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, done away with them so that they are no longer subject to future arising.
Just as a palm tree whose crown is cut off is incapable of further growth, so too, the Tathāgata has abandoned the taints that defile…done away with them so that they are no longer subject to future arising.”
Just as a pupil applauds whatever his teacher says to him, saying: ‘So it is, teacher, so it is!’; so too, Mallikā, no matter what the recluse Gotama says, you applaud it thus: ‘If that has been said by the Blessed One, sire, then it is so.’
Just as a robber caught in burglary
Just as a skilled archer, trained, practised, and tested, could easily shoot a light arrow across the shadow of a palm tree, suppose that they were even to that extent perfect in mindfulness, retentiveness, memory, and lucidity of wisdom.
Just as a skilled bath man or a bath man’s apprentice  heaps bath powder in a metal basin and, sprinkling it gradually with water, kneads it till the moisture wets his ball of bath powder, soaks it and pervades it inside and out, yet the ball itself does not ooze; so too, a bhikkhu makes the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
Just as a skilled bath man or a bath man’s apprentice heaps bath powder in a metal basin and, sprinkling it gradually with water, kneads it till the moisture wets his ball of bath powder, soaks it and pervades it inside and out, yet the ball itself does not ooze; so too, a bhikkhu makes the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
Just as a skilled bath man or a bath man’s apprentice heaps bath powder in a metal basin and, sprinkling it gradually with water, kneads it until the moisture wets his ball of bath powder, soaks it, and pervades it inside and out, yet the ball itself does not ooze; so too, a bhikkhu makes the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
Just as a skilled carpenter or his apprentice might knock out, remove, and extract a coarse peg by means of a fine one, so too…when a bhikkhu gives attention to some other sign connected with what is wholesome…his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness, and concentrated.
Just as a skilled lathe-operator or his apprentice, when making a long turn, understands: ‘I make a long turn’; or, when making a short turn, understands: ‘I make a short turn’; so too, breathing in long, a bhikkhu understands: ‘I breathe in long’…he trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out tranquillising the bodily formation.’
Just as a skilled potter or his apprentice might create and fashion out of well-prepared clay any shape of pot he wished; or just as a skilled ivory-worker or his apprentice might create and fashion out of well-prepared ivory any ivory work of art he wished; or just as a skilled goldsmith or his apprentice might create and fashion out of well-prepared gold any gold work of art he wished; so too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to wield the various kinds of supernormal power……they wield bodily mastery even as far as the Brahma-world.
Just as a strong brewer’s mixer might take a strainer by the corners and shake it down and shake it up and thump it about, so in debate I will shake the recluse Gotama down and shake him up and thump him about.
Just as a strong brewer’s mixer might take a strainer by the corners and shake it down and shake it up and thump it about, so in debate I will shake the recluse Gotama down and shake him up and thump him about.
Just as a strong brewer’s workman might throw a big brewer’s sieve into a deep water tank, and taking it by the corners, drag it to and drag it fro and drag it round about, so in debate I will drag the recluse Gotama to and drag him fro and drag him round about.
Just as a strong brewer’s workman might throw a big brewer’s sieve into a deep water tank, and taking it by the corners, might drag it to and drag it fro and drag it round about, so in debate I will drag the recluse Gotama to and drag him fro and drag him round about.
Just as a strong man might easily snap his fingers, so too concerning anything at all, the agreeable that arose, the disagreeable that arose, and the both agreeable and disagreeable that arose cease just as quickly, just as rapidly, just as easily, and equanimity is established.
Just as a strong man might easily spit out a ball of spittle collected on the tip of his tongue, so too concerning anything at all, the agreeable that arose, the disagreeable that arose, and the both agreeable and disagreeable that arose cease just as quickly, just as rapidly, just as easily, and equanimity is established.
Just as a strong man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended arm, so too concerning anything at all, the agreeable that arose, the disagreeable that arose, and the both agreeable and disagreeable that arose cease just as quickly, just as rapidly, just as easily, and equanimity is established.
Just as a strong man might seize a weaker man by the head or shoulders and beat him down, constrain him, and crush him, so too, with my teeth clenched and my tongue pressed against the roof of my mouth, I beat down, constrained, and crushed mind with mind, and sweat ran from my armpits.
Just as a strong man might seize a weaker man by the head or shoulders and beat him down, constrain him, and crush him, so too…when, with his teeth clenched and his tongue pressed against the roof of his mouth, a bhikkhu beats down, constrains, and crushes mind with mind…his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness, and concentrated.
Just as a vigorous trumpeter could make himself heard without difficulty in the four quarters, so too, when the deliverance of mind by equanimity is developed in this way, no limiting action remains there, none persists there.
Just as a vigorous trumpeter could make himself heard without difficulty in the four quarters, so too, when the deliverance of mind by loving-kindness is developed in this way, no limiting action remains there, none persists there.
Just as a vigorous trumpeter might make himself heard without difficulty in the four quarters; so too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way whereby with the divine ear element…far as well as near.
Just as a young, tender infant lying prone at once draws back when he puts his hand or his foot on a live coal, so too, that is the character of a person who possesses right view.
Just as agriculture is work that involves a great deal of activity…and is of great fruit when it succeeds, so the work of the household life involves a great deal of activity, great functions, great engagements, and great undertakings, and is of great fruit when it succeeds.
Just as an ornament of finest gold, very skilfully wrought in the furnace by a clever goldsmith, lying on red brocade, glows, radiates, and shines, so the Brahmā of a Hundred Thousand abides resolved on pervading a world-system of a hundred thousand worlds, and he abides resolved on pervading the beings that have reappeared there.
Just as an owl on a branch waiting for a mouse meditates, premeditates, out-meditates, and mismeditates, or just as a jackal on a river-bank waiting for fish meditates, premeditates, out-meditates, and mismeditates, or just as a cat, waiting for a mouse by an alley or drain or rubbish bin, meditates, premeditates, out-meditates, and mismeditates, or just as a donkey unladen, standing by a door-post or a dustbin or a drain, meditates, premeditates, out-meditates, and mismeditates, so too, these bald-pated recluses, these swarthy menial offspring of the Kinsman’s feet, claim: “We are meditators, we are meditators!” and with shoulders drooping, heads down and all limp, they meditate, premeditate, out-meditate, and mismeditate.’
Just as an owl on a branch waiting meditate, and mismeditate.
Just as anyone who has extended his mind over the great ocean has included within it whatever streams there are that flow into the ocean; so too, anyone who has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body has included within himself whatever wholesome states there are that partake of true knowledge.
Just as children are dear and agreeable to a father, so too brahmins and householders are dear and agreeable to a Wheel-turning Monarch.
Just as fire is reckoned by the particular condition dependent on which it burns—when fire burns dependent on logs, it is reckoned as a log fire; when fire burns dependent on faggots, it is reckoned as a faggot fire; when fire burns dependent on grass, it is reckoned as a grass fire; when fire burns dependent on cowdung, it is reckoned as a cowdung fire; when fire burns dependent on chaff, it is reckoned as a chaff fire; when fire burns dependent on rubbish, it is reckoned as a rubbish fire—so too, consciousness is reckoned by the particular condition dependent on which it arises.
Just as fire is reckoned by the particular condition dependent on which it burns—when fire burns dependent on logs, it is reckoned as a log fire; when fire burns dependent on faggots, it is reckoned as a faggot fire; when fire burns dependent on grass, it is reckoned as a grass fire; when fire burns dependent on cowdung, it is reckoned as a cowdung fire—so too, brahmin, I declare the noble supramundane Dhamma as a person’s own wealth.
Just as if a man had a house with eleven doors and when that house caught on fire, he could flee to safety by any one of these eleven doors, so I can flee to safety by any one of these eleven doors to the Deathless.
Just as if a man went to castrate someone and came back castrated himself, just as if a man went to put out someone’s eyes and came back with his own eyes put out; so you too, householder, went saying: ‘Venerable sir, I shall refute the recluse Gotama’s doctrine,’ and you have come back caught by the vast net of his doctrine.
Just as if a man were to let two or three drops of water fall onto an iron plate heated for a whole day, the falling of the drops might be slow but they would quickly vaporise and vanish,  so too concerning anything at all, the agreeable that arose, the disagreeable that arose, and the both agreeable and disagreeable that arose cease just as quickly, just as rapidly, just as easily, and equanimity is established.
Just as if a man were to let two or three drops of water fall onto an iron plate heated for a whole day, the falling of the water drops might be slow but they would quickly vaporise and vanish.
Just as if a skilled butcher or his apprentice were to carve up an ox’s belly with a sharp butcher’s knife, so too, while I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths through my mouth, nose, and ears, violent winds carved up my belly.
Just as if a strong man were splitting my head open with a sharp sword, so too, violent winds cut through my head.
Just as if a strong man were splitting my head open with a sharp sword, so too, violent winds cut through my head.
Just as if a strong man were tightening a tough leather strap around my head as a headband, so too, while I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths through my mouth, nose, and ears, there were violent pains in my head.
Just as if a strong man were to crush my head with the tip of a sharp sword, so too, while I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths through my mouth, nose, and ears, violent winds cut through my head.
Just as if there were a lake in a mountain recess, clear, limpid, and undisturbed, so that a man with good sight standing on the bank could see shells, gravel, and pebbles, and also shoals of fish swimming about and resting.
Just as if two strong men were to seize a weaker man by both arms and roast him over a pit of hot coals, so too, while I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths through my mouth, nose, and ears, there was a violent burning in my body.
Just as in a pond of blue or red or white lotuses, some lotuses that are born and grow in the water thrive immersed in the water without rising out of it, and cool water drenches, steeps, fills, and pervades them to their tips and their roots, so that there is no part of all those lotuses unpervaded by cool water; so too, a bhikkhu makes the pleasure divested of rapture drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the pleasure divested of rapture.
Just as in a pond of blue or red or white lotuses, some lotuses that are born and grow in the water thrive immersed in the water without rising out of it, and some other lotuses that are born and grow in the water rest on the water’s surface, and some other lotuses that are born and grow in the water rise out of the water and stand clear, unwetted by it; so too, surveying the world with the eye of a Buddha, I saw beings with little dust in their eyes and with much dust in their eyes, with keen faculties and with dull faculties, with good qualities and with bad qualities, easy to teach and hard to teach, and some who dwelt seeing fear and blame in the other world.
Just as in a pond of blue or white or red lotuses, some lotuses that are born and grow in the water thrive immersed in the water without rising out of it, and cool water drenches, steeps, fills, and pervades them to their tips and their roots, so that there is no part of all those lotuses unpervaded by cool water; so too, a bhikkhu makes the pleasure divested of rapture drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the pleasure divested of rapture.
Just as one who stands on a mountain peak
Just as people burn clean things and dirty things, excrement, urine, spittle, pus, and blood in fire, and the fire is not repelled, humiliated, and disgusted because of that, so too, Rāhula, develop meditation that is like fire; for when you develop meditation that is like fire, arisen agreeable and disagreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain.
Just as people throw clean things and dirty things, excrement, urine, spittle, pus, and blood on the earth, and the earth is not repelled, humiliated, and disgusted because of that, so too, Rāhula, develop meditation that is like the earth; for when you develop meditation that is like the earth, arisen agreeable and disagreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain.
Just as people wash clean things and dirty things, excrement, urine, spittle, pus, and blood in water, and the water is not repelled, humiliated, and disgusted because of that, so too, Rāhula, develop meditation that is like water; for when you develop meditation that is like water, arisen agreeable and disagreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain.
Just as raindrops on a slightly sloping lotus leaf roll off and do not remain there, so too concerning anything at all, the agreeable that arose, the disagreeable that arose, and the both agreeable and disagreeable that arose cease just as quickly, just as rapidly, just as easily, and equanimity is established.
Just as space is not established anywhere, so too, Rāhula, develop meditation that is like space; for when you develop meditation that is like space, arisen agreeable and disagreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain.
Just as the air blows on clean things and dirty things, on excrement, urine, spittle, pus, and blood, and the air is not repelled, humiliated, and disgusted because of that, so too, Rāhula, develop meditation that is like air; for when you develop meditation that is like air, arisen agreeable and disagreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain.
Just as the chief, the most cohesive, the most unifying part of a pinnacled house is the pinnacle itself, so too, of these six principles of cordiality, the chief…is this view that is noble and emancipating…
Just as the extinguished fire cannot be described as having gone to any direction, so the Tathāgata who has attained to final Nibbāna cannot be described in terms of the four alternatives.
Just as the shadow of a great mountain peak in the evening covers, overspreads, and envelops the earth, so too, when a fool is on his chair or on his bed or resting on the ground, then the evil actions that he did in the past—his bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct—cover him, overspread him, and envelop him.
Just as the shadow of a great mountain peak in the evening covers, overspreads, and envelops the earth, so too, when a wise man is on his chair or on his bed or resting on the ground, then the good actions that he did in the past—his good bodily, verbal, and mental conduct—cover him, overspread him, and envelop him.
Just as the sunlight pervades the area that the shadow leaves, and the shadow pervades the area that the sunlight leaves, so too, with the cessation of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, unworldly pleasure arises, and with the cessation of unworldly pleasure, neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling arises.
Just as the sunlight pervades the area that the shadow leaves, and the shadow pervades the area that the sunlight leaves, so too, with the cessation of the rapture of seclusion, grief arises, and with the cessation of grief, the rapture of seclusion arises.
Just as the sunlight pervades the area that the shadow leaves, and the shadow pervades the area that the sunlight leaves, so too, with the cessation of unworldly pleasure, the rapture of seclusion arises and with the cessation of the rapture of seclusion, unworldly pleasure arises.
Just as there is a loud sound when a smith’s bellows are blown, so too, while I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths through my nose and ears, there was a loud sound of winds coming out from my earholes.
Just as though a man were at a crossroads pressing out pure honey and a large group of people were poised in expectancy, so too, when the recluse Gotama is teaching the Dhamma to an assembly of several hundred followers, on that occasion there is no sound of his disciples’ coughing or clearing their throats.
Just as though a man were sitting covered from head down with a white cloth, so that there would be no part of his whole body not covered by the white cloth; so too, a bhikkhu sits pervading this body with a pure bright mind, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the pure bright mind.
Just as though a man were sitting covered from the head down with a white cloth, so that there would be no part of his whole body not covered by the white cloth; so too, a bhikkhu sits pervading this body with a pure bright mind, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the pure bright mind.
Just as though a man were sitting covered from the head down with a white cloth, so that there would be no part of his whole body unpervaded by the white cloth; so too, a bhikkhu sits pervading this body with a pure bright mind, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the pure bright mind.
Just as though a man were to pull out a reed from its sheath and think thus: ‘This is the sheath, this is the reed; the sheath is one, the reed is another; it is from the sheath that the reed has been pulled out’; or just as though a man were to pull out a sword from its scabbard and think thus: ‘This is the sword, this is the scabbard; the sword is one, the scabbard another; it is from the scabbard that the sword has been pulled out’; or just as though a man were to pull a snake out of its slough and think thus: ‘This is the snake, this is the slough; the snake is one, the slough another; it is from the slough that the snake has been pulled out.’
Just as though a skilled butcher or his apprentice had killed a cow and were seated at the crossroads with it cut up into pieces; so too, a bhikkhu reviews this same body however it is placed, however disposed, as consisting of elements thus: ‘In this body there are the earth element, the water element, the fire element, and the air element.’
Just as though there were a bag with an opening at both ends full of many sorts of grain, such as hill rice, red rice, beans, peas, millet, and white rice, and a man with good eyes were to open it and review it thus: ‘This is hill rice, this is red rice, these are beans, these are peas, this is millet, this is white rice’; so too, a bhikkhu reviews this same body as full of many kinds of impurity thus: ‘In this body there are headhairs…and urine.’
Just as though there were a bag with an opening at both ends full of many sorts of grain, such as hill rice, red rice, beans, peas, millet, and white rice, and a man with good eyes were to open it and review it thus: ‘This is hill rice, this is red rice, these are beans, these are peas, this is millet, this is white rice’; so too, a bhikkhu reviews this same body…as full of many kinds of impurity thus: ‘In this body there are head-hairs…and urine.’
Just as though there were a lake whose waters welled up from below and it had no inflow from east, west, north, or south and would not be replenished from time to time by showers of rain, then the cool fount of water welling up in the lake would make the cool water drench, steep, fill, and pervade the lake, so that there would be no part of the whole lake unpervaded by cool water; so too, a bhikkhu makes the rapture and pleasure born of concentration drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
Just as though there were a lake whose waters welled up from below and it had no inflow from east, west, north, or south, and would not be replenished from time to time by showers of rain, then the cool fount of water welling up in the lake would make the cool water drench, steep, fill, and pervade the lake, so that there would be no part of the whole lake unpervaded by cool water; so too, a bhikkhu makes the rapture and pleasure born of concentration drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
Just as though there were a lake whose waters welled up from below and it had no inflow from east, west, north, or south, and would not be replenished from time to time by showers of rain, then the cool fount of water welling up in the lake would make the cool water drench, steep, fill, and pervade the lake, so that there would be no part of the whole lake unpervaded by cool water; so too, a bhikkhu makes the rapture and pleasure born of concentration drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
Just as though there were two houses with doors and a man with good sight standing there between them saw people entering the houses and coming out and passing to and fro, so too, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, a bhikkhu sees beings passing away and reappearing…and he understands how beings pass on according to their actions.he understands how beings pass on according to their actions.
Just as though there were two houses with doors and a man with good sight standing there between them saw people entering the houses and coming out and passing to and fro.
Just as trade is work that involves a small amount of activity…and is of small fruit when it fails, so the work of those gone forth involves a small amount of activity, small functions, small engagements, and small undertakings, and is of small fruit when it fails.
Just as trade is work that involves a small amount of activity…but is of great fruit when it succeeds, so the work of those gone forth involves a small amount of activity, small functions, small engagements, and small undertakings, but is of great fruit when it succeeds.”
Just as when a daughter-in-law sees her father-in-law, she arouses a sense of urgency, so too, when that bhikkhu thus recollects the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha, if equanimity supported by the wholesome does not become established in him, then he arouses a sense of urgency.
Just as when an oil-lamp is burning, its radiance is seen in dependence on its flame and its flame is seen in dependence on its radiance; so too, vitality stands in dependence on heat and heat stands in dependence on vitality.”
Just as when there is a great tree standing possessed of heartwood, it is not possible that anyone shall cut out its heartwood without cutting through its bark and sapwood, so too, there is a path…this is not possible.
Just as, brahmin, when a clever horse-trainer obtains a fine thoroughbred colt, he first makes him get used to wearing the bit, and afterwards trains him further, so when the Tathāgata obtains a person to be tamed he first disciplines him thus: ‘Come, bhikkhu, be virtuous, restrained with the restraint of the Pātimokkha, be perfect in conduct and resort, and seeing fear in the slightest fault, train by undertaking the training precepts.’
Just as, if a man were to bring several oil-lamps into a house, a difference in the flames of the lamps might be discerned but no difference in their radiance; so too, there is an occasion when those deities assemble in one place …but no difference in their radiance.
Just as, if the man were to remove those several oil-lamps from that house, a difference might be discerned in the flames of the lamps and also a difference in their radiance; so too, there is an occasion when those deities disperse from there…and also a difference in their radiance.
Just as, in a pond of blue or red or white lotuses, some lotuses that are born and grow in the water thrive immersed in the water without rising out of it, and cool water drenches, steeps, fills, and pervades them to their tips and their roots, so that there is no part of all those lotuses unpervaded by cool water; so too, a bhikkhu makes the pleasure divested of rapture drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the pleasure divested of rapture.
Just as, when flies are being carried along on a carrying-pole or on a basket, it does not occur to them: ‘This of ours is permanent, everlasting, or eternal,’ yet wherever those flies settle down, there they find delight; so too, it does not occur to those deities…yet wherever they settle down, there they find delight.”
Just as, when there is a great tree standing possessed of heartwood, it is possible that someone shall cut out its heartwood by cutting through its bark and sapwood, so too, there is a path…this is possible.
Just how far, bhikkhus, have these misguided men strayed from this Doctrine and Discipline?
Just like a flax flower, which is blue, of blue colour, blue in appearance, with blue luminosity, or just like Benares cloth smoothened on both sides, which is blue, of blue colour, blue in appearance, with blue luminosity; so too, not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally…with blue luminosity; by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
Just like a hibiscus flower, which is red, of red colour, red in appearance, with red luminosity, or just like Benares cloth smoothened on both sides, which is red, of red colour, red in appearance, with red luminosity; so too, not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally…with red luminosity; by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
Just like a kaṇṇikāra flower, which is yellow, of yellow colour, yellow in appearance, with yellow luminosity, or just like Benares cloth smoothened on both sides, which is yellow, of yellow colour, yellow in appearance, with yellow luminosity; so too, not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally…with yellow luminosity; by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
Just like the morning star, which is white, of white colour, white in appearance, with white luminosity, or just like Benares cloth smoothened on both sides, which is white, of white colour, white in appearance, with white luminosity; so too, not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally…with white luminosity; by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
Just then a slavewoman belonging to one of his relatives was about to throw away some old porridge.
Just then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla was eating the old porridge by the wall of a certain shelter.
K.R.
Kassapa, speaking rightly, should speak just as he did.
Kāḷa, Upakāḷa, Vijita, and Jita;
Ketumbarāga, Mātanga, and Ariya, Then Accuta, Accutagāma, Byāmaka, Sumangala, Dabbila, Supatiṭṭhita, Asayha, Khemābhirata, and Sorata, Durannaya, Sangha, and then Ujjaya;
Killing living beings is unwholesome; taking what is not given is unwholesome; misconduct in sensual pleasures is unwholesome; false speech is unwholesome; malicious speech is unwholesome; harsh speech is unwholesome; gossip is unwholesome; covetousness is unwholesome; ill will is unwholesome; wrong view is unwholesome.
Killing living beings, taking what is not given, and misconduct in sensual pleasures: this is wrong action.
King Avantiputta of Madhurā heard: “The recluse Kaccāna is living at Madhurā in the Gundā Grove.
King Koravya sat down on a seat made ready and said:
King Pasenadi handed over his sword and turban to Dīgha Kārāyaṇa then and there.
King Pasenadi of Kosala asked Sañjaya, the brahmin of the Ākāsa clan: “Brahmin, who introduced this story to the palace?”
King Pasenadi of Kosala said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, we have asked the Blessed One about omniscience, and the Blessed One has answered about omniscience; we approve of and accept that answer, and so we are satisfied.
King Pasenadi of Kosala sat down on a seat made ready and said: “Venerable Ānanda, would the Blessed One behave with the body in such a way that he could be censured by recluses and brahmins?”
King Pasenadi then returned to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said: “It is wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous how the Blessed One tames the untamed, brings peace to the unpeaceful, and leads to Nibbāna those who have not attained Nibbāna.
Know first the grass and trees:
Know him thus, O Vāseṭṭha, As Brahmā and Sakka for those who understand.”
Know this, O Seer, as our debate.
Know those whose bellies are their feet, To wit, the long-backed class of snakes:
Know too the water-dwelling fish
Knowing and seeing and hearing them, I went forth from the home life into homelessness.
Knowing and seeing and hearing them, I went forth from the home life into homelessness.”
Knowing and seeing and hearing this, I went forth from the home life into homelessness.
Knowing directly all the world, The Enlightened One who understands
Knowing it, understanding it as it actually is, the wise one does not avoid it but cultivates it; because he does so, unwished for things…diminish for him and wished for…things increase.
Knowing it, understanding it as it actually is, the wise one does not avoid it but cultivates it; because he does so, unwished for…things diminish for him and wished for…things increase.
Knowing it, understanding it as it actually is, the wise one does not cultivate it but avoids it; because he does so, unwished for, undesired, disagreeable things diminish for him and wished for, desired, agreeable things increase.
Knowing it, understanding it as it actually is, the wise one does not cultivate it but avoids it; because he does so, unwished for…things diminish for him and wished for…things increase.
Knowing that ill will…negligence is an imperfection that defiles the mind, a bhikkhu abandons it.
Knowing that no trace was left behind, he would say: ‘Good man, the arrow has been pulled out from you; the poisonous humour has been expelled with no trace left behind, and it is incapable of harming you.
Knowing this, he cultivates things that should be cultivated and does not cultivate things that should not be cultivated, he follows things that should be followed and does not follow things that should not be followed.
Knowing this, the Blessed One said to him:
Knowing this, the Blessed One told him: “Do not be afraid, great king, do not be afraid.
Knowledge of suffering, knowledge of the origin of suffering, knowledge of the cessation of suffering, and knowledge of the way leading to the cessation of suffering—this is called right view.
Known to all as ‘Finger-garland,’
Later on one might see that same woman here at eighty, ninety, or a hundred years, aged, as crooked as a roof bracket, doubled up, supported by a walking stick, tottering, frail, her youth gone, her teeth broken, grey-haired, scanty-haired, bald, wrinkled, with limbs all blotchy.
Learn the monuments to the Dhamma, bhikkhus; master the monuments to the Dhamma; remember the monuments to the Dhamma.
Learn well what the Blessed One replies and report it to me; for Tathāgatas do not speak untruth.”
Leaving the hunters to lament.”
Let a wise man come, one who is honest and sincere, a man of rectitude.
Let him know that and be sure of it, Invincibly, unshakeably.
Let him know that and be sure of it, Invincibly, unshakeably.
Let him know that and be sure of it, Invincibly, unshakeably.
Let him not lose that measure of faith and love, as he may if we take action against him by repeatedly admonishing him.’
Let Master Assalāyana come and dispute with the recluse Gotama about this assertion.
Let Master Assalāyana come and dispute with the recluse Gotama about this assertion.
Let Master Assalāyana come and dispute with the recluse Gotama about this assertion.”
Let Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life.
Let Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life.”
Let Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life.”
Let Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life.”
Let Master Raṭṭhapāla be seated on it.”
Let Master Ānanda be seated; this seat is ready.”
Let Master Ānanda be seated; this seat is ready.”
Let me give Master Udena one regular donation from that.”
Let me now develop concentration in three ways.’ 
Let me now take possession of the brahmin householders, telling them: “Come now, abuse, revile, scold, and harass the virtuous bhikkhus of good character; then perhaps, when they are abused, reviled, scolded, and harassed by you, some change will come about in their minds whereby the Māra Dūsī may find an opportunity.”’ 
Let me now take possession of the brahmin householders, telling them: “Come now, honour, respect, revere, and venerate the virtuous bhikkhus of good character; then perhaps, when they are honoured, respected, revered, and venerated by you, some change will come about in their minds whereby the Māra Dūsī may find an opportunity.”’ 
Let my enemies give ear from time to time
Let my enemies hear discourse on the Dhamma, Let them be devoted to the Buddha’s teaching, Let my enemies wait on those good people
Let not the Master Assalāyana be defeated without having even fought the battle.”
Let the Blessed One be seated; this seat is ready.”
Let the Blessed One be seated; this seat is ready.”
Let the Blessed One come at his own convenience.”
Let the Blessed One give him the going forth.’
Let the Blessed One give me the going forth.”
Let the Blessed One remember as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life.’
Let the Blessed One remember him as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life.’
Let the Blessed One remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life.”
Let the Blessed One remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life.”
Let the Blessed One remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life.”
Let the Blessed One remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life.”
Let the Blessed One teach him the Dhamma.’
Let the Blessed One teach me the Dhamma further.” 
Let the Blessed One teach the Dhamma, There will be those who will understand.’
Let the Blessed One, the Lord of the Dhamma, live at ease devoted to a pleasant abiding here and now.
Let the Blessed One, together with the Sangha of bhikkhus, consent to accept tomorrow’s meal from me.”
Let the charioteer drive me back to Mithilā.
Let the king order his punishment.’
Let the Sorrowless One survey this human breed, Engulfed in sorrow, overcome by birth and old age.
Let the venerable Bhāradvāja wait until the talk is finished.”
Let the venerable Channa live.
Let the venerable Channa live.
Let the venerable Channa not use the knife.
Let the venerable Mahā Kaccāna expound it without finding it troublesome.”
Let the venerable Mahā Kaccāna expound it without finding it troublesome.”
Let the venerable one stay as long as he likes.”
Let the venerable ones not fall into a dispute over a mere trifle.’
Let the venerable ones not fall into a dispute over a mere trifle.’
Let the venerable Ānanda accept it out of compassion.”
Let the venerable Ānanda be seated on it.”
Let them hear
Let this be for the king himself.’ 
Let this be!—‘Have they all had direct knowledge as they claim, or have none of them had direct knowledge, or have some of them had direct knowledge and some not?’
Let us also go to the venerable Sāriputta to listen to the Dhamma.”—“Yes, friend,” the venerable Revata to replied.to Then the venerable Revata and the venerable Ānanda went to the venerable Sāriputta to listen to the Dhamma.
Let us cremate him.’
Let us curse him!’ Then the seven brahmin seers cursed the seer Devala the Dark thus: ‘Be ashes, vile one!
Let us go and see the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened.
Let us go and see the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened.
Let us go and see the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened.
Let us go and see the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened.”
Let us go to the Blessed One and report this matter to him.
Let us go to the pleasure garden to see a pleasing spot.”
Let us visit him.’
Like a lion in the forest.
Like a new-painted unguent pot:
Like the chariot wheel by the linchpin.
Like the fire that burns dependent on fuel such as grass and wood, I say, is the rapture that is dependent on the five cords of sensual pleasure.
Like the fire that burns independent of fuel such as grass and wood, I say, is the rapture that is apart from sensual pleasures, apart from unwholesome states.
Like the moon freed from a cloud.
Like the moon freed from a cloud.
Like the moon freed from a cloud.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.” 
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—“Yes, friend,” the venerable Pukkusāti replied.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—“Yes, sir,” he replied.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” the bhikkhus replied.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” the bhikkhus replied.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” the bhikkhus replied.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” the bhikkhus replied.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” the bhikkhus replied.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” the bhikkhus replied.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” the bhikkhus replied.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” the bhikkhus replied.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” the bhikkhus replied.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” the bhikkhus replied.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” the bhikkhus replied.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” the bhikkhus replied.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” the bhikkhus replied.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” the bhikkhus replied.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” the bhikkhus replied.
Listen, bhikkhus, the Deathless has been attained.
Listen, bhikkhus, the Deathless has been attained.
Listen, bhikkhus, the Deathless has been attained…from the home life into homelessness.’
Litigation because of a dispute, litigation because of an accusation, litigation because of an offence, and litigation concerning proceedings.
Living beings are bound by action
Longevity is not acquired with wealth
Longing still for further sensual pleasures.
Lust is a maker of measurement, hate is a maker of measurement, delusion is a maker of measurement.
MA explains anidassanaṁ as meaning invisible, “because it does not come within range of eye-consciousness,” but again this is a trite explanation.
MA explains coming back and not coming back as referring to rebirth, thus suggesting that gods who do not come back are non-returners, while those who do come back are still “worldlings.”
MA explains that the arising nature of the body can be observed in its conditioned origination through ignorance, craving, kamma, and food, as well as in the moment-by-moment origination of material phenomena in the body.
MA explains that the king asked this question with reference to the case involving the female wanderer Sundarı̄, which was pending investigation at the time.
MA gives prolific examples illustrating all the different modes of conceiving, and these clearly establish that the intended object of conceiving is the misplaced sense of egoity.
MA glosses sankhā by koṭṭhāsa, “portion,” and says that saññā is either perception associated with papañca or papañca itself.
MA glosses: “If the round of kamma had not been accumulated by me, now there would not be for me the round of results; if the round of kamma is not accumulated by me now, in the future there will not be the round of results.” “What exists, what has come to be” are the five aggregates.
MA interprets it as meaning good states, which it identifies with serenity and insight thus in its paraphrase of the text: “I teach, bhikkhus, even the abandoning of desire and attachment to such peaceful and sublime states as serenity and insight, how much more so to that low, vulgar, contemptible, coarse, and impure thing that this foolish Ariṭṭha sees as harmless when he says that there is no obstruction in desire and lust for the five cords of sensual pleasure.”
MA maintains, by reference to an ancient exegetical source, that in this passage the path of the non-returner is being described.
MA merely says: “‘A single-excellent-nighter’ is one with a single night who is excellent because of possessing application to insight”.
MA offers three explanations of sabbato pabhaṁ: completely possessed of luminosity; possessing being everywhere; and a ford accessible from all sides, i.e., through any of the thirty-eight meditation objects.
MA paraphrases this text thus: “Having perceived earth with a perverted perception, the ordinary person afterwards conceives it—construes or discriminates it—through the gross proliferating tendencies of craving, conceit, and views, which are here called ‘conceivings.’…He apprehends it in diverse ways contrary.”
MA says that he obtains the equanimity of insight, but from § it seems that the equanimity of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception is also intended.
MA says that the abandoning spoken of here should be understood as “abandonment by eradication”, that is, complete uprooting by the supramundane path.
MA takes the subject of the sentence to be Nibbāna, called “consciousness” in the sense that “it can be cognized”.
MA: Although this declaration was made while Channa was still a worldling, as his attainment of final Nibbāna followed immediately, the Buddha answered by referring to that very declaration.
Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Magnificent, Master Gotama!......From today let Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life.”
Magnificent, Master Gotama!......From today let Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life.”
Magnificent, Master Gotama!…From today let Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life.”
Magnificent, Master Gotama!…From today let Master Gotama remember us as lay followers who have gone to him for refuge for life.”
Magnificent, Master Kaccāna!
Magnificent, Master Udena!
Magnificent, venerable sir!
Magnificent, venerable sir!
Magnificent, venerable sir!
Magnificent, venerable sir!
Magnificent, venerable sir!
Magnificent, venerable sir!
Magnificent, venerable sir!
Magnificent, venerable sir!…From today let the Blessed One remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life.” 
Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī has been very helpful to the Blessed One, venerable sir.
Mahāpajāpatı̄ Gotamı̄ was the younger sister of Queen Mahāmāyā, the Buddha’s mother, and was also the wife of King Suddhodana.
Mahānāma the Sakyan was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
Mahānāma, there are these five cords of sensual pleasure......Now this is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering in the life to come, having sensual pleasures as its cause, sensual pleasures as its source, sensual pleasures as its basis, the cause being simply sensual pleasures.
Make a distinctive mark in them.
Make the necessary purchases and preparations for me.”
Many bhikkhus are living there.
Many learned nobles, learned brahmins, learned householders, and learned recluses have full confidence in Master Gotama, and have been disciplined by him in the noble true way, in the Dhamma that is wholesome.”
Master Gotama does not dwell together with these.
Master Gotama dwells together with these.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overturned, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overturned, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overturned, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overturned, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear......for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Gotama is endowed with these thirty-two marks of a Great Man.
Master Gotama sets his foot down squarely—this is a mark of a Great Man in Master Gotama.
Master Gotama was a meditator and cultivated meditation, and he praised every type of meditation.”
Master Gotama, it has occurred to me: ‘Surely Master Gotama’s disciples abide pursuing development of mind, but not development of body.’”
Master Gotama, the brahmins prescribe this as the level of service towards a merchant: a merchant may serve a merchant and a worker may serve a merchant.
Master Gotama, the brahmins prescribe this as the level of service towards a noble: a noble may serve a noble, a merchant may serve a noble, and a worker may serve a noble.
Master Gotama, the brahmins prescribe this as the level of service towards a worker: only a worker may serve a worker; for who else could serve a worker?
Master Gotama, the brahmins prescribe this as the wealth of a merchant—farming and cattle-breeding; a merchant who spurns his own wealth, farming and cattle-breeding, abuses his duty like a guard who takes what has not been given.
Master Gotama, the brahmins prescribe this as the wealth of a noble—the bow and quiver; a noble who spurns his own wealth, the bow and quiver, abuses his duty like a guard who takes what has not been given.
Master Gotama, the brahmins prescribe this as the wealth of a worker—the sickle and carrying-pole; a worker who spurns his own wealth, the sickle and carrying-pole, abuses his duty like a guard who takes what has not been given.
Master Kaccāna has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who is lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Raṭṭhapāla has not undergone any loss of relatives.
Master Raṭṭhapāla has not undergone any loss of wealth.
Master Raṭṭhapāla has not undergone any loss through ageing.
Master Raṭṭhapāla has not undergone any loss through sickness.
Master Raṭṭhapāla has not undergone any of these.
Master Sāriputta said ‘the Brahma-world.’”
Master Udena has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
Master Ānanda can well hear about it later.
Material form is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change—this is the danger in the case of material form.
Material form is not yours.
Material form is not yours…Feeling is not yours…Perception is not yours…Formations are not yours…Consciousness is not yours.
May I understand a mind affected by lust as affected by lust and a mind unaffected by lust as unaffected by lust; may I understand a mind affected by hate as affected by hate and a mind unaffected by hate as unaffected by hate; may I understand a mind affected by delusion as affected by delusion and a mind unaffected by delusion as unaffected by delusion; may I understand a contracted mind as contracted and a distracted mind as distracted; may I understand an exalted mind as exalted and an unexalted mind as unexalted; may I understand a surpassed mind as surpassed and an unsurpassed mind as unsurpassed; may I understand a concentrated mind as concentrated and an unconcentrated mind as unconcentrated; may I understand a liberated mind as liberated and an unliberated mind as unliberated,’ let him fulfil the precepts…
May I understand a mind affected by lust as affected by lust and a mind unaffected by lust as unaffected by lust; may I understand a mind affected by hate as affected by hate and a mind unaffected by hate as unaffected by hate; may I understand a mind affected by delusion as affected by delusion and a mind unaffected by delusion as unaffected by delusion; may I understand a contracted mind as contracted and a distracted mind as distracted; may I understand an exalted mind as exalted and an unexalted mind as unexalted; may I understand a surpassed mind as surpassed and an unsurpassed mind as unsurpassed; may I understand a concentrated mind as concentrated and an unconcentrated mind as unconcentrated; may I understand a liberated mind as liberated and an unliberated mind as unliberated’—you will attain the ability to witness any aspect therein, there being a suitable basis.
May they live happily!’ He has right view, undistorted vision, thus: ‘There is what is given and what is offered and what is sacrificed; there is fruit and result of good and bad actions; there is this world and the other world; there is mother and father; there are beings who are reborn spontaneously; there are good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have themselves realised by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.’
May they look after themselves happily!’ Such mental conduct causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it.
Mālunkyāputta
Mālunkyāputta
Mānatthaddha glorious, Vītarāga
Māra, shun the Enlightened One, Play no more your tricks on bhikkhus.”
Meanwhile King Pasenadi of Kosala said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, could something else have been said by the Blessed One referring to that, and the person understood it wrongly?
Meanwhile, with the divine ear, which is purified and surpasses the human, the Blessed One heard this conversation between the brahmin of the Bhāradvāja clan and the wanderer Māgandiya.
Meditate, bhikkhus, do not delay or else you will regret it later.
Meditate, Cunda, do not delay or else you will regret it later.
Meditate, Ānanda, do not delay, or else you will regret it later.
Meditate, Ānanda, do not delay, or else you will regret it later.
Men have come along this road in groups of ten, twenty, thirty, and even forty, but still they have fallen into Angulimāla’s hands.”
Men have come along this road in groups of ten, twenty, thirty, and even forty, but still they have fallen into my hands.
men with the bier as fifth carry away the corpse.
Mental conduct is of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.
Mental pain, mental discomfort, painful, uncomfortable feeling born of mental contact—this is called grief.
Mentality-materiality has consciousness as its source…And this consciousness has what as its source…?
Mentality-materiality has consciousness as its source…Consciousness has what as its source…?
Mentality-materiality is the cause and condition for the manifestation of the consciousness aggregate.” 
Merit is the glory of all who aspire;
Mind should be inclined thus: ‘Others will adhere to their own views, hold on to them tenaciously, and relinquish them with difficulty; we shall not adhere to our own views or hold on to them tenaciously, but shall relinquish them easily.’
Mind should be inclined thus: ‘Others will be cruel; we shall not be cruel here.’
Mind should be inclined thus: ‘Others will kill living beings; we shall abstain from killing living beings here.’
Mind should be inclined thus:…
Mind-objects cognizable by the mind are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.”
Mindfully one abandons wrong action, mindfully one enters upon and dwells in right action: this is one’s right mindfulness.
Mindfully one abandons wrong intention, mindfully one enters upon and abides in right intention: this is one’s right mindfulness.
Mindfully one abandons wrong livelihood, mindfully one enters upon and dwells in right livelihood: this is one’s right mindfulness.
Mindfully one abandons wrong speech, mindfully one enters upon and abides in right speech: this is one’s right mindfulness.
Mindfully one abandons wrong view, mindfully one enters upon and abides in right view: this is one’s right mindfulness.
Misguided man, have I not stated in many ways consciousness to be dependently arisen, since without a condition there is no origination of consciousness?
Misguided man, have I not stated in many ways how obstructive things are obstructions, and how they are able to obstruct one who engages in them?
Misguided men, that will lead to your harm and suffering for a long time.”
Misguided men, what can you possibly know, what can you see, that you take to quarrelling and brawling and are deep in disputes, stabbing each other with verbal daggers?
Moggallāna, speaking rightly, should speak just as he did.
Moreover, while I am living here my unestablished mindfulness does not become established…I do not attain the unattained supreme security from bondage.’
Moreover, while I am living here my unestablished mindfulness has become established…I have attained the unattained supreme security from bondage.’
Most other people too, not just a king, Encounter death with craving unabated; still incomplete they leave the corpse;
Most worthy of gifts, most mighty of spirits, most perfect of persons, beyond estimation;
Moths, maggots, and earthworms, and any other such animals.
Must pass on according to his actions;
My back is uncomfortable.
My body had the same form as a human body, Evil One, but my head had the form of a fish’s head.
My decision to treat saññā-sankhā as a dvanda compound, “perceptions and notions,” may be questioned, but as the expression papañca-saññā-sankhā occurs but rarely in the Canon and is never verbally analysed, no rendering is utterly beyond doubt.
My family has wealth; I can both enjoy wealth and make merit.’
My mind is content with this progress.
My mind is well disposed for awakening to the truths.’
My only son, where are you?’”
My only son, where are you?”
My painful feelings are increasing, not subsiding; their increase and not their subsiding is apparent.
My painful feelings are increasing, not subsiding; their increase and not their subsiding is apparent.
My painful feelings are increasing, not subsiding; their increase and not their subsiding is apparent.”
My painful feelings are increasing, not subsiding; their increase and not their subsiding is apparent.”
My painful feelings are increasing, not subsiding;…...their increase and not their subsiding is apparent.
My rendering here is based on the reading of SN:.
My triple robe is complete.” 
My way is right.
My way is right.
Neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling is pleasant when there is knowledge and painful when there is no knowledge.”
Neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling too is impermanent, conditioned, dependently arisen, subject to destruction, vanishing, fading away, and ceasing.
Nevertheless, Aggivessana, as to how one is undeveloped in body and undeveloped in mind, and developed in body and developed in mind, listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”—“Yes, sir,” Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son replied.
Nevertheless, I thought I would oppose the Blessed One thus since I desired to hear the Blessed One’s varied solutions to the problem.
Next come the moths and butterflies
Next know the birds that wing their way
Next the Blessed One extruded his tongue, and he repeatedly touched both ear holes and both nostrils, and he covered the whole of his forehead with his tongue.
Next the Blessed One extruded his tongue, and he repeatedly touched both ear holes and both nostrils, and he covered the whole of his forehead with his tongue.
Next the Blessed One extruded his tongue, and he repeatedly touched both ear holes and both nostrils, and he covered the whole of his forehead with his tongue.
Next, position B is considered.
No bargain with Mortality
No bargain with Mortality
No bargain with Mortality
No fear comes from the wise man, no trouble comes from the wise man, no calamity comes from the wise man.
No more perplexity since he knows;
No person for my counterpart.
No, Master Gotama.”
No, venerable sir.”
No, venerable sir.”
Non-greed is a root of the wholesome; non-hate is a root of the wholesome; non-delusion is a root of the wholesome.
None can surpass his resplendent qualities; without hesitation, he is the illuminator;
None considers himself a fool;
None is able pleasure or pain or pleasure-and-pain in another.
None knows what leads him so to act.
None thinks himself to be at fault.
Nor can prosperity banish old age;
Nor in the belly or the back
Nor in the buttocks or the breast
Nor in the ears nor in the eyes
Nor in the fingers or the nails
Nor in the genitals or ways of mating;
Nor in the hairs nor in the head
Nor in the hands nor in the feet
Nor in the knees nor in the thighs
Nor in the lips nor in the brows;
Nor in the mouth nor in the nose
Nor in the shoulders or the neck
Nor in their colour or in voice:
Nor seek delight in sensual pleasures, But meditate with diligence
Nor work harm for living beings, Nor take what is offered not, With faith and free from avarice, What need for you to go to Gayā?
Norman, in an interesting paper, has proposed a radical re-editing of this portion of the sutta, which would entail important differences in translation, but as his proposals are not supported by any editions I hesitate to follow him.
Not ageing, how could he die?
Not being born, how could he age?
Not being satisfied with that Dhamma, disappointed with it, I left.
Not being satisfied with that Dhamma, disappointed with it, I left.
Not being shaken, why should he yearn?
Not child nor wife nor wealth nor royal estate.
Not dying, how could he be shaken?
Not examining the meaning of those teachings with wisdom, they do not gain a reflective acceptance of them.
Not knowing about suffering, not knowing about the origin of suffering, not knowing about the cessation of suffering, not knowing about the way leading to the cessation of suffering—this is called ignorance.
Not knowing it, not understanding it as it actually is, the ignorant one cultivates it and does not avoid it; because he does so, unwished for, undesired, disagreeable things increase for him and wished for, desired, agreeable things diminish.
Not knowing it, not understanding it as it actually is, the ignorant one cultivates it and does not avoid it; because he does so, unwished for…things increase for him and wished for…things diminish.
Not knowing it, not understanding it as it actually is, the ignorant one does not cultivate it but avoids it; because he does so, unwished for…things increase for him and wished for…things diminish.
Not knowing it, not understanding it as it actually is, the ignorant one does not cultivate it but avoids it; because he does so, unwished for…things increase for him and wished for…things diminish.
Not knowing this, he cultivates things that should not be cultivated and does not cultivate things that should be cultivated, he follows things that should not be followed and does not follow things that should be followed.
Not knowing, they declare to us:
Not long after his full admission, a half-month after his full admission, the venerable Vacchagotta went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and told the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, I have attained whatever can be attained by the knowledge of a disciple in higher training, by the true knowledge of a disciple in higher training.
Not long after they have gone forth, dwelling alone, withdrawn, diligent, ardent, and resolute, by realising for themselves with direct knowledge they here and now enter upon and abide in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness.
Not long after they have thus gone forth, dwelling alone, withdrawn, diligent, ardent, and resolute, by realising for themselves with direct knowledge they here and now enter upon and abide in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness.
Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, blue, of blue colour, blue in appearance, with blue luminosity.
Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, immeasurable, fair and ugly; by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, limited, fair and ugly; by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, red, of red colour, red in appearance, with red luminosity.
Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, white, of white colour, white in appearance, with white luminosity.
Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, yellow, of yellow colour, yellow in appearance, with yellow luminosity.
Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally: this is the second liberation.
Not perceiving forms internally, he sees forms externally: this is the second direction.
Note that in each case it is the attachment to the good states that should be abandoned, not the good states themselves.
Note that the word itthatta, which in the stock declaration of arahantship signifies any state of manifest existence, is here glossed by MA as manussaloka, the human world.
Note that this meditative experience does not make manifest any conditioned phenomena of the world, and thus may be truly described as “non-manifesting.” that is not partaken of by the earthness of earth, that is not partaken of by the waterness of water……that is not partaken of by the allness of all.’
Nothing distinctive can be found.
Now a good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this effect......Now it is good to see such arahants.”
Now a good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this effect......Now it is good to see such arahants.”
Now a good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this effect: ‘That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.
Now a good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this effect: ‘That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.
Now a good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this effect: ‘That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.
Now a good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this effect: ‘That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.’
Now a good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this effect: ‘That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.’
Now a good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this effect: ‘That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.’
Now a good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this effect: ‘That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened…...he reveals a holy life that is utterly perfect and pure.’
Now a good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this effect: ‘The Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.
Now a good report of Master Kaccāna has been spread to this effect: ‘He is wise, discerning, sagacious, learned, articulate, and perspicacious; he is aged and he is an arahant.
Now a good report of that Blessed Gotama has been spread to this effect: ‘That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.’
Now a number of bhikkhus were sitting in the assembly hall, where they had met together on returning from their almsround, after their meal, when this discussion arose among them: “It is wonderful, friends, it is marvellous, how it has been said by the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, that mindfulness of the body, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and great benefit.”
Now a number of bhikkhus were sitting in the assembly hall, where they had met together on returning from their almsround, after their meal, when this discussion arose among them: “It is wonderful, friends, it is marvellous, how mighty and powerful is the Tathāgata!
Now although that bhikkhu by eating that almsfood passed the night and day neither hungry nor weak, yet the first bhikkhu is more to be respected and commended by me.
Now among these worthy recluses and brahmins, heads of orders…regarded by many as saints, who is honoured, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples?
Now any recluses or brahmins that come to our town are our guests, and guests should be honoured, respected, revered, and venerated by us.
Now as to that Great Hell, bhikkhus:
Now as to that Great Hell, bhikkhus:
Now as to the recluses and brahmins who hold the doctrine and view “there definitely are no immaterial realms,” if their word is true then it is certainly still possible that I might reappear among the gods of the fine-material realms who consist of mind.
Now as to the recluses and brahmins who hold the doctrine and view “there definitely is no cessation of being,” if their word is true then it is certainly still possible that I might reappear among the gods of the immaterial realms who consist of perception.
Now at that time a clansman named Raṭṭhapāla, the son of the leading clan in that same Thullakoṭṭhita, was sitting in the assembly.
Now at that time five bhikkhus were waiting upon me, thinking: ‘If our recluse Gotama achieves some higher state, he will inform us.’
Now at that time five hundred brahmins from diverse provinces were staying at Sāvatthī for some business or other.
Now at that time five hundred Licchavis had met together in an assembly hall for some business or other.
Now at that time the brahmin Brahmāyu had a young brahmin student named Uttara who was a master of the Three Vedas…fully versed in natural philosophy and in the marks of a Great Man.
Now at that time the brahmin Dhānañjāni was having his cows milked in a cowshed outside the city.
Now at that time the venerable Angulimāla was a forest dweller, an almsfood eater, a refuse-rag wearer, and restricted himself to three robes.
Now both the internal air element and the external air element are simply air element.
Now both the internal air element and the external air element are simply air element.
Now both the internal air element and the external air element are simply air element.
Now both the internal earth element and the external earth element are simply earth element.
Now both the internal earth element and the external earth element are simply earth element.
Now both the internal earth element and the external earth element are simply earth element.
Now both the internal fire element and the external fire element are simply fire element.
Now both the internal fire element and the external fire element are simply fire element.
Now both the internal fire element and the external fire element are simply fire element.
Now both the internal space element and the external space element are simply space element.
Now both the internal space element and the external space element are simply space element.
Now both the internal water element and the external water element are simply water element.
Now both the internal water element and the external water element are simply water element.
Now both the internal water element and the external water element are simply water element.
Now delight in feelings is clinging.
Now does the abandoning and relinquishing of those views come about in a bhikkhu who is attending only to the beginning?” 
Now how should the meaning of these statements be regarded, Master Ānanda?”
Now how should the meaning of these statements be regarded, Master Ānanda?”
Now I am old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, come to the last stage; my years have turned eighty.
Now I recall having eaten a single kola-fruit a day.
Now I recall having eaten a single rice grain a day.
Now I shall go myself and find out whether or not he has gone over to discipleship under the recluse Gotama.”
Now if they possessed these five factors of striving, and if their striving was right, would there be any difference among them in that respect?”
Now if they possessed these five factors of striving, it would lead to their welfare and happiness for a long time.”
Now if they possessed these five factors of striving, would there be any difference among them here in that respect?”
Now if you do not give him your permission to go forth from the home life into homelessness, he will die there.
Now if you see any such root of dispute either in yourselves or externally, you should strive to abandon that same evil root of dispute.
Now if you see any such root of dispute either in yourselves or externally, you should strive to abandon that same evil root of dispute.
Now in whatever region the wheel-treasure pauses, there the Wheel-turning Monarch takes up his abode with his four-constituent army.
Now is it also possible, Master Gotama, to describe gradual training, gradual practice, and gradual progress in this Dhamma and Discipline?” 
Now is not the time to be silent.
Now it has gradually become current among ordinary people.
Now it is good to see such arahants.”
Now it is good to see such arahants.”
Now it is good to see such arahants.”
Now it is good to see such arahants.”
Now it is good to see such arahants.” 
Now let him follow me who wants
Now Master Raṭṭhapāla said: ‘ any world has no shelter and no protector.’
Now Master Raṭṭhapāla said: ‘ any world has nothing of its own; one has to leave all and pass on.’
Now Mistress Vedehikā had a maid named Kālī, who was clever, nimble, and neat in her work.
Now of these five faculties, each having a separate field, a separate domain, not experiencing each other’s field and domain, what is their resort, what experiences their fields and domains?” 
Now on that occasion a bhikkhu named Gulissāni, a forest-dweller of lax behaviour, had come on a visit to stay in the midst of the Sangha for some business or other.
Now on that occasion a brahmin student named Assalāyana was staying at Sāvatthī.
Now on that occasion a brahmin woman named Dhānañjānī was staying at Caṇḍalakappa, having full confidence in the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha.
Now on that occasion a certain householder’s dear and beloved only son had died.
Now on that occasion a new assembly hall had recently been built for the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu and it had not yet been inhabited by any recluse or brahmin or human being at all.
Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus had declared final knowledge in the presence of the Blessed One thus: “We understand: Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.”
Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus were engaged in making up a robe for the Blessed One, thinking: “With his robe completed, at the end of the three months, the Blessed One will set out wandering.”
Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus were going to see the Blessed One.
Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus were sitting together in the hermitage discussing the Dhamma.
Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus were walking up and down in the open.
Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus were walking up and down in the open.
Now on that occasion a number of well-known wanderers were staying at the Peacocks’ Sanctuary, the wanderers’ park—that is, Annabhāra, Varadhara, and the wanderer Sakuludāyin, as well as other well-known wanderers.
Now on that occasion a number of well-known, well-to-do brahmins were staying at Icchānangala, that is, the brahmin Cankī, the brahmin Tārukkha, the brahmin Pokkharasāti, the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi, the brahmin Todeyya, and other well-known, well-to-do brahmins.
Now on that occasion a palace named Kokanada had recently been built for Prince Bodhi, and it had not yet been inhabited by any recluse or brahmin or any human being at all.
Now on that occasion a pernicious view had arisen in a bhikkhu named Ariṭṭha, formerly of the vulture killers, thus: “As I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, those things called obstructions by the Blessed One are not able to obstruct one who engages in them.⇃⇂ 
Now on that occasion a pernicious view had arisen in a bhikkhu named Sāti, son of a fisherman, thus: “As I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is this same consciousness that runs and wanders through the round of rebirths, not another.” 
Now on that occasion a pernicious view had arisen in Baka the Brahmā thus: ‘This is permanent, this is everlasting, this is eternal, this is total, this is not subject to pass away; for this is where one is neither born nor ages nor dies nor passes away nor reappears, and beyond this there is no other escape.’ 
Now on that occasion a thunderbolt-wielding spirit holding an iron thunderbolt that burned, blazed, and glowed, appeared in the air above Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son, thinking: “If this Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son, when asked a reasonable question up to the third time by the Blessed One, still does not answer, I shall split his head into seven pieces here and now.”
Now on that occasion a young tender infant was lying prone on Prince Abhaya’s lap.
Now on that occasion elder bhikkhus had been teaching and instructing new bhikkhus; some elder bhikkhus had been teaching and instructing ten bhikkhus, some elder bhikkhus had been teaching and instructing twenty…thirty…forty bhikkhus.
Now on that occasion five hundred bhikkhus headed by the venerable Sāriputta and the venerable Mahā Moggallāna had come to Cātumā to see the Blessed One.
Now on that occasion five hundred brahmins from various states were staying at Opasāda for some business or other.
Now on that occasion great crowds of people were gathering at the gates of King Pasenadi’s inner palace, very loud and noisy, crying: “Sire, the bandit Angulimāla is in your realm; he is murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to living beings!
Now on that occasion King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha, being suspicious of King Pajjota, was having Rājagaha fortified.
Now on that occasion King Pasenadi of Kosala had arrived at Nagaraka for some business or other.
Now on that occasion King Pasenadi of Kosala had arrived at Ujuññā for some business or other.
Now on that occasion King Pasenadi of Kosala had mounted the elephant Ekapuṇḍarīka and was riding out from Sāvatthī at midday.
Now on that occasion many thousands of deities followed the Blessed One, thinking: “Today the Blessed One will lead the venerable Rāhula further to the destruction of the taints.”
Now on that occasion many very well known clansmen had gone forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness under the Blessed One—the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Nandiya, the venerable Kimbila, the venerable Bhagu, the venerable Kuṇḍadhāna, the venerable Revata, the venerable Ānanda, and other very well-known clansmen.
Now on that occasion Prince Bodhi was standing in the outer porch waiting for the Blessed One.
Now on that occasion Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son was staying at Vesālī, a debater and a clever speaker regarded by many as a saint.
Now on that occasion Sakka, ruler of gods, was furnished and endowed a hundredfold with the five kinds of heavenly music, and he was enjoying it in the Pleasure Park of the Single Lotus.
Now on that occasion Samīti the cartwright’s son was planing a felloe and the Ājīvaka Paṇḍuputta, son of a former cartwright, was standing by.
Now on that occasion some brahmin householders of Verañja were on a visit to Sāvatthī for some business or other.
Now on that occasion some gamblers were playing with dice not far from the Blessed One.
Now on that occasion someone threw a clod and hit the venerable Angulimāla’s body, someone else threw a stick and hit his body, and someone else threw a potsherd and hit his body.
Now on that occasion Sunakkhatta, son of the Licchavis, had recently left this Dhamma and Discipline.
Now on that occasion the bhikkhus at Kosambī had taken to quarrelling and brawling and were deep in disputes, stabbing each other with verbal daggers.
Now on that occasion the bhikkhus at Kosambī had taken to quarrelling and brawling and were deep in disputes, stabbing each other with verbal daggers.
Now on that occasion the bhikkhus led by Assaji and Punabbasuka were residing at Kīṭāgiri.
Now on that occasion the Blessed One was seated finishing some amiable talk with some very senior brahmins.
Now on that occasion the brahmin Brahmāyu was living at Mithilā.
Now on that occasion the brahmin Cankī had retired to the upper storey of his palace for his midday rest.
Now on that occasion the brahmin Cankī was ruling over Opasāda, a crown property abounding in living beings, rich in grasslands, woodlands, waterways, and grain, a royal endowment, a sacred grant given to him by King Pasenadi of Kosala.
Now on that occasion the brahmin Ghọamukha had arrived in Benares for some business or other.
Now on that occasion the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi was driving out of Sāvatthī in the middle of the day in an all-white chariot drawn by white mares.
Now on that occasion the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi was driving out of Sāvatthī in the middle of the day in an all-white chariot drawn by white mares.
Now on that occasion the brahmin Sela was staying at Āpaṇa.
Now on that occasion the brahmin student Subha, Todeyya’s son, was staying at the residence of a certain householder in Sāvatthī for some business or other.
Now on that occasion the brahmin Sundarika Bhāradvāja was sitting not far from the Blessed One.
Now on that occasion the elder bhikkhus were taking turns in advising the bhikkhunīs, but the venerable Nandaka did not want to advise them when his turn came.
Now on that occasion the householder Anāthapiṇḍika was afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill.
Now on that occasion the householder Dasama of Aṭṭhakanāgara had arrived at Pāṭaliputta for some business or other.
Now on that occasion the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta had just died at P̄v̄.
Now on that occasion the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta was seated together with a large assembly of laymen from Bālaka headed by Upāli.
Now on that occasion the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta was staying at Nāḷandā with a large assembly of Nigaṇṭhas.
Now on that occasion the novice Aciravata was living in a forest hut.
Now on that occasion the Sakyans of Cātumā had met together in their assembly hall for some business or other.
Now on that occasion the venerable Angulimāla was sitting not far from the Blessed One.
Now on that occasion the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Nandiya and the venerable Kimbila were living at the Eastern Bamboo Park.
Now on that occasion the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Nandiya, and the venerable Kimbila were living at the Park of the Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood.
Now on that occasion the venerable Kumāra Kassapa was living in the Blind Men’s Grove.
Now on that occasion the venerable Lomasakangiya was living in the Sakyan country at Kapilavatthu in Nigrodha’s Park.
Now on that occasion the venerable Mahā Moggallāna was walking up and down in the open.
Now on that occasion the venerable Mahā Moggallāna was sitting not far from the Blessed One.
Now on that occasion the venerable Moliya Phagguna was associating overmuch with bhikkhunīs.
Now on that occasion the venerable Nāgasamāla was standing behind the Blessed One fanning him.
Now on that occasion the venerable Rāhula was living at Ambalaṭṭhikā.
Now on that occasion the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s father was sitting in the hall of the central door having his hair dressed.
Now on that occasion the venerable Samiddhi was living in a forest hut.
Now on that occasion the venerable Sāriputta was standing behind the Blessed One, fanning him.
Now on that occasion the venerable Sāriputta was wandering in the Southern Hills with a large Sangha of bhikkhus.
Now on that occasion the venerable Sāriputta, the venerable Mahā Cunda, and the venerable Channa were living on the mountain Vulture Peak.
Now on that occasion the venerable Sāriputta was seated near the Blessed One.
Now on that occasion the venerable Ānanda was instructing, urging, rousing, and gladdening the bhikkhus with talk on the Dhamma in the assembly hall.
Now on that occasion the venerable Ānanda, along with many bhikkhus, was busy making robes at Gh̄ṭ̄ the Sakyan’s dwelling.
Now on that occasion the wanderer Sakuludāyin was seated with a large assembly of wanderers who were making an uproar, loudly and noisily talking many kinds of pointless talk, such as talk of kings......
Now on that occasion the wanderer Sakuludāyin was seated with a large assembly of wanderers who were making an uproar… …“For what discussion are you sitting together here now, Udāyin?
Now on that occasion the wanderer Sakuludāyin was staying in the Peacocks’ Sanctuary, the wanderers’ park, with a large assembly of wanderers.
Now on that occasion the wanderer Sandaka was seated with a large assembly of wanderers who were making an uproar, loudly and noisily talking many kinds of pointless talk, such as talk of kings, robbers, ministers, armies, dangers, battles, food, drink, clothing, beds, garlands, perfumes, relatives, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, countries, women, heroes, streets, wells, the dead, trifles, the origin of the world, the origin of the sea, whether things are so or are not so.
Now on that occasion the wanderer Sandaka was staying in the Pilakkha-tree Cave with a large assembly of wanderers.
Now on that occasion the wanderer Uggāhamāna Samaṇamaṇḍikāputta was staying in Mallikā’s Park, the single-halled Tinduka plantation for philosophical debates,  together with a large following of wanderers, with as many as three hundred wanderers.
Now on that occasion the wanderer Uggāhamāna was seated with a large assembly of wanderers who were making an uproar, loudly and noisily talking many kinds of pointless talk, such as talk of kings......whether things are so or are not so.
Now on that occasion the wanderer Vacchagotta was staying in the Wanderers’ Park of the Single White-lotus Mango Tree.
Now on that occasion there was a bandit in the realm of King Pasenadi of Kosala named Angulimāla, who was murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to living beings.
Now on that occasion there were many resting places prepared in Kāḷakhemaka the Sakyan’s dwelling.
Now on that occasion, when it was morning, the Blessed One had finished dressing and had taken his bowl and outer robe, desiring to go into Vesālī for alms.
Now Sāriputta’s insight into states one by one as they occurred was this:
Now something may be fully accepted out of faith, yet it may be empty, hollow, and false; but something else may not be fully accepted out of faith, yet it may be factual, true, and unmistaken.
Now suppose someone said: ‘The rotting creeper by which that quail is tethered and thereby expects injury, captivity, or death, is for her a feeble, weak, rotting, coreless tether.’
Now suppose someone said: ‘The stout leather thongs by which this royal tusker elephant is tethered…are for him a strong, stout, tough, unrotting tether and a thick yoke.’
Now suppose someone said: ‘The tethers by which that householder or householder’s son is tethered so that he can abandon his vast number of gold ingots…his vast number of men and women slaves, and shave off his hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness—for him those are a strong, stout, tough, unrotting tether and a thick yoke.’
Now suppose someone said: ‘The tethers by which that man is tethered so that he cannot abandon his one dilapidated hovel…and his hag of a wife, not the best kind, and shave off his hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness—for him those are a feeble, weak, rotting, coreless tether.’
Now suppose that I had four disciples with a hundred years’ lifespan, perfect in mindfulness, retentiveness, memory, and lucidity of wisdom.
Now that unshakeable deliverance of mind is void of lust, void of hate, void of delusion.
Now that unshakeable deliverance of mind is void of lust, void of hate, void of delusion.
Now that unshakeable deliverance of mind is void of lust, void of hate, void of delusion.
Now the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, lived near the market town Vebhalinga.
Now the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, lived near the market town Vebhalinga.
Now the Brahmā of a Hundred Thousand abides resolved on pervading a world-system of a hundred thousand worlds, and he abides resolved on pervading the beings that have reappeared there.
Now the Brahmā of a Thousand abides resolved on pervading a world-system of a thousand worlds, and he abides resolved on pervading the beings that have reappeared there.
Now the Brahmā of Five Thousand abides resolved on pervading a world-system of five thousand worlds, and he abides resolved on pervading the beings that have reappeared there.
Now the Brahmā of Ten Thousand abides resolved on pervading a world-system of ten thousand worlds, and he abides resolved on pervading the beings that have reappeared there.
Now the pleasure and joy that arise dependent on these five cords of sensual pleasure are called sensual pleasure.
Now the pleasure and joy that arise dependent on these five cords of sensual pleasure are called sensual pleasure—a filthy pleasure, a coarse pleasure, an ignoble pleasure.
Now the pleasure and joy that arise dependent on these five cords of sensual pleasure are the gratification in the case of sensual pleasures.
Now the radiance of the jewel-treasure spreads around for a whole league.
Now the seer Devala the Dark heard this.
Now the thirty-two marks of a Great Man have been handed down in our hymns, and the Great Man who is endowed with them has only two possible destinies, no other.
Now the venerable Sāriputta and I shall look after the Sangha of bhikkhus.’”
Now there are disciples of mine who are almsfood eaters, who go on unbroken almsround from house to house, who delight in gathering their food; when they have entered among the houses they will not consent even when invited to sit down.
Now there are disciples of mine who are forest dwellers, dwellers in remote resting places, who live withdrawn in remote jungle-thicket resting places and return to the midst of the Sangha once each half-month for the recitation of the Pātimokkha.
Now there are disciples of mine who are refuse-rag wearers, wearers of coarse robes; they collect rags from the charnel ground, rubbish heaps, or shops, make them into patched robes, and wear them.
Now there are disciples of mine who are tree-root dwellers and open-air dwellers, who do not use a roof for eight months, while I sometimes live in gabled mansions plastered within and without, protected against the wind, secured by door bolts, with shuttered windows.
Now there are disciples of mine who live on a cupful or half a cupful of food, a bilva fruit’s or half a bilva fruit’s quantity of food, while I sometimes eat the full contents of my almsbowl or even more.
Now there are drops of sweat on your forehead and they have soaked through your upper robe and fallen to the ground.
Now there are two destinations for one with wrong view, I say: hell or the animal realm.
Now there are two destinations for one with wrong view, I say: hell or the animal realm.
Now there is nothing this royal tusker elephant would not do.’
Now there is this kind of person who does not torment himself or pursue the practice of torturing himself and who does not torment others or pursue the practice of torturing others; who, since he torments neither himself nor others, is here and now hungerless, extinguished, and cooled, and abides experiencing bliss, having himself become holy.
Now there was a clansman named Pukkusāti who had gone forth from the home life into homelessness out of faith in the Blessed One, and on that occasion he was already staying in the potter’s workshop.
Now these five faculties, each having a separate field, a separate domain, not experiencing each other’s field and domain, have mind as their resort, and mind experiences their fields and domains.”
Now this almsfood is one of the material things.
Now this has been said by the Blessed One: “One who sees dependent origination sees the Dhamma; one who sees the Dhamma sees dependent origination.”
Now this has been said by the Blessed One: “One who sees dependent origination sees the Dhamma; one who sees the Dhamma sees dependent origination.”
Now this is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering in the life to come, having sensual pleasures as its cause, sensual pleasures as its source, sensual pleasures as its basis, the cause being simply sensual pleasures.
Now this is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering visible here and now, having sensual pleasures as its cause, sensual pleasures as its source, sensual pleasures as its basis, the cause being simply sensual pleasures.
Now this too is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering here and now…the cause being simply sensual pleasures.
Now this too is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering here and now…the cause being simply sensual pleasures.
Now this too is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering here and now…the cause being simply sensual pleasures.
Now this too is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering here and now…the cause being simply sensual pleasures.
Now those who speak the Dhamma are difficult to dispute with.
Now those who speak the Dhamma are difficult to dispute with.
Now those who speak the Dhamma are difficult to dispute with.
Now we ask the venerable Anuruddha: Friend Anuruddha, the Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood is delightful…What kind of bhikkhu, friend Anuruddha, could illuminate this Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood?”
Now we ask the venerable Gotama: Who abides in greater pleasure, King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha or the venerable Gotama?’
Now we ask the venerable Mahā Kassapa: Friend Kassapa, the Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood is delightful…What kind of bhikkhu, friend Kassapa, could illuminate this Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood?”
Now we ask the venerable Mahā Moggallāna: Friend Moggallāna, the Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood is delightful…What kind of bhikkhu, friend Moggallāna, could illuminate this Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood?”
Now we ask the venerable Revata: Friend Revata, the Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood is delightful, the night is moonlit, the sāla trees are all in blossom, and heavenly scents seem to be floating in the air.
Now we ask the venerable Sāriputta: Friend Sāriputta, the Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood is delightful, the night is moonlit, the sāla trees are all in blossom, and heavenly scents seem to be floating in the air.
Now we shall go to pay respects to that Master Raṭṭhapāla.”
Now what if, on such nights as these, I were to dwell in such awe-inspiring, horrifying abodes as orchard shrines, woodland shrines, and tree shrines?
Now whether or not the word of those good recluses and brahmins is true, let me assume that there is no causality: still this good person is here and now censured by the wise as an immoral person, one of wrong view who holds the doctrine of non-causality.
Now whether or not the word of those good recluses and brahmins is true, let me assume that there is no causality: still this good person is here and now praised by the wise as a virtuous person, one with right view who holds the doctrine of causality.
Now whether or not the word of those good recluses and brahmins is true, let me assume that there is no doing: still this good person is here and now censured by the wise as an immoral person, one of wrong view who holds the doctrine of non-doing.
Now whether or not the word of those good recluses and brahmins is true, let me assume that there is no doing: still this good person is here and now praised by the wise as a virtuous person, one with right view who holds the doctrine of doing.
Now whether or not the word of those good recluses and brahmins is true, let me assume that there is no other world: still this good person is here and now censured by the wise as an immoral person, one of wrong view who holds the doctrine of nihilism.
Now whether or not the word of those good recluses and brahmins is true, let me assume that there is no other world: still this good person is here and now praised by the wise as a virtuous person, one with right view who holds the doctrine of affirmation.
Now while he was tidying up the Migācīra Garden, the gamekeeper saw the venerable Raṭṭhapāla seated at the root of a tree for the day’s abiding.
Now while this discourse was being spoken, through not clinging the minds of sixty bhikkhus were liberated from the taints.
Now while this discourse was being spoken, through not clinging the minds of sixty bhikkhus were liberated from the taints.
Now while this discourse was being spoken, through not clinging the venerable Rāhula’s mind was liberated from the taints.
Now who will expound this in detail?”
Now who will expound this in detail?”
Now who will expound this in detail?”
Now would anyone be speaking rightly who spoke thus: ‘The root, trunk, branches, and foliage of this great tree standing possessed of heartwood are impermanent and subject to change, but its shadow is permanent, everlasting, eternal, not subject to change’?”
Now would anyone be speaking rightly who spoke thus: ‘While this oil-lamp is burning, its oil, wick, and flame are impermanent and subject to change, but its radiance is permanent, everlasting, eternal, not subject to change’?”
Now you, great king, thought: “The Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, does not accept from me a residence for the Rains in Benares,” and you were very disappointed and sad; but the potter Ghaṭīkāra is not and will not be so.
Now ‘fear of crocodiles’ is a designation for gluttony.
Now ‘fear of sharks’ is a designation for women.
Now ‘fear of waves’ is a designation for anger and irritation.
Now ‘fear of whirlpools’ is a designation for the five cords of sensual pleasure.
Now, bhikkhus, do ageing and death cease with the cessation of birth or not, or how do you take it in this case?”
Now, bhikkhus, do ageing and death have birth as condition or not, or how do you take it in this case?”
Now, bhikkhus, do formations cease with the cessation of ignorance or not, or how do you take it in this case?”
Now, bhikkhus, do formations have ignorance as condition or not, or how do you take it in this case?”
Now, bhikkhus, does being have clinging as condition or not, or how do you take it in this case?”
Now, bhikkhus, does birth have being as condition or not, or how do you take it in this case?”
Now, bhikkhus, does clinging have craving as condition or not, or how do you take it in this case?”
Now, bhikkhus, does consciousness have formations as condition or not, or how do you take it in this case?”
Now, bhikkhus, does contact have the sixfold base as condition or not, or how do you take it in this case?”
Now, bhikkhus, does craving have feeling as condition or not, or how do you take it in this case?”
Now, bhikkhus, does feeling have contact as condition or not, or how do you take it in this case?”
Now, bhikkhus, does mentality-materiality have consciousness as condition or not, or how do you take it in this case?”
Now, bhikkhus, does the sixfold base have mentality-materiality as condition or not, or how do you take it in this case?”
Now, bhikkhus, it is by so doing that that man would be doing what should be done with that raft.
Now, bhikkhus, Subhūti is a clansman who has entered upon the way without conflict.” 
Now, bhikkhus, what do you think is the reason for that?”
Now, bhikkhus, what do you think?
Now, bhikkhus, you have been trained by me through interrogation on various occasions in regard to various things.
Now, bhikkhus, you may think thus: ‘We are possessed of shame and fear of wrongdoing and our bodily conduct has been purified.
Now, bhikkhus, you may think thus: ‘We are possessed of shame and fear of wrongdoing, our bodily conduct and verbal conduct have been purified, and our mental conduct has been purified.
Now, bhikkhus, you may think thus: ‘We are possessed of shame and fear of wrongdoing, our bodily conduct has been purified, and our verbal conduct has been purified.
Now, bhikkhus, you may think thus: ‘We are possessed of shame and fear of wrongdoing, our bodily conduct, verbal conduct, and mental conduct have been purified, and our livelihood has been purified.
Now, bhikkhus, you may think thus: ‘We are possessed of shame and fear of wrongdoing, our bodily conduct, verbal conduct, mental conduct, and livelihood have been purified, and we guard the doors of our sense faculties.
Now, bhikkhus, you may think thus: ‘We are possessed of shame and fear of wrongdoing, our bodily conduct, verbal conduct, mental conduct, and livelihood have been purified, we guard the doors of our sense faculties, we are moderate in eating, and we are devoted to wakefulness.
Now, bhikkhus, you may think thus: ‘We are possessed of shame and fear of wrongdoing, our bodily conduct, verbal conduct, mental conduct, and livelihood have been purified, we guard the doors of our sense faculties, we are moderate in eating, we are devoted to wakefulness, and we are possessed of mindfulness and full awareness.
Now, bhikkhus, you may think thus: ‘We are possessed of shame and fear of wrongdoing.
Now, brahmin, since Rājagaha exists and the path leading to Rājagaha exists and you are present as the guide, what is the cause and reason why, when those men have been thus advised and instructed by you, one man takes a wrong road and goes to the west and one arrives safely in Rājagaha?” 
Now, dear Sir, you may go at your own convenience.”
Now, Evil One, on that occasion most of those human beings, when they died, reappeared on the dissolution of the body, after death, in a happy destination, even the heavenly world.
Now, Evil One, on that occasion most of those human beings, when they died, reappeared on the dissolution of the body, after death, in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
Now, friends, if you wish, go to the Blessed One and ask him about the meaning of this.
Now, friends, if you wish, go to the Blessed One and ask him about the meaning of this.
Now, friends, if you wish, go to the Blessed One and ask him about the meaning of this.
Now, good sir, this is permanent, this is everlasting, this is eternal, this is total, this is not subject to pass away; for this is where one is neither born nor ages nor dies nor passes away nor reappears, and beyond this there is no other escape.’
Now, householder, where would the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta describe his rebirth?”
Now, indeed, you often abide in the abiding of a great man.
Now, my dear Sañjikāputta, for the third time I go to the Blessed One for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
Now, Puṇṇa, it is time to do as you think fit.”
Now, venerable sir, I see some recluses and brahmins leading a limited holy life for ten years, twenty years, thirty years, or forty years, and then on a later occasion I see them well groomed and well anointed, with trimmed hair and beards, enjoying themselves provided and endowed with the five cords of sensual pleasure.
Now, venerable sir, I shall go and refute the recluse Gotama’s doctrine on the basis of this statement.
Now, when faithful householders give us good food of various kinds during the day outside the proper time, it seems these put a muzzle on our mouths.’
O Blessed One, golden is your colour, And white your teeth; you are strong.
O Hero, extend your feet, And let these great beings worship the Teacher.”
Odours cognizable by the nose are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.
Of all the brahmin householders who live in Mithilā, the brahmin Brahmāyu is pronounced the foremost of them in wealth, in knowledge of the hymns, and in age and fame.
Of all the kinds of deliverance of mind through nothingness, the unshakeable deliverance of mind is pronounced the best.
Of all the kinds of immeasurable deliverance of mind, the unshakeable deliverance of mind is pronounced the best.
Of all the kinds of signless deliverance of mind, the unshakeable deliverance of mind is pronounced the best.
Of all the teachings resorted to, I have come to the very best.
Of birth make their distinctive mark, With humans no differences of birth
Of both merit and evil deeds, Is sorrowless, stainless, and pure:
Of men, who have plucked out the dart.
Of supreme serenity, with extensive wisdom, a man of great wisdom, devoid of all greed;
of the Elephant’s Footprint
of the Elephant’s Footprint
of the Heartwood
Of Vidhura the disciple
Of Vidhura the disciple
Of what family is his mother?”
Of what four?
Of what four?
Oh the Dhamma!
Oh the Dhamma!
Oh, how much more so must be the Blessed One, your teacher!”
Oh, how well proclaimed is the Dhamma!
Oh, how well proclaimed is the Dhamma!’ But he does not say: ‘I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.’”
Oh, that I might attain the human state, that a Tathāgata, accomplished and fully enlightened, might appear in the world, that I might wait on that Blessed One, that the Blessed One might teach me the Dhamma, and that I might come to understand that Blessed One’s Dhamma!’
On a later occasion he might see that woman standing with another man, chatting, joking, and laughing.
On a later occasion the brahmin Dhānañjāni became afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill.
On a later occasion, abandoning a small or a large fortune, abandoning a small or a large circle of relations, I shaved off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and went forth from the home life into homelessness.
On a later occasion, abandoning a small or a large fortune, abandoning a small or a large circle of relatives, he shaves off his hair and beard, puts on the yellow robe, and goes forth from the home life into homelessness.
On a later occasion, abandoning a small or a large fortune, abandoning a small or a large circle of relatives, he shaves off his hair and beard, puts on the yellow robe, and goes forth from the home life into homelessness.
On a later occasion, having understood as they actually are the gratification, the danger, and the escape in the case of sensual pleasures, I abandoned craving for sensual pleasures, I removed fever for sensual pleasures, and I abide without thirst, with a mind inwardly at peace.
On a later occasion, having understood as they actually are the origin, the disappearance, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in the case of forms, he might abandon craving for forms, remove fever for forms, and abide without thirst, with a mind inwardly at peace.
On a later occasion, having understood as they actually are the origin, the disappearance, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in the case of tangibles, he might abandon craving for tangibles, remove fever for tangibles, and abide without thirst, with a mind inwardly at peace.
On a later occasion, the venerable Puṇṇa attained final Nibb̄na.
On account of it he lauds himself and disparages others thus: ‘I am concentrated, my mind is unified, but these other bhikkhus are unconcentrated, with their minds astray.’
On account of it he lauds himself and disparages others thus: ‘I am concentrated, my mind is unified, but these other bhikkhus are unconcentrated, with their minds astray.’
On account of it he lauds himself and disparages others thus: ‘I am one who gets gain and renown, but these other bhikkhus are unknown, of no account.’
On account of it he lauds himself and disparages others thus: ‘I am virtuous, of good character, but these other bhikkhus are immoral, of evil character.’
On account of it he lauds himself and disparages others thus: ‘I am virtuous, of good character, but these other bhikkhus are immoral, of evil character.’
On account of it he lauds himself and disparages others thus: ‘I have gain, honour, and renown, but these other bhikkhus are unknown, of no account.’
On account of it he lauds himself and disparages others thus: ‘I live knowing and seeing, but these other bhikkhus live unknowing and unseeing.’
On account of it he lauds himself and disparages others thus: ‘I live knowing and seeing, but these other bhikkhus live unknowing and unseeing.’
On account of them, these evil unwholesome mental states such as covetousness, ill will, and presumption arise, and they constitute an obstruction to a noble disciple in training here.
On alternative interpretations of its components, the expression might have been rendered “notions the proliferation of perceptions” or “perceptual notions proliferation.”
On an occasion when he abandons the killing of living beings and abstains from killing living beings, does his self then feel only pleasure or both pleasure and pain?”
On an occasion when he abandons the taking of what is not given and abstains from taking what is not given…when he abandons misconduct in sensual pleasures and abstains from misconduct in sensual pleasures… when he abandons false speech and abstains from false speech, does his self then feel only pleasure or both pleasure and pain?”
On an occasion when he undertakes and practises some kind of asceticism, does his self then feel only pleasure or both pleasure and pain?”
On hearing a sound with the ear… On smelling an odour with the nose…On tasting a flavour with the tongue…On touching a tangible with the body…On cognizing a mind-object with the mind, one explores a mind-object productive of joy, one explores a mind-object productive of grief, one explores a mind-object productive of equanimity.
On hearing a sound with the ear…O n smelling an odour with the nose…On tasting a flavour with the tongue…On touching a tangible with the body…on cognizthe tongue...On touching a tangible with the body...on cognizing a mind-object with the mind, a noble disciple does not grasp at its signs and features.
On hearing a sound with the ear…On smelling an odour with the nose…On tasting a flavour with the tongue… On touching a tangible with the body… On cognizing a mind-object with the mind, one explores a mind-object productive of joy, one explores a mind-object productive of grief, one explores a mind-object productive of equanimity.
On hearing a sound with the ear…On smelling an odour with the nose…On tasting a flavour with the tongue…On touching a tangible with the body…On cognizing a mind-object with the mind, a bhikkhu does not grasp at its signs and features.
On hearing a sound with the ear…On smelling an odour with the nose…On tasting a flavour with the tongue…On touching a tangible with the body…On cognizing a mind-object with the mind, do not grasp at its signs and features.
On hearing a sound with the ear…On smelling an odour with the nose…On tasting a flavour with the tongue…On touching a tangible with the body…On cognizing a mind-object with the mind, do not grasp at its signs and features.
On hearing a sound with the ear…On smelling an odour with the nose…On tasting a flavour with the tongue…On touching a tangible with the body…On cognizing a mind-object with the mind, he does not grasp at its signs and features.
On hearing a sound with the ear…On smelling an odour with the nose…On tasting a flavour with the tongue…On touching a tangible with the body…On cognizing a mind-object with the mind, he does not grasp at its signs and features.
On hearing a sound with the ear…On smelling an odour with the nose…On tasting a flavour with the tongue…On touching a tangible with the body…On cognizing a mind-object with the mind, he grasps at its signs and features.
On hearing a sound with the ear…On smelling an odour with the nose…On tasting a flavour with the tongue…On touching a tangible with the body…On cognizing a mind-object with the mind, we will not grasp at its signs and features.
On hearing the Dhamma he acquires faith in the Tathāgata.
On hearing the Dhamma he acquires faith in the Tathāgata.
On hearing the Dhamma I acquired faith in the Tathāgata.
On his death the Nigaṇṭhas divided, split into two; and they had taken to quarrelling and brawling and were deep in disputes, stabbing each other with verbal daggers: “You do not understand this Dhamma and Discipline.
On his death the Nigaṇṭhas divided, split into two…and is now with its shrine broken, left without a refuge.’
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Benares in the Deer Park at Isipatana.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Campā on the banks of the Gaggarā Lake with a large Sangha of bhikkhus.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Cātumā in a myrobalan grove.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Icchānangala, in the wood near Icchānangala.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Kajangalā in a grove of mukhelu trees.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Kosamb in Ghosita’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Kosambī in Ghosita’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Kusinārā, in the Grove of Offerings.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Nāḷandā in Pāvārika’s Mango Grove.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Nādikā in the Brick House.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha in the Boar’s Cave on the mountain Vulture Peak.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha in the Mango Grove of Jīvaka Komārabhacca.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha in the Park of the Hot Springs.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha, at Isigili—the Gullet of the Seers.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Rājagaha on the mountain Vulture Peak; it was soon after Devadatta had left.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in the Eastern Park, in the Palace of Migāra’s Mother.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sāvatthī in the Eastern Park, in the Palace of Migāra’s Mother.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Sā̄vatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at S̄vatth in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at S̄āvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at S̄āvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at S̄āvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at S̄āvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at S̄āvatthī in the Eastern Park, in the Palace of Migāra’s Mother, together with many very well known elder disciples—the venerable Sāriputta, the venerable Mahā Moggallāna, the venerable Mahā Kassapa, the venerable Mahā Kaccāna, the venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita, the venerable Mahā Kappina, the venerable Mahā Cunda, the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Revata, the venerable Ānanda, and other very well known elder disciples.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at S̄āvatthī in the Eastern Park, in the Palace of Migāra’s Mother.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at S̄āvatthī in the Eastern Park, in the Palace of Migāra’s Mother.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at S̄āvatthī in the Eastern Park, in the Palace of Migāra’s Mother.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at S̄āvattī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Ujuññā, in the Kaṇṇakatthala Deer Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Vesālī in the Great Wood in the Hall with the Peaked Roof.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Vesālī in the Great Wood in the Hall with the Peaked Roof.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Vesālī in the Great Wood in the Hall with the Peaked Roof.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Vesālī in the Great Wood in the Hall with the Peaked Roof.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Vesālī in the grove outside the city to the west.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Angan country at a town of the Angans named Assapura.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Angan country at a town of the Angans named Assapura.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Bhagga country at Suṁsumāragira in the Bhesakaḷā Grove, the Deer Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the country of the Anguttarāpans where there was a town of theirs named Āpaṇa.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the country of the Anguttarāpans where there was a town of theirs named Āpaṇa.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Koliyan country where there was a town of the Koliyans named Haliddavasana.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Kosalan country at Naḷakapāna in the Palāsa Grove.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Kuru country where there was a town of the Kurus named Kammāsadhamma, on a spread of grass in the fire chamber of a brahmin belonging to the Bhāradvāja clan.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Kuru country where there was a town of the Kurus named Kammāsadhamma.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Kuru country where there was a town of the Kurus named Kammāsadhamma.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Park of the Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood together with a number of very well-known elder disciples—the venerable Sāriputta, the venerable Mahā Moggallāna, the venerable Mahā Kassapa, the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Revata, the venerable Ānanda, and other very well known elder disciples.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Sakyan country at Kapilavatthu in Nigrodha’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Sakyan country at Kapilavatthu in Nigrodha’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Sakyan country at Kapilavatthu in Nigrodha’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Sakyan country at Kapilavatthu in Nigrodha’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Sakyan country at Kapilavatthu in Nigrodha’s Park.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Sakyan country at Sāmagāma.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Sakyan country where there was a town of the Sakyans named Devadaha.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Sakyan country where there was a town of the Sakyans named Medaḷumpa.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Vajjian country at Ukkācelā on the banks of the river Ganges.
On one occasion the Blessed One was living in Ukkaṭṭhā in the Subhaga Grove at the root of a royal sāla tree.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering among the Kosalans together with a large Sangha of bhikkhus.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering by stages in the Kosalan Country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus, and eventually he arrived at a Kosalan brahmin village named Sālā.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering in the country of the Anguttarāpans with a large Sangha of bhikkhus, with twelve hundred and fifty bhikkhus, and eventually he arrived at a town of the Anguttarāpans named Āpaṇa.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering in the country of the Videhans with a large Sangha of bhikkhus, with five hundred bhikkhus.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering in the Kāsi country together with a large Sangha of bhikkhus.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering in the Kosalan country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus, and eventually arrived at a Kosalan village named Nagaravinda.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering in the Kosalan country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus, and eventually he arrived at a Kosalan brahmin village named Opasāda.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering in the Kosalan country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus, and eventually he arrived at a Kosalan brahmin village named Sālā.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering in the Kosalan country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering in the Kuru country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus, and eventually he arrived at a Kuru town named Thullakoṭṭhita.
On one occasion the Blessed One was wandering in the Magadhan country and eventually arrived at Rājagaha.
On one occasion the venerable Bakkula was living at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.
On one occasion the venerable Mahā Kaccāna was living at Madhurā in the Gundā Grove.
On one occasion the venerable Mahā Moggallāna was living in the Bhagga country at Suṁsumāragira in the Bhesakaḷā Grove, the Deer Park.
On one occasion the venerable Mahā Moggallāna was living in the Bhagga country at Suṁsumāragira in the Bhesakalā Grove, the Deer Park.
On one occasion the venerable Udena was living at Benares in the Khemiya Mango Grove.
On one occasion the Venerable Ānanda was living at Beluvagāmaka near Vesālī.
On one occasion the venerable Ānanda was living at Rājagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary, not long after the Blessed One had attained to final Nibbāna.
On one occasion, Master Ānanda, Master Gotama was living at Vesālī in the Hall with the Peaked Roof in the Great Wood.
On one occasion, the Blessed One was living at Mithilā in the Makhādeva Mango Grove.
On returning from his almsround, after his meal he sits down, folding his legs crosswise, setting his body erect, and establishing mindfulness before him.
On returning from his almsround, after his meal he sits down, folding his legs crosswise, setting his body erect, and establishing mindfulness before him.
On seeing a form with the eye, a noble disciple does not grasp at its signs and features.
On seeing a form with the eye, do not grasp at its signs and features.
On seeing a form with the eye, do not grasp at its signs and features.
On seeing a form with the eye, equanimity arises in a foolish infatuated ordinary person, in an untaught ordinary person who has not conquered his limitations or conquered the results and who is blind to danger.
On seeing a form with the eye, one explores a form productive of joy, one explores a form productive of grief, one explores a form productive of equanimity.
On seeing a form with the eye, we will not grasp at its signs and features.
On seeing him, the Wheel-turning Monarch’s mind has confidence in him thus: ‘It would be wonderful to ride the elephant, if he would undergo taming!’ Then the elephant-treasure undergoes taming just like a fine thoroughbred elephant well tamed for a long time.
On seeing him, the Wheel-turning Monarch’s mind has confidence in him thus: ‘It would be wonderful to ride the horse, if he would undergo taming!’ Then the horse-treasure undergoes taming just like a fine thoroughbred horse well tamed for a long time.
On seeing it, the head-anointed noble king thinks thus: ‘Now it has been heard by me that when a head-anointed noble king has bathed his head on the Uposatha day of the fifteenth and has ascended to the upper palace chamber for the Uposatha, and there appears to him the divine wheel-treasure with its thousand spokes, its tire, and its nave, complete in every aspect, then that king becomes a Wheel-turning Monarch.
On such an occasion he does not choose for his own affliction, or for another’s affliction, or for the affliction of both.
On that occasion a number of Nigaṇṭhas living on the Black Rock on the slopes of Isigili were practising continuous standing, rejecting seats, and were experiencing painful, racking, piercing feelings due to exertion.
On that occasion he feels only feeling that is free from affliction.
On that occasion he feels only feeling that is free from affliction.
On that occasion the venerable Bhagu was living at the village of Bālakaloṇakāra.
On that occasion the venerable Channa was afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill.
On that occasion—on the Uposatha day of the fifteenth, on the full-moon night—the Blessed One was seated in the open surrounded by the Sangha of bhikkhus.
On that occasion—the Uposatha day of the fifteenth, on the full-moon night of the Pavāraṇā ceremony —the Blessed One was seated in the open surrounded by the Sangha of bhikkhus.
On that occasion—the Uposatha day of the fifteenth, on the full-moon night— the Blessed One was seated in the open surrounded by the Sangha of bhikkhus.
On that occasion—the Uposatha day of the fifteenth, the full-moon night of the Komudī full moon of the fourth month—the Blessed One was seated in the open surrounded by the Sangha of bhikkhus.
On the contrary, final knowledge is achieved by gradual training, by gradual practice, by gradual progress.
On the contrary, Māgandiya, those recluses or brahmins who abided or abide or will abide free from thirst, with a mind inwardly at peace, all do so after having understood as they actually are the origin, the disappearance, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in the case of sensual pleasures, and it is after abandoning craving for sensual pleasures and removing fever for sensual pleasures that they abided or abide or will abide free from thirst, with a mind inwardly at peace.”
On the contrary, others will take over this property while I shall have to pass on according to my actions.”
On the contrary, Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son will refute the recluse Gotama’s assertions.”
On the contrary, the Blessed One will refute Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son’s assertions.”
On the contrary, the bodily rod is the most reprehensible for the performance of evil action, for the perpetration of evil action, and not so much the verbal rod and the mental rod.
On the contrary, the bodily rod is the most reprehensible for the performance of evil action, for the perpetration of evil action, and not so much the verbal rod and the mental rod.”
On the contrary, the bodily rod is the most reprehensible for the performance of evil action, for the perpetration of evil action, and not so much the verbal rod and the mental rod.”
On the dissolution of the body after death, would only he reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell—and not a brahmin?”
On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in the company of the gods of Defiled Radiance.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in the company of the gods of Pure Radiance.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, it is possible that the evolving consciousness may pass on in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, it is possible that the evolving consciousness may pass on in the base of nothingness.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, it is possible that the evolving consciousness may pass on in the base of nothingness.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, it is possible that the evolving consciousness may pass on in the base of nothingness.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, it is possible that the evolving consciousness may pass on in the imperturbable.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, it is possible that the evolving consciousness may pass on in the imperturbable.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, it is possible that the evolving consciousness may pass on in the imperturbable.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, would he reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world, or not, or how does it appear to you in this case?”
On the dissolution of the body, after death, would he reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell, or not, or how does it appear to you in this case?”
On the dissolution of the body, after death, would he reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell, or not, or how does it appear to you in this case?”
On the dissolution of the body, after death, would only he reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world—and not a noble, or a merchant, or a worker?”
On the dissolution of the body, after death, would only he reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell—and not a brahmin?
On the dissolution of the body,ill after death, would he reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world, or not, or how does it appear to you in this case?”
on the Lion’s Roar
on the Lion’s Roar
on the Mass of Suffering
on the Mass of Suffering
On the occasion when I do not attend to the sign of light but attend to the sign of forms, I then see forms but do not perceive light, even for a whole night or a whole day or a whole day and night.’
On the occasion when one feels neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, one does not feel pleasant feeling or painful feeling; on that occasion one feels only neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.
On the occasion when one feels painful feeling, one does not feel pleasant feeling or neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling; on that occasion one feels only painful feeling.
On the occasion when one feels pleasant feeling, one does not feel painful feeling or neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling; on that occasion one feels only pleasant feeling.
on the Simile of the Heartwood
On the soles of his feet there are wheels with a thousand spokes and ribs and hubs all complete…
On the Uposatha day as many of us as live in dependence upon a single village district meet together in unison, and when we meet we ask one who knows the Pātimokkha to recite it.
On this road is the bandit Angulimāla, who is murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to living beings.
On whatever occasion a bhikkhu closely looks on with equanimity at the mind thus concentrated—on that occasion the equanimity enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
On whatever occasion the body and the mind become tranquil in a bhikkhu who is rapturous—on that occasion the tranquillity enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
On whatever occasion the mind becomes concentrated in a bhikkhu whose body is tranquil and who feels pleasure—on that occasion the concentration enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
On whatever occasion tireless energy is aroused in a bhikkhu who investigates and examines that state with wisdom and embarks upon a full inquiry into it—on that occasion the energy enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
On whatever occasion unremitting mindfulness is established in a bhikkhu—on that occasion the mindfulness enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development, it comes to fulfilment in him.
On whatever occasion unworldly rapture arises in a bhikkhu who has aroused energy— on that occasion the rapture enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
On whatever occasion, abiding thus mindful, a bhikkhu investigates and examines that state with wisdom and embarks upon a full inquiry into it—on that occasion the investigation-of-states enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
Once a Wheel-turning Monarch was driving in a pleasure park with his four-constituent army.
Once gone down to the lower world.
Once in this same Sāvatthī there was a certain man whose mother died…whose father died…whose brother died…whose sister died…whose son died…whose daughter died…whose wife died.
Once in this same Sāvatthī there was a certain woman who went to live with her relatives’ family.
Once in this same Sāvatthī there was a certain woman whose father died…whose brother died…whose sister died…whose son died…whose daughter died…whose husband died.
Once in this same Sāvatthī there was a certain woman whose mother died.
Once Pūraṇa Kassapa was teaching his Dhamma to an assembly of several hundred followers.
Once the Blessed One was teaching the Dhamma to an assembly of several hundred followers and there a disciple of his cleared his throat.
Once the guideline of the Dhamma has been drawn out, that litigation should be settled in a way that accords with it.
Once the guideline of the Dhamma has been drawn out, that litigation should be settled in a way that accords with it.
Once the recluse Gotama was teaching his Dhamma to an assembly of several hundred followers and there a certain disciple of his cleared his throat.
Once there is full confidence, he either attains to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception now or else he resolves with wisdom.
Once there is full confidence, he either attains to the base of nothingness now or else he resolves with wisdom.
Once there is full confidence, he either attains to the base of nothingness now or else he resolves with wisdom.
Once there is full confidence, he either attains to the base of nothingness now or else he resolves with wisdom.
Once there is full confidence, he either attains to the imperturbable now or else he resolves with wisdom.
Once there is full confidence, he either attains to the imperturbable now or else he resolves with wisdom.
Once there is full confidence, he either attains to the imperturbable now or else he resolves with wisdom.
Once when I had gone out leading an army and was testing these inspectors, Isidatta and Purāṇa, I happened to put up in very cramped quarters.
Once, venerable sir, a certain man had obtained some soup during the day and he said: ‘Put that aside and we will all eat it together in the evening.’ all dishes are prepared at night, few by day.
Once, venerable sir, I went wandering for alms in the thick darkness of the night.
One brahmin among them would think: ‘Oh, that only I might get the best seat, the best water, the best almsfood in the refectory; that no other brahmin might get the best seat, the best water, the best almsfood in the refectory!’ And it is possible that the other brahmin, not that brahmin, gets the best seat, the best water, the best almsfood in the refectory.
One came to meet me and took my bowl and outer robe, another prepared a seat, and another set out water for my feet; however, they addressed me by name and as ‘friend.ʹ 
One cognizes: ‘ pleasant’; one cognizes: ‘ painful’; one cognizes: ‘ neither-painful-nor-pleasant.’
One contemplates the earthkasiṇa above, below, and across, undivided and immeasurable.
One does not nurture delight there thinking, ‘I had such feeling in the past,’…‘I had such perception in the past,’…‘I had such formations in the past,’…‘I had such consciousness in the past.’
One does not nurture delight there thinking, ‘I had such material form in the past.’
One does not nurture delight there thinking, ‘May I have such material form in the future!’ One does not nurture delight there thinking, ‘May I have such feeling in the future!’…‘May I have such perception in the future!’…‘May I have such formations in the future!’…‘May I have such consciousness in the future!’ That is how one does not build up hope upon the future.
One does not set one’s heart on obtaining what has not yet been obtained, thinking, ‘May my eye be thus in the future and forms be thus!’ Because one does not set one’s heart thus, one does not delight in that.
One does not wisely understand: ‘This is suffering’; one does not wisely understand: ‘This is the origin of suffering’; one does not wisely understand: ‘This is the cessation of suffering’; one does not wisely understand: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’ ‘One does not wisely understand, one does not wisely understand,’ friend; that is why it is said, ‘one who is unwise.’”
One fair in act, one pure in heart
One given to adhere to his own views, who holds on to them tenaciously and relinquishes them with difficulty, has non-adherence to his own views, not holding on to them tenaciously and relinquishing them easily, by which to avoid it.
One given to adhere to his own views, who holds on to them tenaciously and relinquishes them with difficulty, has non-adherence to his own views, not holding on to them tenaciously and relinquishing them easily, by which to extinguish it.
One given to adhere to his own views, who holds on to them tenaciously and relinquishes them with difficulty, has non-adherence to his own views, not holding on to them tenaciously and relinquishing them easily, to lead him upwards.
One given to anger has non-anger by which to avoid it.
One given to arrogance has non-arrogance by which to avoid it.
One given to avarice has non-avarice by which to avoid it.
One given to be uncelibate has celibacy by which to avoid it.
One given to being difficult to admonish has being easy to admonish by which to avoid it.
One given to contempt has non-contempt by which to avoid it.
One given to covetousness has uncovetousness by which to avoid it.
One given to deceit has non-deceit by which to avoid it.
One given to doubt has the state beyond doubt by which to avoid it.
One given to envy has non-envy by which to avoid it.
One given to faithlessness has faith by which to avoid it.
One given to false speech has abstention from false speech by which to avoid it.
One given to fearlessness of wrongdoing has fear of wrongdoing by which to avoid it.
One given to fraud has non-fraud by which to avoid it.
One given to gossip has abstention from gossip by which to avoid it.
One given to harsh speech has abstention from harsh speech by which to avoid it.
One given to ill will has non-ill will by which to avoid it.
One given to insolence has non-insolence by which to avoid it.
One given to killing living beings has abstention from killing living beings by which to avoid it.
One given to killing living beings has abstention from killing living beings by which to extinguish it.
One given to killing living beings has abstention from killing living beings to lead him upwards.
One given to lack of wisdom has the acquisition of wisdom by which to avoid it.
One given to laziness has the arousal of energy by which to avoid it.
One given to little learning has great learning by which to avoid it.
One given to making bad friends has making good friends by which to avoid it.
One given to malicious speech has abstention from malicious speech by which to avoid it.
One given to negligence has diligence by which to avoid it.
One given to obstinacy has non-obstinacy by which to avoid it.
One given to resentment has non-resentment by which to avoid it.
One given to restlessness has non-restlessness by which to avoid it.
One given to shamelessness has shame by which to avoid it.
One given to sloth and torpor has freedom from sloth and torpor by which to avoid it.
One given to taking what is not given has abstention from taking what is not given by which to avoid it.
One given to unmindfulness has the establishment of mindfulness by which to avoid it.
One given to wrong action has right action by which to avoid it.
One given to wrong concentration has right concentration by which to avoid it.
One given to wrong deliverance has right deliverance by which to avoid it.
One given to wrong effort has right effort by which to avoid it.
One given to wrong intention has right intention by which to avoid it.
One given to wrong knowledge has right knowledge by which to avoid it.
One given to wrong livelihood has right livelihood by which to avoid it.
One given to wrong mindfulness has right mindfulness by which to avoid it.
One given to wrong speech has right speech by which to avoid it.
One given to wrong view has right view by which to avoid it.
One given to…to lead him upwards.
One given to……by which to extinguish it.
One gives a gift to a non-returner; this is the fifth kind of personal offering.
One gives a gift to a once-returner; this is the seventh kind of personal offering.
One gives a gift to a paccekabuddha; this is the second kind of personal offering.
One gives a gift to a Sangha of bhikkhunīs; this is the fourth kind of offering made to the Sangha.
One gives a gift to a Sangha of bhikkhus; this is the third kind of offering made to the Sangha.
One gives a gift to a Sangha of both after the Tathāgata has attained final Nibbāna; this is the second kind of offering made to the Sangha.
One gives a gift to a Sangha of both headed by the Buddha; this is the first kind of offering made to the Sangha.
One gives a gift to a stream-enterer; this is the ninth kind of personal offering.
One gives a gift to a virtuous ordinary person; this is the twelfth kind of personal offering.
One gives a gift to an animal; this is the fourteenth kind of personal offering.
One gives a gift to an arahant disciple of the Tathāgata; this is the third kind of personal offering.
One gives a gift to an immoral ordinary person; this is the thirteenth kind of personal offering.
One gives a gift to one outside who is free from lust for sensual pleasures; this is the eleventh kind of personal offering.
One gives a gift to one who has entered upon the way to the realisation of the fruit of arahantship; this is the fourth kind of personal offering.
One gives a gift to one who has entered upon the way to the realisation of the fruit of non-return; this is the sixth kind of personal offering.
One gives a gift to one who has entered upon the way to the realisation of the fruit of once-return; this is the eighth kind of personal offering.
One gives a gift to one who has entered upon the way to the realisation of the fruit of stream-entry; this is the tenth kind of personal offering.
One gives a gift to the Tathāgata, accomplished and fully enlightened; this is the first kind of personal offering.
One gives a gift, saying: ‘Appoint so many bhikkhunīs for me from the Sangha’; this is the seventh kind of offering made to the Sangha.
One gives a gift, saying: ‘Appoint so many bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs for me from the Sangha’; this is the fifth kind of offering made to the Sangha.
One gives a gift, saying: ‘Appoint so many bhikkhus for me from the Sangha’; this is the sixth kind of offering made to the Sangha.
One is not a brahmin by birth, Nor by birth a non-brahmin.
One is resolved only upon the beautiful: this is the third liberation.
One nurtures delight there thinking, ‘I had such feeling in the past,’…‘I had such perception in the past,’…‘I had such formations in the past,’…‘I had such consciousness in the past.’
One nurtures delight there thinking, ‘I had such material form in the past.’
One nurtures delight there thinking, ‘May I have such material form in the future!’ One nurtures delight there thinking, ‘May I have such feeling in the future!’…‘May I have such perception in the future!’…‘May I have such formations in the future!’…‘May I have such consciousness in the future!’ That is how one builds up hope upon the future.
One possessing the triple knowledge, Peaceful, with being all destroyed:
One pure in heart has evermore
One regards forms thus…One regards eye-consciousness thus...One regards eye-contact thus...One regards feeling thus...One regards craving thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self.’
One regards forms thus…One regards eye-consciousness thus...One regards eye-contact thus…One regards feeling thus…One regards craving thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’
One regards mind-objects thus…One regards mind-consciousness thus…One regards mind-contact thus…One regards feeling thus…One regards craving thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self.’
One regards mind-objects thus…One regards mind-consciousness thus…One regards mind-contact thus…One regards feeling thus…One regards craving thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’
One regards the eye thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self.’
One regards the eye thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’
One sets one’s heart on obtaining what has not yet been obtained, thinking, ‘May my eye be thus in the future and forms be thus!’ Because one sets one’s heart thus, one delights in that.
One should know how to define pleasure, and knowing that, one should pursue pleasure within oneself.
One should know what it is to extol and what it is to disparage, and knowing both, one should neither extol nor disparage but should teach only the Dhamma.
One should not insist on local language, and one should not override normal usage.
One should not neglect wisdom, should preserve truth, should cultivate relinquishment, and should train for peace.
One should not underrate equanimity towards such a person.
One should not utter covert speech, and one should not utter overt sharp speech.
One should speak unhurriedly, not hurriedly.
One so practising practises the way to the cessation of unwholesome habits.
One so practising practises the way to the cessation of unwholesome intentions.
One so practising practises the way to the cessation of wholesome habits.
One so practising practises the way to the cessation of wholesome intentions.
One speaks of the seen as it was seen; one speaks of the heard as it was heard; one speaks of the sensed as it was sensed; one speaks of the cognized as it was cognized.
One such as this is called a Buddha.” 
One thus gone, I say, is untraceable here and now.
One time she stumbled, and exclaimed three times: “Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened!
One took his bowl and outer robe, one prepared a seat, and one set out water for washing the feet.
One took his bowl and outer robe, one prepared a seat, and one set out water for washing the feet.
One understands a mind affected by lust as affected by lust…...an unliberated mind as unliberated.
One understands wrong action as wrong action and right action as right action: this is one’s right view.
One understands wrong intention as wrong intention and right intention as right intention: this is one’s right view.
One understands wrong livelihood as wrong livelihood and right livelihood as right livelihood: this is one’s right view.
One understands wrong speech as wrong speech and right speech as right speech: this is one’s right view.
One understands wrong view as wrong view and right view as right view: this is one’s right view.
One understands: ‘With the cessation of that same contact to be felt as neither-painful-nor-pleasant, its corresponding feeling—the neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling that arose in dependence on that contact to be felt as neither-painful-nor-pleasant—ceases and subsides.’
One understands: ‘With the cessation of that same contact to be felt as painful, its corresponding feeling—the painful feeling that arose in dependence on that contact to be felt as painful—ceases and subsides.’
One understands: ‘With the cessation of that same contact to be felt as pleasant, its corresponding feeling—the pleasant feeling that arose in dependence on that contact to be felt as pleasant—ceases and subsides.’
One who trains with diligence
One whom the great flood swept along, I went for refuge to the Buddha.
One wisely understands: ‘This is suffering’; one wisely understands: ‘This is the origin of suffering’; one wisely understands: ‘This is the cessation of suffering’; one wisely understands: ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’ ‘One wisely understands, one wisely understands,’ friend; that is why it is said, ‘one who is wise.′” 
One would surely have to be his equal to know the recluse Gotama’s lucidity of wisdom.”
One would surely have to be his equal to know the recluse Gotama’s lucidity of wisdom.”
One would think it full of beans.”
One would think the jungles must rob a bhikkhu of his mind, if he has no concentration.
One would think the jungles must rob a bhikkhu of his mind, if he has no concentration.” 
One would think they were fishermen hawking fish.” 
One would think you were fishermen hawking fish.”
One’s bodily and mental troubles are abandoned, one’s bodily and mental torments are abandoned, one’s bodily and mental fevers are abandoned, and one experiences bodily and mental pleasure.
One’s bodily and mental troubles increase, one’s bodily and mental torments increase, one’s bodily and mental fevers increase, and one experiences bodily and mental suffering.
One’s consciousness becomes bound up with desire and lust there thinking, ‘My eye was thus in the past and forms were thus.’
One’s consciousness does not become bound up with desire and lust there thinking, ‘My eye was thus in the past and forms were thus.’
Only material form, Sublime One?”
Only the first of these seems to have any linguistic legitimacy.
Only what is given to me is very fruitful, not what is given to others.
Only what is given to my disciples is very fruitful, not what is given to others’ disciples.’
Open the doors to the Deathless!
Opened the door to the deathless state
Or do you have to feel that pain yourself alone?”
Or does that answer occur to the Tathāgata on the spot?”
Or does that answer occur to you on the spot?”
Or else he abides contemplating in feelings their nature of arising, or he abides contemplating in feelings their nature of vanishing, or he abides contemplating in feelings their nature of both arising and vanishing.
Or else he abides contemplating in mind its nature of arising, or he abides contemplating in mind its nature of vanishing, or he abides contemplating in mind its nature of both arising and vanishing.
Or else he abides contemplating in mind-objects their nature of arising, or he abides contemplating in mind-objects their nature of vanishing, or he abides contemplating in mind-objects their nature of both arising and vanishing.
Or else he abides contemplating in mind-objects their nature of arising, or he abides contemplating in mind-objects their nature of vanishing, or he abides contemplating in mind-objects their nature of both arising and vanishing.
Or else he abides contemplating in the body its nature of arising, or he abides contemplating in the body its nature of vanishing, or he abides contemplating in the body its nature of both arising and vanishing.
Or else he abides contemplating in the body its nature of arising, or he abides contemplating in the body its nature of vanishing, or he abides contemplating in the body its nature of both arising and vanishing.
Or else he is inwardly perplexed about the present thus: ‘Am I?
Or else is it just because my work is neat that my lady shows no anger though it is actually present in her?
Or else mindfulness that ‘there are mind-objects’ is simply established in him to the extent necessary for bare knowledge and mindfulness.
Or else mindfulness that ‘there are mind-objects’ is simply established in him to the extent necessary for bare knowledge and mindfulness.
Or else mindfulness that ‘there is a body’ is simply established in him to the extent necessary for bare knowledge and mindfulness.
Or else mindfulness that ‘there is a body’ is simply established in him to the extent necessary for bare knowledge and mindfulness.
Or else mindfulness that ‘there is feeling’ is simply established in him to the extent necessary for bare knowledge and mindfulness.
Or else mindfulness that ‘there is mind’ is simply established in him to the extent necessary for bare knowledge and mindfulness.
Or else, among those few who go beyond this, some make assertions about the consciousness-kasiṇa, immeasurable and imperturbable.
Or else, some make assertions about the base of nothingness, immeasurable and imperturbable; “there is nothing” is declared to be the purest, supreme, best, and unsurpassed of those perceptions—whether perceptions of form or of the formless, of unity or diversity.
Or has King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha been invited with a large retinue for tomorrow’s meal?”
Or is there some great sacrifice?
or MN..
Or on the future build his hopes;
Or on the future build his hopes;
Or on the future build his hopes; 
Or some assert Nibbāna here and now.
Or suppose a man were a slave, not self-dependent but dependent on others, unable to go where he wants, but later on he would be released from slavery, self-dependent, independent of others, a freed man able to go where he wants; then on considering this, he would be glad and full of joy.
Or suppose a man were afflicted, suffering and gravely ill, and his food would not agree with him and his body had no strength, but later he would recover from the affliction and his food would agree with him and his body would regain strength; then on considering this, he would be glad and full of joy.
Or suppose a man were imprisoned in a prisonhouse, but later he would be released from prison, safe and secure, with no loss to his property; then on considering this, he would be glad and full of joy.
Or suppose a man with wealth and property were to enter a road across a desert, but later on he would cross over the desert, safe and secure, with no loss to his property; then on considering this, he would be glad and full of joy.
Or that the recluse Gotama teaches the Dhamma for the sake of a resting place?
Or that the recluse Gotama teaches the Dhamma for the sake of almsfood?
Or that the recluse Gotama teaches the Dhamma for the sake of some better state of being?” 
Or these worthy beings who were ill conducted …on the dissolution of the body, after death, have reappeared in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.’
Or these worthy beings who were ill conducted…on the dissolution of the body, after death, have reappeared in the animal world.
Or these worthy beings who were well conducted in body, speech, and mind, not revilers of noble ones, right in their views, giving effect to right views in their actions, on the dissolution of the body, after death, have reappeared among human beings.
Or they describe the annihilation, destruction, and extermination of an existing being.
Or will others take over this property, while you will have to pass on according to your actions?”
Or would his parents be able: ‘It was for our sake that he behaved contrary to the Dhamma, that he behaved unrighteously, so let not the wardens of hell to hell’?”
Or would others be able: ‘It was for the sake of refreshing and nourishing this body that he behaved contrary to the Dhamma, that he behaved unrighteously, so let not the wardens of hell to hell’?”
Order what punishment you will for him.’
Originating in conventions, They are assigned here and there.
Other deities said: ‘The recluse Gotama is not dead, he is dying.’
Other people said: ‘The recluse Gotama is neither black nor brown, he is golden-skinned.’
Other people said: ‘The recluse Gotama is not black, he is brown.’
Our love is dead!’
Our Teacher, the Blessed One, has come.”
Our Teacher, the Blessed One, has come.”
Out of compassion for you I have thought: ‘How shall my disciples be my heirs in Dhamma, not my heirs in material things?’
Out of compassion for you I have thought: ‘How shall my disciples be my heirs in Dhamma, not my heirs in material things?’
Out of compassion for you I have thought: ‘How shall my disciples be my heirs in Dhamma, not my heirs in material things?’”
Out of our love and respect for the Blessed One, and out of shame and fear of wrongdoing, we abandoned that daytime meal, which was outside the proper time.
Out of our love and respect for the Blessed One, and out of shame and fear of wrongdoing, we abandoned that night meal, which was outside the proper time.
Over a long time I have previously associated with those deities and talked with them and held conversations with them.” 
Over all that the Vedic experts teach;
Owing to her husband’s death, she went mad, lost her mind, and wandered from street to street and from crossroad to crossroad, saying: ‘Have you seen my husband?
Owing to her mother’s death, she went mad, lost her mind, and wandered from street to street and from crossroad to crossroad, saying: ‘Have you seen my mother?
Owing to his wife’s death, he went mad, lost his mind, and wandered from street to street and from crossroad to crossroad, saying: ‘Have you seen my wife?
Paccekabuddhas no more led to being—
Painful feeling is painful when it persists and pleasant when it changes.
Painful feeling too is impermanent, conditioned, dependently arisen, subject to destruction, vanishing, fading away, and ceasing.
Papañca is thus closely akin to maññanā, “conceiving,” in MN —see n..
Passin conquered acquisition, the root of suffering;
Passing over its heartwood and its sapwood, he would cut off its inner bark and take it away thinking it was heartwood.
Passing over its heartwood and its sapwood, he would cut off its inner bark and take it away thinking it was heartwood.
Passing over its heartwood, he would cut off its sapwood and take it away thinking it was heartwood.
Passing over its heartwood, he would cut off its sapwood and take it away thinking it was heartwood.
Passing over its heartwood, its sapwood and its inner bark, he would cut off its outer bark and take it away thinking it was heartwood.
Passing over its heartwood, its sapwood, and its inner bark, he would cut off its outer bark and take it away thinking it was heartwood.
Passing over its heartwood, its sapwood, its inner bark, and its outer bark, he would cut off its twigs and leaves and take them away thinking they were heartwood.
Passing over its heartwood, its sapwood, its inner bark, and its outer bark, he would cut off its twigs and leaves and take them away thinking they were heartwood.
People who saw this said: ‘This mountain swallows up these seers.’
People will give gifts to those immoral persons for the sake of the Sangha.
Perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, immeasurable, fair and ugly; by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
Perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, limited, fair and ugly; by transcending them, one perceives thus: ‘I know, I see.’
Perception and feeling are mental, these are states bound up with the mind; that is why perception and feeling are the mental formation.” 
Perception is not yours.
Perfect in true knowledge and conduct.’
Perhaps a peacock will swallow the māluva-creeper seed or a wild animal will eat it or a forest fire will burn it or woodsmen will carry it off or white ants will devour it or it may not even be fertile.’
Perhaps I can understand the meaning of his words.”
Perhaps I might encounter that fear and dread.’
Perhaps if he finds our assembly a quiet one, he will think to join us.”
Perhaps if he finds our assembly a quiet one, he will think to join us.”
Perhaps if he finds our assembly a quiet one, he will think to join us.”
Perhaps some time or other we might meet Master Gotama and have some conversation with him.”
Perhaps sometime or other we might meet Master Gotama and have some conversation with him.
Perhaps sometime or other we might meet Master Gotama, perhaps we might have some conversation with him.”
Perhaps sometime or other we might meet the brahmin Dh̄nañj̄ni and have some conversation with him.” brahmin
Perhaps sometime or other we might meet the venerable Puṇṇa Mantāṇiputta and have some conversation with him.”
Perhaps we might detach him from that evil view.”
Perhaps we shall be able to restore his confidence.”
Perhaps you will get to hear a talk on the Dhamma from the Blessed One’s own lips.”—“Yes, friend,” they replied.
Perhaps your tongue is a manly one?
Perhaps your tongue is large as well, According to what we have been taught?
Perhaps, venerable sir, I might satisfy the Blessed One’s mind by answering a question about our own teachers’ doctrine.”
Persons are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.” 
Pessa, after paying homage to the Blessed One, sat down at one side, while Kandaraka exchanged greetings with the Blessed One, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he stood at one side.
Pessa, there are four kinds of persons to be found existing in the world.
Pleasant is the touch of this māluva creeper’s tender soft downy tendril!’ Then the creeper enfolded the sāla tree, made a canopy over it, draped a curtain all around it, and split the main branches of the tree.
Pleasant is the touch of this woman wanderer’s tender soft downy arm!’ Thus they take to gulping down sensual pleasures, and having done so, on the dissolution of the body, after death, they reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
Please confine yourself to your own assertion alone.”
Please put it out a little bit
Please, friend Bhaddāli, give proper attention to this advice.
Pleasure and pain are meted out.
Possessed of material form, one sees forms: this is the first liberation.
Possessing such self-control and peacefulness, you will be able to dwell in the Sunāparanta country.
Possessing that faith, he considers thus: ‘Household life is crowded and dusty; life gone forth is wide open.
Possessing that faith, he considers thus: ‘Household life is crowded and dusty; life gone forth is wide open.
Possessing that faith, I considered thus: “Household life is crowded and dusty; life gone forth is wide open.
Possessing these four kinds of intrepidity, the Tathāgata approaches and enters these eight assemblies.
Possessing this aggregate of noble virtue, he experiences within himself a bliss that is blameless.
Possessing this aggregate of noble virtue, he experiences within himself a bliss that is blameless.
Possessing this noble restraint of the faculties, he experiences within himself a bliss that is unsullied.
Possessing this noble restraint of the faculties, he experiences within himself a bliss that is unsullied.
Potaliya the householder, while walking and wandering for exercise, wearing full dress with parasol and sandals, also went to the grove, and having entered the grove, he went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Practising as you are instructed, by realising for yourselves here and now through direct knowledge you will soon enter upon and abide in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness.’
Practising as you are instructed, by realising for yourselves here and now through direct knowledge you will soon enter upon and abide in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness.’ 
Previously, when the householder Upāli saw the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta coming in the distance, he used to go out to meet him, dust off the highest, best, chief, most excellent seat there with an upper robe, and having arranged it all around, have him seated on it.
Prince Abhaya then reported to the Blessed One his entire conversation with the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta.
Prince Bodhi said to him: “Venerable sir, let the Blessed One step on the cloth, let the Sublime One step on the cloth, that it may lead to my welfare and happiness for a long time.”
Prostrating himself with his head at the Blessed One’s feet, he covered the Blessed One’s feet with kisses and caressed them with his hands, pronouncing his name: “I am King Pasenadi of Kosala, venerable sir; I am King Pasenadi of Kosala, venerable sir.”
Provider of safety, possessor of knowledge, he stands in the Dhamma, inwardly restrained;
Puṇṇa, the ox-duty ascetic, paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side, while Seniya, the naked dog-duty ascetic, exchanged greetings with the Blessed One, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he too sat down at one side curled up like a dog.
Puṇṇa, the ox-duty ascetic, said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, this Seniya is a naked dog-duty ascetic who does what is hard to do: he eats his food when it is thrown to the ground.
Questions and Answers
Questions and Answers
Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he enters upon and abides in the first jhāna…With the stilling of applied and sustained thought, he enters upon and abides in the second jhāna…With the fading away as well of rapture…he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna…With the abandoning of pleasure and pain…he enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna…On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
Rather it is I who ought to be asked: “Who abides in greater pleasure, King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha or the venerable Gotama?”’
Rather, brahmins give gifts motivated by compassion.”
Rather, did you not go forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness after considering thus: ‘I am a victim of birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering.
Rather, he is in the process of coming to this conclusion.
Rather, I know more than you.
Rather, I know more than you.
Rather, I know more than you.
Rather, I know more than you.’
Rather, it is because there are faithful clansmen inspired and gladdened by what is lofty, who when they hear that, direct their minds to such a state, and that leads to their welfare and happiness for a long time.
Rather, it is because there are faithful clansmen inspired and gladdened by what is lofty, who when they hear that, direct their minds to such a state, and that leads to their welfare and happiness for a long time.”
Rather, let the past be, Kaccāna, and let the future be.
Rather, the venerable Anuruddha says: ‘These gods are thus and those gods are such.’
Ratta and ratti could be taken to represent respectively either Skt rātra and rātri or Skt rakta and rakti.
Rattapāṇi the dyer’s son told him: ‘Venerable sir, this pair of new garments will take a dyeing and a pounding and a smoothening out.’
Rattapāṇi the dyer’s son told him: ‘Venerable sir, this young male monkey will take a dyeing but not a pounding or a smoothening out.’
Recollecting her faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she directs her mind to such a state.
Recollecting her faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she directs her mind to such a state.
Recollecting his faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he directs his mind to such a state.
Recollecting his faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he directs his mind to such a state.
Reflecting wisely, he abides with the ear faculty restrained…with the nose faculty restrained…with the tongue faculty restrained…with the body faculty restrained…with the mind faculty restrained…While taints, vexation, and fever might arise in one who abides with the faculties unrestrained, there are no taints, vexation, or fever in one who abides with the faculties restrained.
Reflecting wisely, he avoids sitting on unsuitable seats, wandering to unsuitable resorts, and associating with bad friends, since if he were to do so wise companions in the holy life might suspect him of evil conduct.
Reflecting wisely, we will take food neither for amusement nor for intoxication nor for the sake of physical beauty and attractiveness, but only for the endurance and continuance of this body, for ending discomfort, and for assisting the holy life, considering: “Thus I shall terminate old feelings without arousing new feelings and I shall be healthy and blameless and shall live in comfort.”’ Now, bhikkhus, you may think thus: ‘We are possessed of shame and fear of wrongdoing, our bodily conduct, verbal conduct, mental conduct, and livelihood have been purified, we guard the doors of our sense faculties, and we are moderate in eating.
Reflecting wisely, you should take food neither for amusement nor for intoxication nor for the sake of physical beauty and attractiveness, but only for the endurance and continuance of this body, for ending discomfort, and for assisting the holy life, considering: “Thus I shall terminate old feelings without arousing new feelings and I shall be healthy and blameless and shall live in comfort.”’
Reflecting wisely, you should take food neither for amusement nor for intoxication nor for the sake of physical beauty and attractiveness, but only for the endurance and continuance of this body, for ending discomfort, and for assisting the holy life, considering: “Thus I shall terminate old feelings without arousing new feelings and I shall be healthy and blameless and shall live in comfort.”’
Refraining from eating at night, he would eat only in one part of the day, and would be celibate, virtuous, of good character.
regarding tangibles cognizable by the body…regarding mind-objects cognizable by the mind, whose minds are not inwardly peaceful, and who conduct themselves now righteously, now unrighteously in body, speech, and mind…should not be honoured……Since we do not see any higher righteous conduct on the part of those good recluses and brahmins, they should not be honoured, respected, revered, and venerated.’
Regarding the heard…Regarding the sensed…Regarding the cognized I abide unattracted, unrepelled, independent, detached, free, dissociated, with a mind rid of barriers.
Regarding this world and the next, Who lives unyearning and detached:
Regarding those states, he abided unattracted, unrepelled, independent, detached, free, dissociated, with a mind rid of barriers.
Regarding those states, he abided unattracted, unrepelled, independent, detached, free, dissociated, with a mind rid of barriers.
Regarding those states, he abided unattracted, unrepelled, independent, detached, free, dissociated, with a mind rid of barriers.
Rejoice then, bhikkhus, mightily
Remember this too, Ānanda, as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Tathāgata.”
Remote jungle-thicket resting places in the forest are hard to endure, seclusion is hard to practise, and it is hard to enjoy solitude.
Repeatedly admonishing you, I shall speak to you, Ānanda.
Repeatedly restraining you, I shall speak to you, Ānanda.
Resting places are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.
Revata, speaking rightly, should speak just as he did.
Right action, I say, is twofold: there is right action that is affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions; and there is right action that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path.
Right and true, immaculate and wise.
Right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration—these states are included in the aggregate of concentration.
Right intention, I say, is twofold: there is right intention that is affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions, and there is right intention that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path.
Right livelihood, I say, is twofold: there is right livelihood that is affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions; and there is right livelihood that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path.
Right speech, I say, is twofold: there is right speech that is affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions; and there is right speech that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path.
Right speech, right action, and right livelihood—these states are included in the aggregate of virtue.
Right view and right intention—these states are included in the aggregate of wisdom.”
Right view assisted by these five factors has deliverance of mind for its fruit, deliverance of mind for its fruit and benefit; it has deliverance by wisdom for its fruit, deliverance by wisdom for its fruit and benefit.” 
Right view, I say, is twofold: there is right view that is affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions; and there is right view that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path.
Rightly speaking, were it to be said of anyone: ‘A being not subject to delusion has appeared in the world for the welfare and happiness of many, out of compassion for the world, for the good, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans,’ it is of me indeed that rightly speaking this should be said.
rivalry...conceit...arrogance...vanity… …negligence is an imperfection that defiles the mind.
Sakka and the divine King Vessavaṇa and the gods of the Thirty-three were filled with wonder and amazement, and they said: “Sirs, it is wonderful, it is marvellous, what power and might the recluse has, that with his toe he makes the heavenly abode shake and quake and tremble!”
Sakka, ruler of gods, saw King Nimi coming in the distance and said to him: ‘Come, great king!
Satthar, Pavattar, Sarabhanga, Lomahaṁsa, Uccangamāya, Asita, Anāsava, Manomaya, and Bandhumant the free from pride, Tadādhimutta stainless and resplendent;
Saying, ‘I do not know these, I do not see these, therefore these do not exist,’ he would not be speaking rightly.”
Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
Saying, “Good, friend,” the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
Saying, “Good, friend,” the venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta′s words.
Saying, “Good, lady,” the lay follower Visākha delighted and rejoiced in the bhikkhunī Dhammadinnā’s words.
Saying, “Good, venerable sir,” the bhikkhu delighted and rejoiced in the Blessed One’s words.
Sāriputta has reached the peak
Sāriputta is like a mother; Moggallāna is like a nurse.
Sāriputta trains others for the fruit of stream-entry, Moggallāna for the supreme goal.
Sāriputta, bhikkhus, is able to announce, teach, describe, establish, reveal, expound, and exhibit the Four Noble Truths.”
Sāriputta, when one lays down this body and takes up a new body, then I say one is blameworthy.
Scheming, talking, hinting, belittling, pursuing gain with gain: this is wrong livelihood.
See action as it really is, Seers of dependent origination, Skilled in action and its results.
See AN:/iii.–; and for a thoughtful commentary on that sutta, see Nyanaponika Thera, The Roots of Good and Evil, pp.
See in this connection AN v.–, –.
See Norman, Collected Papers,:–.
See the refuge I have found:
See Ud:/–.
See, Dīgha, how those three clansmen are practising for the welfare and happiness of the many, out of compassion for the world, for the good, welfare and happiness of gods and humans.”
See, good sir Moggallāna, this loveliness of the Vejayanta Palace!”
See, ladies, the meek lady’s work!
See, ladies, the peaceful lady’s work!
Seeing him, he quieted his own assembly thus: “Sirs, be quiet; sirs make no noise.
Seeing him, he quieted his own assembly thus: “Sirs, be quiet; sirs, make no noise.
Seeing him, he quieted his own assembly thus: “Sirs, be quiet; sirs, make no noise.
Seeing in myself this possession of wisdom, I found great solace in dwelling in the forest.
Seeing in myself this purity of bodily conduct, I found great solace in dwelling in the forest.
Seeing in myself this purity of livelihood, I found great solace in dwelling in the forest.
Seeing the bhikkhus coming in the distance, they went to them and asked: “Where are you going, venerable sirs?”
Seeing the danger in these sensual ties
Seeing them, he went to them and asked them: “Where are the venerable ones going?” “We are going to see the Blessed One, friend.”
Seeing this danger, I do not take up any of these speculative views.”
Seeing this fruit of diligence for such a bhikkhu, I say that he still has work to do with diligence.
Seeing this fruit of diligence for such a bhikkhu, I say that he still has work to do with diligence.
Seeing this fruit of diligence for such a bhikkhu, I say that he still has work to do with diligence.
Seeing this fruit of diligence for such a bhikkhu, I say that he still has work to do with diligence.
Seeing this fruit of diligence for such a bhikkhu, I say that he still has work to do with diligence.
Seeing this fruit of diligence for these bhikkhus, I say that they still have work to do with diligence.
Seeing this too, O King, I have gone forth:
Seeing this, the venerable Raṭṭhapāla said to her: “Sister, if that stuff is to be thrown away, then pour it into my bowl here.”
Seeking his shelter, asylum, and refuge in the Blessed One himself, he said: “Ask me, Master Gotama, I will answer.”
Sensual pleasures here and now and sensual pleasures in lives to come, sensual perceptions here and now and sensual perceptions in lives to come—both alike are Māra’s realm, Māra’s domain, Māra’s bait, Māra’s hunting ground.
Sensual pleasures, varied, sweet, delightful, In many different ways disturb the mind:
Serenity and insight.
Several bhikkhus, having heard about this, went to the bhikkhu Ariṭṭha and asked him: “Friend Ariṭṭha, is it true that such a pernicious view has arisen in you?”
Several bhikkhus, having heard about this, went to the bhikkhu Sāti and asked him: “Friend Sāti, is it true that such a pernicious view has arisen in you?”
Several suttas identify it as an expression for the annihilationist view, adapted by the Buddha with new meanings assigned to it.
Shaking his head, he took a bypath and departed.
Shall I be in the future?
Shall I not be in the future?
Shall we not be in the future?
She is eager to serve, agreeable in conduct, and sweet in speech.
She rises before the Wheel-turning Monarch and retires after him.
She saw the Bodhisatta within her womb with all his limbs, lacking no faculty.
She suckled the Blessed One when his own mother died.
Shining and lighting up the quarters, Over a thousandfold such world
Short is this life, as all the sages say, Eternity it knows not, only change.
Should a son born from a noble youth and a brahmin girl be called a noble after the father or a brahmin after the mother?”
Should the foal be called a horse after the mother or a donkey after the father?”
Should the son born from a brahmin youth and a noble girl be called a noble after the mother or a brahmin after the father?”
Show me the road to Rājagaha.’
Show me the road to Rājagaha.’
Sight of the Enlightened Ones.
Similar to that, I say, is the way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pain.
Similar to that, I say, is the way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pleasure.
Similar to that, I say, is the way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pain.
Similar to that, I say, is the way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure.
Since he conceives himself thus, though it is contrary to fact, he might pursue those things that are unsuitable for one completely intent on Nibbāna.
Since he died I have no more desire to work or to eat.
Since he does not do so, his consciousness does not become dependent on it and does not cling to it.
Since he does not form any condition or generate any volition tending towards either being or non-being, he does not cling to anything in this world.
Since he torments neither himself nor others, he is here and now hungerless, extinguished, and cooled, and he abides experiencing bliss, having himself become holy.
Since he torments neither himself nor others, he is here and now hungerless, extinguished, and cooled, and he abides experiencing bliss, having himself become holy.
Since I shaved off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and went forth from the home life into homelessness, it has not been possible for arisen pleasant feeling to invade my mind and remain or for arisen painful feeling to invade my mind and remain.”
Since I take delight in that, I do not envy what is inferior, nor do I delight therein.
Since I take delight in that, I do not envy what is inferior, nor do I delight therein.
Since if he left the eye faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief might invade him, he practises the way of its restraint, he guards the eye faculty, he undertakes the restraint of the eye faculty.
Since Master Gotama possesses each one of these factors, it is not proper for him to come to see me; rather, it is proper for me to go to see Master Gotama.
Since neither of us could convince the other, Or make him see his point of view, We have come to ask you, sir, Widely famed to be a Buddha.
Since she is never unfaithful to the Wheel-turning Monarch even in thought, how could she be so in body?
Since that is so, he attends to those things unfit for attention and he does not attend to those things fit for attention.
Since that is so, he does not attend to those things unfit for attention and he attends to those things fit for attention.
Since that is so, I think it proper to do such supreme honour to the Blessed One and to show such friendship.
Since that is so, Master Cankī, it is not proper for you to go to see the recluse Gotama; rather, it is proper for the recluse Gotama to come to see you.
Since that is what you are designated and what you claim to be, you should train thus: ‘We will practise the way proper to the recluse so that our designations may be true and our claims genuine, and so that the services of those whose robes, almsfood, resting place, and medicinal requisites we use shall bring them great fruit and benefit, and so that our going forth shall not be in vain but fruitful and fertile.’
Since that is what you are designated and what you claim to be, you should train thus: ‘We will undertake and practise those things that make one a recluse, that make one a brahmin, so that our designations may be true and our claims genuine, and so that the services of those whose robes, almsfood, resting place, and medicinal requisites we use shall bring them great fruit and benefit, and so that our going forth shall not be in vain but fruitful and fertile.’
Since the bhikkhus were unable to convince the bhikkhus led by Assaji and Punabbasuka, they went to the Blessed One.
Since the bhikkhus were unable to detach him from that pernicious view, they went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, they sat down at one side and told him all that had occurred, adding: “Venerable sir, since we could not detach the bhikkhu Ariṭṭha, formerly of the vulture killers, from this pernicious view, we have reported this matter to the Blessed One.”
Since the bhikkhus were unable to detach him from that pernicious view, they went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, they sat down at one side and told him all that had occurred, adding: “Venerable sir, since we could not detach the bhikkhu Sāti, son of a fisherman, from this pernicious view, we have reported this matter to the Blessed One.”
Since the recluse Gotama has arrived at Opasāda, he is our guest, and as our guest should be honoured, respected, revered, and venerated by us.
Since the work of those gone forth involves a small amount of activity, small functions, small engagements, and small undertakings, it is of small fruit.’
Since there actually is another world, one who convinces another ‘there is another world’ convinces him to accept true Dhamma; and because he convinces another to accept true Dhamma, he does not praise himself and disparage others.
Since there actually is another world, one who convinces another ‘there is no other world’ convinces him to accept an untrue Dhamma; and because he convinces another to accept an untrue Dhamma, he praises himself and disparages others.
Since there actually is another world, one who intends ‘there is another world’ has right intention.
Since there actually is another world, one who intends ‘there is no other world’ has wrong intention.
Since there actually is another world, one who makes the statement ‘there is another world’ has right speech.
Since there actually is another world, one who makes the statement ‘there is no other world’ has wrong speech.
Since there actually is another world, one who says ‘there is another world’ is not opposed to those arahants who know the other world.
Since there actually is another world, one who says ‘there is no other world’ is opposed to those arahants who know the other world.
Since there actually is causality, one who convinces another ‘there is causality’ convinces him to accept true Dhamma; and because is he convinces another to accept true Dhamma, he does not praise himself and disparage others.
Since there actually is causality, one who convinces another ‘there is no causality’ convinces him to accept an untrue Dhamma; and because he convinces another to accept an untrue Dhamma, he praises himself and disparages others.
Since there actually is causality, one who intends ‘there is causality’ has right intention.
Since there actually is causality, one who intends ‘there is no causality’ has wrong intention.
Since there actually is causality, one who makes the statement ‘there is causality’ has right speech.
Since there actually is causality, one who makes the statement ‘there is no causality’ has wrong speech.
Since there actually is causality, one who says ‘there is causality’ is not opposed to those arahants who hold the doctrine of causality.
Since there actually is causality, one who says ‘there is no causality’ is opposed to those arahants who hold the doctrine of causality.
Since there actually is doing, one who convinces another ‘there is doing’ convinces him to accept true Dhamma; and because he convinces another to accept true Dhamma, he does not praise himself and disparage others.
Since there actually is doing, one who convinces another ‘there is no doing’ convinces him to accept an untrue Dhamma; and because he convinces another to accept an untrue Dhamma, he praises himself and disparages others.
Since there actually is doing, one who intends ‘there is doing’ has right intention.
Since there actually is doing, one who intends ‘there is no doing’ has wrong intention.
Since there actually is doing, one who makes the statement ‘there is doing’ has right speech.
Since there actually is doing, one who makes the statement ‘there is no doing’ has wrong speech.
Since there actually is doing, one who says ‘there is doing’ is not opposed to those arahants who hold the doctrine that there is doing.
Since there actually is doing, one who says ‘there is no doing’ is opposed to those arahants who hold the doctrine that there is doing.
Since there will be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu should apply himself to the higher Dhamma and the higher Discipline.
Since there will be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu should apply himself to the superhuman state.”
Since there will be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu should apply himself to those liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms.
Since there would be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be concentrated.
Since there would be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be devoted to wakefulness.
Since there would be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be energetic.
Since there would be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be established in mindfulness.
Since there would be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be moderate in eating.
Since there would be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be wise.
Since there would be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu should guard the doors of his sense faculties.
Since there would be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu who has come to the Sangha and is living in the Sangha should be easy to correct and should associate with good friends.
Since there would be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu who has come to the Sangha and is living in the Sangha should be respectful and deferential towards his companions in the holy life.
Since there would be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu who has come to the Sangha and is living in the Sangha should be skilled in good behaviour regarding seats.
Since there would be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu who has come to the Sangha and is living in the Sangha should not be haughty and personally vain.
Since there would be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu who has come to the Sangha and is living in the Sangha should not be rough-tongued and loose-spoken.
Since there would be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu who has come to the Sangha and is living in the Sangha should not enter the village too early or return late in the day.
Since there would be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu who has come to the Sangha and is living in the Sangha should not go before the meal or after the meal to visit families.
Since they have no pure and clear personal knowledge, even the mere fragmentary knowledge that those good recluses and brahmins clarify is declared to be clinging on their part.
Since they have no pure and clear personal knowledge, even the mere fragmentary knowledge that those good recluses and brahmins clarify is declared to be clinging on their part.
Since this is so, Master Cankī, it is not proper for you to go to see the recluse Gotama; rather, it is proper for the recluse Gotama to come to see you.”
Since this is so, sirs, it is not proper for Master Gotama to come to see me; rather, it is proper for me to go to see Master Gotama.
Since this is so, sirs, it is not proper for Master Gotama to come to see me; rather, it is proper for me to go to see Master Gotama.
Since we do not see any higher righteous conduct on the part of those good recluses and brahmins, they should not be honoured, respected, revered, and venerated.
Since we see higher righteous conduct on the part of those good recluses and brahmins, they should be honoured, respected, revered, and venerated.
Since you do not know what development of body is, how could you know what development of mind is?
Since you now live luxuriously, having given up your striving and reverted to luxury, how will you have achieved any superhuman states, any distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones?’
Since, if he left the eye faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief might invade him, he practises the way of its restraint, he guards the eye faculty, he undertakes the restraint of the eye faculty.
Since, if he left the eye faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief might invade him, he practises the way of its restraint, he guards the eye faculty, he undertakes the restraint of the eye faculty.
Since, if he left the eye faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief might invade him, he practises the way of its restraint, he guards the eye faculty, he undertakes the restraint of the eye faculty.
Since, if he left the mind faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief might invade him, he practises the way of its restraint, he guards the mind faculty, he undertakes the restraint of the mind faculty.
Since, if he left the mind faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief might invade him, he practises the way of its restraint, he guards the mind faculty, he undertakes the restraint of the mind faculty.
Since, if he left the mind faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief might invade him, he practises the way of its restraint, he guards the mind faculty, he undertakes the restraint of the mind faculty.
Since, if he left the mind faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief might invade him, he practises the way of its restraint, he guards the mind faculty, he undertakes the restraint of the mind faculty.
Since, if we left the eye faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief might invade us, we will practise the way of its restraint, we will guard the eye faculty, we will undertake the restraint of the eye faculty.
Since, if we left the mind faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief might invade us, we will practise the way of its restraint, we will guard the mind faculty, we will undertake the restraint of the mind faculty.’
Since, if you were to leave the eye faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief might invade you, practise the way of its restraint, guard the eye faculty, undertake the restraint of the eye faculty.
Since, if you were to leave the eye faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief might invade you, practise the way of its restraint, guard the eye faculty, undertake the restraint of the eye faculty.
Since, if you were to leave the mind faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome states might invade you, practise the way of its restraint, guard the mind faculty, undertake the restraint of the mind faculty.’
Since, if you were to leave the mind faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief might invade you, practise the way of its restraint, guard the mind faculty, undertake the restraint of the mind faculty.’
Sir, those five things that the brahmins prescribe for the performance of merit, for accomplishing the wholesome, the recluse Gotama calls equipment of the mind, that is, for developing a mind that is without hostility and without ill will.”
Sirs, a good report of the recluse Gotama has been spread to this effect: ‘That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.’
Sirs, King Pasenadi of Kosala and his wife and children have gone for refuge for life to the recluse Gotama.
Sirs, King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha and his wife and children have gone for refuge for life to the recluse Gotama.
Sirs, many thousands of deities have gone for refuge for life to the recluse Gotama.
Sirs, people come from remote kingdoms and remote districts to question the recluse Gotama.
Sirs, the brahmin Pokkharasāti and his wife and children have gone for refuge for life to the recluse Gotama.
Sirs, the recluse Gotama has arrived at Opasāda and is living at Opasāda in the Gods’ Grove, the Sāla-tree Grove to the north of Opasāda.
Sirs, the recluse Gotama holds the doctrine of the moral efficacy of action, the doctrine of the moral efficacy of deeds; he does not seek any harm for the line of brahmins.
Sirs, the recluse Gotama is a good speaker with a good delivery; he speaks words that are courteous, distinct, flawless, and communicate the meaning.
Sirs, the recluse Gotama is a teacher of the teachers of many.
Sirs, the recluse Gotama is free from sensual lust and without personal vanity.
Sirs, the recluse Gotama is handsome, comely, and graceful, possessing supreme beauty of complexion, with sublime beauty and sublime presence, remarkable to behold.
Sirs, the recluse Gotama is virtuous, with noble virtue, with wholesome virtue, possessing wholesome virtue.
Sirs, the recluse Gotama is well born on both sides, of pure maternal and paternal descent seven generations back, unassailable and impeccable in respect of birth.
Sirs, the recluse Gotama possesses the thirty-two marks of a Great Man.
Sirs, the recluse Gotama shaved off his hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and went forth from the home life into homelessness though his mother and father wished otherwise and wept with tearful faces.
Sirs, the recluse Gotama went forth abandoning much gold and bullion stored away in vaults and in lofts.
Sirs, the recluse Gotama went forth from a rich family, from a family of great wealth and great possessions.
Sirs, the recluse Gotama went forth from an aristocratic family, from one of the original noble families.
Sirs, the recluse Gotama went forth from the home life into homelessness while still young, a black-haired young man endowed with the blessing of youth, in the prime of life.
Sirs, though living in a generation that delights in being, that takes delight in being, that rejoices in being, he has extirpated being together with its root.’
Sit down, good sir Moggallāna; this seat is ready.”
Sit down.
Sit down.
Skilled in discussion, imbued with wisdom, his banner lowered, he no longer lusts;
Skilled in philology and grammar
So arouse still more energy to attain the unattained, to achieve the unachieved, to realise the unrealised.
So as to reach the perfect bliss.
So by annihilating with asceticism past actions and by doing no fresh actions, there will be no consequence in the future.
So by annihilating with asceticism past actions and by doing no fresh actions, there will be no consequence in the future.
So by annihilating with asceticism past actions and by doing no fresh actions, there will be no consequence in the future.
So by annihilating with asceticism past actions and by doing no fresh actions, there will be no consequence in the future.
So by annihilating with asceticism past actions and by doing no fresh actions, there will be no consequence in the future.
So for the second time, venerable sir, I go to the Blessed One for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
So for the third time, venerable sir, I go to the Blessed One for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
So give him your permission to go forth from the home life into homelessness.”
So he arouses no desire to act, he makes no effort for the realisation of those other states that are higher and more sublime than gain, honour, and renown; he hangs back and slackens.
So he arouses no desire to act, he makes no effort for the realisation of those other states that are higher and more sublime than knowledge and vision; he hangs back and slackens.
So he arouses no desire to act, he makes no effort for the realisation of those other states that are higher and more sublime than the attainment of concentration; he hangs back and slackens.
So he arouses no desire to act, he makes no effort for the realisation of those other states that are higher and more sublime than the attainment of virtue; he hangs back and slackens.
So he arranged his upper robe on one shoulder, and extending his hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One, asked him: “Venerable sir, what is the reason, what is the cause, for the Blessed One’s smile?
So he arranged his upper robe on one shoulder, and extending his hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One, he asked him: “Venerable sir, what is the reason, what is the cause, for the Blessed One’s smile?
So he asked the venerable Pukkusāti:
So he had a number of state carriages made ready, and mounting a state carriage, drove out from Benares with the full pomp of royalty in order to see the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened.
So he is angry and bitter thus: ‘A person not my equal admonishes me, not a person my equal.’
So he is angry and bitter thus: ‘Another bhikkhu is the one to get superior medicinal requisites, not me.’
So he is angry and bitter thus: ‘The bhikkhus admonish me in the midst of the Sangha, not in private.’
So he is angry and bitter thus: ‘The bhikkhus enter the village for alms putting some other bhikkhu in the forefront, not me.’
So he is angry and bitter thus: ‘The bhikkhus know I have committed an offence.’
So he is angry and bitter thus: ‘The Teacher teaches the Dhamma to the bhikkhus by asking a series of questions of some other bhikkhu, not of me.’
So he lauds himself and disparages others because of gain.
So he lauds himself and disparages others because of his aristocratic family.
So he lauds himself and disparages others because of his attainment of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
So he lauds himself and disparages others because of his attainment of the first jhāna.
So he lauds himself and disparages others because of his being a one-session eater.
So he lauds himself and disparages others because of his influential family.
So he lauds himself and disparages others because of his renown.
So I dismissed those deities, saying: ‘There is no need.’
So I have shown you how the Dhamma is similar to a raft, being for the purpose of crossing over, not for the purpose of grasping.
So I shall be no more!’ Then he does not sorrow, grieve, and lament, he does not weep beating his breast and become distraught.
So I shall be no more!’ Then he sorrows, grieves, and laments, he weeps beating his breast and becomes distraught.
So I shall perish!
So I shall perish!
So I shall question you about this in return, Vaccha.
So I steadied my mind internally, quieted it, brought it to singleness, and concentrated it.
So I steadied my mind internally, quieted it, brought it to singleness, and concentrated it.
So I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths through my mouth and nose.
So I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths through my mouth, nose, and ears.
So I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths through my mouth, nose, and ears.
So I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths through my mouth, nose, and ears.
So I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths through my mouth, nose, and ears.
So I took very little food, a handful each time, whether of bean soup or lentil soup or vetch soup or pea soup.
So if my disciples honoured me…with the thought: ‘The recluse Gotama eats little and commends eating little,’ then those disciples of mine who live on a cupful of food…should not honour, respect, revere, and venerate me for this quality, nor should they live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.
So if my disciples honoured me…with the thought: ‘The recluse Gotama is content with any kind of almsfood and commends contentment with any kind of almsfood,’ then those disciples of mine who are almsfood eaters…should not honour, respect, revere, and venerate me for this quality, nor should they live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.
So if my disciples honoured me…with the thought: ‘The recluse Gotama is content with any kind of resting place and commends contentment with any kind of resting place,’ then those disciples of mine who are tree-root dwellers and open-air dwellers…should not honour, respect, revere, and venerate me for this quality, nor should they live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.
So if my disciples honoured me…with the thought: ‘The recluse Gotama is content with any kind of robe and commends contentment with any kind of robe,’ then those disciples of mine who are refuse-rag wearers, wearers of coarse robes…should not honour, respect, revere, and venerate me for this quality, nor should they live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.
So if my disciples honoured me…with the thought: ‘The recluse Gotama is secluded and commends seclusion,’ then those disciples of mine who are forest dwellers…should not honour, respect, revere, and venerate me for this quality, nor should they live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.
So it is with a noble disciple who sees this as it actually is with proper wisdom.
So it is with a noble disciple who sees this as it actually is with proper wisdom.
So it is with a noble disciple who sees this as it actually is with proper wisdom.
So it is with a noble disciple who sees this as it actually is with proper wisdom.
So it is with a noble disciple who sees this as it actually is with proper wisdom.
So it is with reference to this that it was said: ‘With the support of non-arrogance, arrogance is to be abandoned.’ 
So it is with reference to this that it was said: ‘With the support of the non-killing of living beings, the killing of living beings is to be abandoned.’
So it is with you, O Māra:
So it was said by the Blessed One.
So it was said by the Blessed One.
So it was said by the Blessed One.
So it was said by the Blessed One.
So it was said by the Blessed One.
So it was said by the Blessed One.
So it was said by the Blessed One.
So it was said by the Blessed One.
So it was said by the Blessed One.
So it was said by the Blessed One.
So it was said by the Blessed One.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said.
So it was said…
So it was said…
So it was said…
So it was said…
So it was said…
So it was said…
So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘Bhikkhu, this person consists of eighteen kinds of mental exploration.’
So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘Bhikkhu, this person consists of six bases of contact.’
So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘Bhikkhu, this person consists of six elements.’
So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘Bhikkhu, this person has four foundations.’
So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘The eighteen kinds of mental exploration should be understood.’
So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘The Middle Way discovered by the Tathāgata avoids both these extremes…to Nibbāna.’
So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘The six classes of consciousness should be understood.’
So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘The six classes of consciousness should be understood.’
So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘The six classes of contact should be understood.’
So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘The six classes of contact should be understood.’
So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘The six classes of craving should be understood.’
So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘The six classes of feeling should be understood.’
So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘The six external bases should be understood.’
So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘The six external bases should be understood.’
So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘The six internal bases should be understood.’
So it was with reference to this that it was said: ‘The six internal bases should be understood.’
So much had the clear, bright colour of my skin deteriorated through eating so little.
So much so that it is hard to finish describing the suffering in hell.
So much was the venerable Moliya Phagguna associating with bhikkhunīs.
So now we ask of you, Gotama, The eye uprisen in the world:
So Prince Bodhi had the cloth removed, and he had seats prepared in the upper apartments of the Kokanada Palace.
So put away all your doubts about me
So saying, the bandit took his sword and weapons
So speak the Nigaṇṭhas, bhikkhus.
So standing, the deity said to him:
So that my mind should not be strained.
So that my mind should not be strained.
So that they should not see me or I see them.
So the bhikkhu chastened Māra
So the bhikkhu sat on his own seat and said to the Blessed One:
So the Blessed One addressed the venerable Pukkusāti thus: “Bhikkhu, I will teach you the Dhamma.
So the Blessed One said.
So the brahmin Brahmāyu went to the Blessed One.
So the brahmins went to the brahmin student Assalāyana and said to him: “Master Assalāyana, this recluse Gotama describes purification for all the four castes.
So the Dhamma that I declare I enter upon and abide in by realising for myself with direct knowledge is the Dhamma that you enter upon and abide in by realising for yourself with direct knowledge.
So the Dhamma that Rāma declared he entered upon and abided in by realising for himself with direct knowledge is the Dhamma that you enter upon and abide in by realising for yourself with direct knowledge.
So the venerable Ānanda went to the brahmin Gopaka Moggallāna at his workplace.
So then the body was subservient to the mind, the mind wielded mastery over it.
So then the mind was subservient to the body, the body wielded mastery over it.
So they went to the park of the wanderers of other sects and exchanged greetings with the wanderers.
So this ageing and this death are what is called ageing and death.
So this mentality and this materiality are what is called mentality-materiality.
So tireless energy shall be aroused in me and unremitting mindfulness established, my body shall be tranquil and untroubled, my mind concentrated and unified.
So too I saw in unwholesome states danger, degradation, and defilement, and in wholesome states the blessing of renunciation, the aspect of cleansing.
So too when the Bodhisatta came forth…clean and unsullied.’
So too, a bhikkhu recollects his manifold past lives…Thus with their aspects and particulars he recollects his manifold past lives.
So too, a bhikkhu understands as it actually is: ‘This is suffering.’…He understands: ‘Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.’
So too, a bhikkhu who thus possesses the fifteen factors including enthusiasm is capable of breaking out, capable of enlightenment, capable of attaining the supreme security from bondage.”
So too, a bhikkhu wields mastery over his mind, he does not let the mind wield mastery over him.
So too, a deficiency of energy arose in me…the light and the vision of forms disappeared.
So too, Aggivessana, if an elder bhikkhu dies with his taints destroyed, then he is considered an elder bhikkhu who has died a tamed death.
So too, Aggivessana, if an elder bhikkhu dies with his taints undestroyed, then he is considered an elder bhikkhu who has died an untamed death.
So too, Aggivessana, when you are pressed, questioned, and cross-questioned by me about your own assertion, you turn out to be empty, vacant, and mistaken.
So too, all Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son’s contortions, writhings, and vacillations have been cut off, broken, and smashed by the Blessed One, and now he cannot get near the Blessed One again for the purpose of debate.”
So too, an excess of energy arose in me…the light and the vision of forms disappeared.
So too, as to those recluses and brahmins who are not tied to these five cords of sensual pleasure…it may be understood of them: ‘They have not met with calamity, not met with disaster, the Evil One cannot do with them as he likes.’
So too, as to those recluses and brahmins who are tied to these five cords of sensual pleasure…it may be understood of them: ‘They have met with calamity, met with disaster, the Evil One may do with them as he likes.’
So too, Bhāradvāja, in regard to their statement the brahmins seem to be like a file of blind men: the first one does not see, the middle one does not see, and the last one does not see.
So too, bhikkhu, then there remains only equanimity, purified and bright, malleable, wieldy, and radiant.
So too, bhikkhus, abandon what is unwholesome and devote yourselves to wholesome states, for that is how you will come to growth, increase, and fulfilment in this Dhamma and Discipline.
So too, bhikkhus, here some clansman goes forth out of faith…he lives in suffering.
So too, bhikkhus, here some clansman goes forth out of faith…he lives in suffering.
So too, bhikkhus, here some clansman goes forth out of faith…he lives in suffering.
So too, bhikkhus, here some clansman goes forth out of faith…When he is diligent, he attains perpetual liberation.
So too, bhikkhus, here some clansman goes forth out of faith……he lives in suffering.
So too, bhikkhus, if anyone from a clan of nobles goes forth from the home life into homelessness, and after encountering the Dhamma and Discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, develops loving-kindness, compassion, appreciative joy, and equanimity, and thereby gains internal peace, then because of that internal peace he practises the way proper to the recluse, I say.
So too, bhikkhus, when anyone has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body…he attains the ability to witness any aspect therein, there being a suitable basis.
So too, bhikkhus, when these five hindrances are unabandoned in himself, a bhikkhu sees them respectively as a debt, a disease, a prisonhouse, slavery, and a road across a desert.
So too, by encompassing mind with mind …much painful feeling.
So too, by encompassing mind with mind…exclusively pleasant feelings.
So too, by encompassing mind with mind…exclusively pleasant feelings.
So too, by encompassing mind with mind…much pleasant feeling.
So too, by encompassing mind with mind…piercing feelings.
So too, by encompassing mind with mind…piercing feelings.
So too, elation arose in me…the light and the vision of forms disappeared.
So too, fear arose in me…the light and the vision of forms disappeared.
So too, here a bhikkhu abides resolved upon and pervading a defiled radiance.
So too, here a bhikkhu abides resolved upon and pervading a pure radiance.
So too, here some clansmen learn the Dhamma… Why is that?
So too, here some misguided men learn the Dhamma…Why is that?
So too, here some person practises the way…His mindfulness may be slow in arising, but he quickly abandons them, removes them, does away with them, and annihilates them.
So too, householder, a noble disciple considers thus: ‘Sensual pleasures have been compared to a dream by the Blessed One; they provide much suffering and much despair, while the danger in them is great.’
So too, I had no need to keep on instructing those bhikkhus; I had only to arouse mindfulness in them.
So too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to create from this body another body having form, mind-made, with all its limbs, lacking no faculty.
So too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to recollect their manifold lives…Thus with their aspects and particulars they recollect their manifold past lives.
So too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to understand thus: ‘This body of mine…is subject to impermanence, to being worn and rubbed away, to dissolution and disintegration, and this consciousness of mine is supported by it and bound up with it.’
So too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way whereby by realising for themselves with direct knowledge, they here and now enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.
So too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way whereby with the divine eye…They understand how beings pass on according to their actions.
So too, let a wise man come…‘Thus, indeed, there rightly comes to be liberation from the bond, that is, from the bond of ignorance.’”
So too, Māgandiya, beings who are not free from lust for sensual pleasures, who are devoured by craving for sensual pleasures, who burn with fever for sensual pleasures, still indulge in sensual pleasures; the more such beings indulge in sensual pleasures, the more their craving for sensual pleasures increases and the more they are burned by their fever for sensual pleasures, yet they find a certain measure of satisfaction and enjoyment in dependence on the five cords of sensual pleasure.
So too, Mālunkyāputta, if anyone should say thus: ‘I will not lead the holy life under the Blessed One until the Blessed One declares to me: “the world is eternal”…or “after death a Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist,”’ that would still remain undeclared by the Tathāgata and meanwhile that person would die.
So too, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
So too, Rāhula, when one is not ashamed to tell a deliberate lie, there is no evil, I say, that one would not do.
So too, Sandaka, when a bhikkhu is an arahant with taints destroyed…his knowledge and vision that his taints are destroyed is not continuously and uninterruptedly present to him whether he is walking or standing or sleeping or awake; rather, he knows ‘My taints are destroyed’ only when he reviews this fact.” 
So too, some bhikkhu progresses by a measure of faith and love…‘Let him not lose that measure of faith and love, as he may if we take action against him by repeatedly admonishing him.’
So too, student, in regard to their statement the brahmins seem to be like a file of blind men: the first one does not see, the middle one does not see, and the last one does not see.”
So too, venerable sir, the doctrine of that Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened, will give delight to the wise but not to fools, and it will withstand testing and being smoothened out.”
So too, venerable sir, the doctrine of the foolish Nigaṇṭhas will give delight to fools but not to the wise, and it will not withstand testing or being smoothened out.
So too, venerable sir, the venerable Ānanda can make a triple robe for himself out of this cloak, and he can share out his old triple robe among his companions in the holy life.
So too, whatever recluses and brahmins have right view …they are still able to procure fruit.
So too, whatever recluses and brahmins have right view…they are still able to procure fruit.
So too, whatever recluses and brahmins have right view…they are still able to procure fruit.
So too, whatever recluses and brahmins have right view…they are still able to procure fruit.
So too, whatever recluses and brahmins have wrong view…they are still unable to procure any fruit.
So too, whatever recluses and brahmins have wrong view…they are still unable to procure any fruit.
So too, whatever recluses and brahmins have wrong view…they are still unable to procure any fruit.
So too, whatever recluses and brahmins have wrong view…they are still unable to procure any fruit.
So too, when a noble disciple has thus become one who is possessed of virtue…he is called one in higher training who has entered upon the way.
So too, when I saw four footprints of the recluse Gotama, I came to the conclusion: ‘The Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha is practising the good way.’
So too, when the Dhamma is being taught to someone for the cessation of personality, if his mind does not enter into it and acquire confidence, steadiness, and resolution, then he can be regarded as like the feeble man.
So too, when the Dhamma is being taught to someone for the cessation of personality, if his mind enters into it and acquires confidence, steadiness, and resolution, then he can be regarded as like the strong man.
So too, when the mind is defiled, an unhappy destination may be expected.
So too, when the mind is undefiled, a happy destination may be expected.
So too, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, I see beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate.
So too:
So too:
So too…when a bhikkhu gives attention to stilling the thought-formation of those thoughts…his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness, and concentrated.
So welcome to that choice of mine
So welcome to that choice of mine
So what has been rightly grasped should be borne in mind as rightly grasped and what has been wrongly grasped should be borne in mind as wrongly grasped.
So what has been rightly grasped should be borne in mind as rightly grasped.
So what has been wrongly grasped should be borne in mind as wrongly grasped and what has been rightly grasped should be borne in mind as rightly grasped.
So what has been wrongly grasped should be borne in mind as wrongly grasped.
So whatever they call it in such and such a locality, one speaks accordingly, firmly adhering and insisting: ‘Only this is correct; anything else is wrong.’
So whatever they call it in such and such a locality, without adhering one speaks accordingly, thinking: ‘These venerable ones, it seems, are speaking with reference to this.’
So when he finds that this holy life is without consolation, he turns away from it and leaves it.
So when he finds that this holy life is without consolation, he turns away from it and leaves it.
So when he finds that this way negates the living of the holy life, he turns away from it and leaves it.
So when he finds that this way negates the living of the holy life, he turns away from it and leaves it.
So when he finds that this way negates the living of the holy life, he turns away from it and leaves it.
So when he finds that this way negates the living of the holy life, he turns away from it and leaves it.
So when the venerable Sāriputta had wandered for alms in Rājagaha and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he went to the brahmin Dhānañjāni.
So with this regular donation and another regular donation, I shall have an assembly hall built for the Sangha at Pāṭaliputta.”
So you have been guided by me with this Dhamma, which is visible here and now, immediately effective, inviting inspection, onward leading, to be experienced by the wise for themselves.
So you know the Dhamma that I know and I know the Dhamma that you know.
So you know the Dhamma that Rāma knew and Rāma knew the Dhamma that you know.
So you say thus, and I also say thus: ‘When this does not exist, that does not come to be; with the cessation of this, that ceases.’
So you say thus, and I also say thus: ‘When this exists, that comes to be; with the arising of this, that arises.’
So, bhikkhu, I tell you this: Be sure, good sir, to abide inactive, devoted to a pleasant abiding here and now; this is better left undeclared, and so, good sir, do not advise anyone else.’ 
So, bhikkhu, I tell you this: Be sure, good sir, to do only as the Brahmā says; never overstep the word of the Brahmā.
So, bhikkhu, I tell you this: You will find no other escape beyond, and eventually you will reap only weariness and disappointment.
So, bhikkhu, listen and attend closely to what I shall say.”
So, brahmin, doubt no more on that.
So, householders, it is by reason of such conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, by reason of such righteous conduct that some beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
So, householders, it is by reason of such conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, by reason of such unrighteous conduct that some beings here on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in states of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.
So, putting non-identification first, he neither lauds himself nor disparages others because of his attainment of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
So, putting the practice of the way first, he neither lauds himself nor disparages others because of gain.
So, putting the practice of the way first, he neither lauds himself nor disparages others because of his aristocratic family.
So, putting the practice of the way first, he neither lauds himself nor disparages others because of his being a one-session eater.
So, putting the practice of the way first, he neither lauds himself nor disparages others because of his influential family.
So, putting the practice of the way first, he neither lauds himself nor disparages others because of his renown.
So, Puṇṇa, if his dog-duty succeeds, it will lead him to the company of dogs; if it fails, it will lead him to hell.”
So, Seniya, if his ox-duty succeeds, it will lead him to the company of oxen; if it fails, it will lead him to hell.”
So, with my teeth clenched and my tongue pressed against the roof of my mouth, I beat down, constrained, and crushed mind with mind.
Some assert thus: ‘The self and the world are both eternal and not eternal: only this is true, anything else is wrong.’ 
Some assert thus: ‘The self and the world are both finite and infinite: only this is true, anything else is wrong.’
Some assert thus: ‘The self and the world are eternal: only this is true, anything else is wrong.’ 
Some assert thus: ‘The self and the world are finite: only this is true, anything else is wrong.’ 
Some assert thus: ‘The self and the world are infinite: only this is true, anything else is wrong.’
Some assert thus: ‘The self and the world are neither eternal nor not eternal: only this is true, anything else is wrong.’ 
Some assert thus: ‘The self and the world are neither finite nor infinite: only this is true, anything else is wrong.’
Some assert thus: ‘The self and the world are not eternal: only this is true, anything else is wrong.’ 
Some assert thus: ‘The self and the world are percipient of diversity: only this is true, anything else is wrong.’
Some assert thus: ‘The self and the world are percipient of the immeasurable: only this is true, anything else is wrong.’
Some assert thus: ‘The self and the world are percipient of the limited: only this is true, anything else is wrong.’
Some assert thus: ‘The self and the world are percipient of unity: only this is true, anything else is wrong.’ 
Some assert thus: ‘The self and the world both pleasure and pain: only this is true, anything else is wrong.’
Some assert thus: ‘The self and the world exclusively pain: only this is true, anything else is wrong.’ 
Some assert thus: ‘The self and the world exclusively pleasure: only this is true, anything else is wrong.’
Some assert thus: ‘The self and the world neither pleasure nor pain: only this is true, anything else is wrong.’
Some assert thus: ‘The self is neither percipient nor non-percipient and unimpaired after death.’
Some assert thus: ‘The self is non-percipient and unimpaired after death.’
Some assert thus: ‘The self is percipient and unimpaired after death.’
Some cowherds, shepherds, ploughmen, and travellers saw the venerable Sañjīva sitting at the root of the tree having entered upon the cessation of perception and feeling, and they thought: ‘It is wonderful, sirs, it is marvellous!
Some of his disciples will hear and give ear and exert their minds to understand; they do not err and turn aside from the Teacher’s Dispensation.
Some of his disciples will not hear or give ear or exert their minds to understand; they err and turn aside from the Teacher’s Dispensation.
Some of the Licchavis paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some exchanged greetings with him, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, sat down at one side; some extended their hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some pronounced their name and clan in the Blessed One’s presence and sat down at one side; some kept silent and sat down at one side.
Some paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some exchanged greetings with him, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, sat down at one side; some extended their hands in reverential salutation towards him and sat down at one side; some pronounced their name and clan in the Blessed One’s presence and sat down at one side; some kept silent and sat down at one side.
Some paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some exchanged greetings with him, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, sat down at one side; some extended their hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some pronounced their name and clan in the Blessed One’s presence and sat down at one side; some kept silent and sat down at one side.
Some paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some exchanged greetings with him, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, sat down at one side; some extended their hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some pronounced their name and clan in the Blessed One’s presence and sat down at one side; some kept silent and sat down at one side.
Some paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some exchanged greetings with him, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, sat down at one side; some extended their hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some pronounced their name and clan in the Blessed One’s presence and sat down at one side; some kept silent and sat down at one side.
Some paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some exchanged greetings with him, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, sat down at one side; some extended their hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some pronounced their name and clan in the Blessed One’s presence and sat down at one side; some kept silent and sat down at one side.
Something that we aspire to know.”
Sometimes I instructed three bhikkhus while the other two went for alms, and the six of us lived on what those two bhikkhus brought back from their almsround.
Sometimes I mean to put my foot here and I put my foot somewhere else.”
Sometimes I wonder if I had supernormal power then.
Sometimes my friends and companions, kinsmen and relatives, stand around me, thinking: ‘Now King Koravya is about to die, now King Koravya is about to die!’”
Soon after he had gone, the brahmin Brahmāyu died.
Soon after he had left, the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus, Pessa, the elephant driver’s son, is wise, he has great wisdom.
Soon after he had left, the venerable Sāriputta addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Friends, bhikkhus.”—“Friend,” they replied.
Soon after Prince Jayasena had left, the novice Aciravata went to the Blessed One.
Soon after the venerable Sāriputta had left, the brahmin Dhānañjāni died and reappeared in the Brahma-world.
Soon after the wanderer Potaliputta had left, the venerable Samiddhi went to the venerable Ānanda and exchanged greetings with him.
Soon after they had gone, the clansman Raṭṭhapāla went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, as I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not easy while living in a home to lead the holy life, utterly perfect and pure as a polished shell.
Soon after they had left, the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus: “Bhikkhus, just as on the Uposatha day of the fifteenth people are not doubtful or perplexed as to whether the moon is incomplete or full, since then the moon is clearly full, so too, those bhikkhunīs are satisfied with Nandaka’s teaching of the Dhamma and their intention has been fulfilled.
Soon after they had left, the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus: “Bhikkhus, just as on the Uposatha day of the fourteenth people are not doubtful or perplexed as to whether the moon is incomplete or full, since then the moon is clearly incomplete, so too, those bhikkhunīs are satisfied with Nandaka’s teaching of the Dhamma, but their intention has not yet been fulfilled.”
Soon after they had left, the householder Anāthapiṇḍika died and reappeared in the Tusita heaven.
Soon afterward the light and the vision of forms disappeared.
Soon afterwards the light and the vision of forms disappear, but we have not discovered the cause for that.”
Soon afterwards the light and the vision of forms disappeared.
Sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair are born from those who are dear, arise from those who are dear.
Sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair are born from those who are dear, arise from those who are dear.”
Sounds cognizable by the ear are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.
Sounds cognizable by the ear… Odours cognizable by the nose…Flavours cognizable by the tongue…Tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire and provocative of lust.
Sounds cognizable by the ear…Odours cognizable by the nose…Flavours cognizable by the tongue… Tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire and provocative of lust.
Sounds cognizable by the ear…Odours cognizable by the nose…Flavours cognizable by the tongue… Tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire and provocative of lust.
Sounds cognizable by the ear…Odours cognizable by the nose…Flavours cognizable by the tongue… Tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire and provocative of lust.
Sounds cognizable by the ear…Odours cognizable by the nose…Flavours cognizable by the tongue…Tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired, agreeable and likeable, connected with sensual desire, and provocative of lust.
Sounds cognizable by the ear…Odours cognizable by the nose…Flavours cognizable by the tongue…Tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired, agreeable and likeable, connected with sensual desire, and provocative of lust.
Sounds cognizable by the ear…Odours cognizable by the nose…Flavours cognizable by the tongue…Tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire and provocative of lust.
Sounds cognizable by the ear…Odours cognizable by the nose…Flavours cognizable by the tongue…Tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire and provocative of lust.
Speaking thus, bhikkhus, I did not see any legitimate defence of their position by the Nigaṇṭhas.
Speaking thus, student, would he be speaking rightly?”
speaks of consciousness as “descending into the mother’s womb,” this being a condition for rebirth to take place.
Stakes of steel, even a hundred, Each one suffered separately;
Standing at one side, Candana the young deity said to him:
Standing at one side, the deity said to him:
Standing there, he surveyed the Sangha of bhikkhus sitting in complete silence, and then he said to the Blessed One:
Still he has already greatly benefited even as it is.” 
Still I will teach you the wholesome and the unwholesome in brief.
Still the Tathāgata’s exposition of the Dhamma, his explanations of factors of the Dhamma, and his replies to questions would not yet come to an end, but meanwhile those four disciples of mine with their hundred years’ lifespan would have died at the end of those hundred years.
Still, Bhaddāli, I will teach you an exposition of the Dhamma through the simile of the young thoroughbred colt.
Still, sirs, at your bidding I will go.”
Stop, recluse!”
Strength of supernormal powers, Shook all Vejayanta Palace
Subdue his forest habits, subdue his forest memories and intentions, subdue his distress, fatigue, and fever over leaving the forest.
Such a bhikkhu dwells disrespectful and undeferential towards the Teacher, towards the Dhamma, and towards the Sangha, and he does not fulfil the training.
Such a bhikkhu dwells disrespectful and undeferential towards the Teacher, towards the Dhamma, and towards the Sangha, and he does not fulfil the training.
Such a dispute would be for the harm and unhappiness of many, for the loss, harm, and suffering of gods and humans.”
Such a person I call fettered, not unfettered.
Such a person I call unfettered, not fettered.
Such a person too I call fettered, not unfettered.
Such a person too I call fettered, not unfettered.
Such a thought should not be entertained by you again.” 
Such acquisition of perception causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it.
Such acquisition of perception causes unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who cultivates it.
Such acquisition of view causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it.
Such acquisition of view causes unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who cultivates it.
Such an assembly as is rare for the world to see—such is this Sangha of bhikkhus, such is this assembly.
Such an assembly as is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an incomparable field of merit for the world—such is this Sangha of bhikkhus, such is this assembly.
Such an assembly as would be worth journeying many leagues with a travel-bag to see—such is this Sangha of bhikkhus, such is this assembly.
Such an assembly that a small gift given to it becomes great and a great gift greater—such is this Sangha of bhikkhus, such is this assembly.
Such bodily behaviour is censured by wise recluses and brahmins, great king.” 
Such bodily behaviour, great king, is uncensured by wise recluses and brahmins.”
Such bodily conduct causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it.
Such bodily conduct causes unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who cultivates it.
Such equanimity as this does not transcend the form; that is why it is called equanimity based on the household life.
Such equanimity as this does not transcend the mind-object; that is why it is called equanimity based on the household life.
Such equanimity as this transcends the form; that is why it is called equanimity based on renunciation.
Such equanimity as this transcends the mind-object; that is why it is called equanimity based on renunciation.
Such grief as this is called grief based on renunciation.
Such grief as this is called grief based on renunciation.
Such grief as this is called grief based on the household life.
Such grief as this is called grief based on the household life.
Such inclination of mind causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it.
Such inclination of mind causes unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who cultivates it.
Such is its meaning, and so you should remember it.”
Such is its meaning, and so you should remember it.”
Such is its meaning, and so you should remember it.” 
Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.
Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.
Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.
Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.
Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.’
Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.’”
Such is the counsellor-treasure that appears to a Wheel-turning Monarch.
Such is the covering over with grass.
Such is the effecting of acknowledgement of an offence.
Such is the elephant-treasure that appears to a Wheel-turning Monarch.
Such is the horse-treasure that appears to a Wheel-turning Monarch.
Such is the jewel-treasure that appears to a Wheel-turning Monarch.
Such is the Master Gotama; such he is, and more than that.” 
Such is the meaning of this, and so you should remember it.”
Such is the opinion of a majority.
Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.
Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.
Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.
Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.
Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.
Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.’”
Such is the potter Ghaṭīkāra.’
Such is the pronouncement of bad character against someone.
Such is the removal of litigation by confrontation.
Such is the removal of litigation on account of memory.
Such is the removal of litigation on account of past insanity.
Such is the steward-treasure that appears to a Wheel-turning Monarch.
Such is the wheel-treasure that appears to a Wheel-turning Monarch.
Such is the woman-treasure that appears to a Wheel-turning Monarch.
Such is this Sangha of bhikkhus, such is this assembly.
Such joy as this is called joy based on renunciation.
Such joy as this is called joy based on renunciation.
Such joy as this is called joy based on the household life.
Such joy as this is called joy based on the household life.
Such speech as the Tathāgata knows to be true and correct but unbeneficial, and which is also unwelcome and disagreeable to others: such speech the Tathāgata does not utter.
Such speech as the Tathāgata knows to be true and correct but unbeneficial, and which is welcome and agreeable to others: such speech the Tathāgata does not utter.
Such speech as the Tathāgata knows to be true, correct, and beneficial, and which is welcome and agreeable to others: the Tathāgata knows the time to use such speech.
Such speech as the Tathāgata knows to be true, correct, and beneficial, but which is unwelcome and disagreeable to others: the Tathāgata knows the time to use such speech.
Such speech as the Tathāgata knows to be untrue, incorrect, and unbeneficial, but which is welcome and agreeable to others: such speech the Tathāgata does not utter.
Such talk on the Dhamma is given to those who have gone forth.” 
Such teachings as are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing, and affirm a holy life that is utterly perfect and pure—such teachings as these he has learned much of, remembered, recited verbally, investigated with the mind and penetrated well by view.
Such teachings as are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing, and which affirm a holy life that is utterly perfect and pure—such teachings as these he has learned much of, remembered, mastered verbally, investigated with the mind, and penetrated well by view.
Such teachings as are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing, and which affirm a holy life that is utterly perfect and pure—such teachings as these he has learned much of, remembered, mastered verbally, investigated with the mind, and penetrated well by view.
Such teachings as are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing, and which affirm a holy life that is utterly perfect and pure—such teachings as these he has learned much of, remembered, mastered verbally, investigated with the mind, and penetrated well by view.
Such verbal conduct causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it.
Such verbal conduct causes unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who cultivates it.
Such was my abiding in equanimity.
Such was my asceticism.
Such was my coarseness.
Such was my great practice of feeding on filth.
Such was my scrupulousness.
Sunakkhatta, son of the Licchavis, heard: “A number of bhikkhus, it seems, have declared final knowledge in the presence of the Blessed One thus: ‘We understand: Birth is destroyed …there is no more coming to any state of being.’” Then Sunakkhatta, son of the Licchavis, went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said to the Blessed One:
Sunakkhatta, son of the Licchavis, was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
Suppose a bhikkhu here were one liberated-by-wisdom…a body-witness…one attained-toview…one liberated-by-faith…a Dhamma-follower…a faith-follower, and I told him: ‘Come, bhikkhu, be a plank for me across the mud.’
Suppose a bhikkhu here were one liberated-in-both-ways, and I told him: ‘Come, bhikkhu, be a plank for me across the mud.’
Suppose a blue, yellow, red, white, or brown thread were strung through a fine beryl gem of purest water, eight-faceted, well cut, and a man with good sight were to take it in his hand and review it thus: “This is a fine beryl gem of purest water, eight-faceted, well cut, and through it is strung a blue, yellow, red, white, or brown thread”; so too when the Bodhisatta had descended into his mother’s womb…she saw the Bodhisatta within her womb with all his limbs, lacking no faculty.’
Suppose a brahmin were to abstain from killing living beings, from taking what is not given, from misconduct in sensual pleasures, from false speech, from malicious speech, from harsh speech, and from gossip, and were to be uncovetous, to have a mind without ill will, and to hold right view.
Suppose a brahmin youth here were to cohabit with a noble girl, and a son were to be born from their cohabitation.
Suppose a brahmin…a merchant...
Suppose a brahmin…a merchant…a worker were to abstain from killing living beings…and to hold right view.
Suppose a brahmin…a merchant…a worker were to break into houses…or seduce another’s wife, and if your men arrested him and produced him, saying: ‘Sire, this is the culprit; command what punishment for him you wish,’ how would you treat him?”
Suppose a brahmin…a merchant…a worker were to kill living beings…and hold wrong view.
Suppose a bronze dish were brought from a shop or a smithy covered with dirt and stains, and the owners neither used it nor had it cleaned but put it away in a dusty corner.
Suppose a bronze dish were brought from a shop or a smithy covered with dirt and stains, and the owners used it and had it cleaned and did not put it in a dusty corner.
Suppose a bronze dish were brought from a shop or smithy clean and bright, and the owners neither used it nor had it cleaned but put it in a dusty corner.
Suppose a bronze dish were brought from a shop or smithy clean and bright, and the owners used it and had it cleaned and did not put it in a dusty corner.
Suppose a fire were burning before you.
Suppose a forest deer who was bound lay down on a heap of snares; it might be understood of him: ‘He has met with calamity, met with disaster, the hunter can do with him as he likes, and when the hunter comes he cannot go where he wants.’
Suppose a forest deer who was unbound lay down on a heap of snares; it might be understood of him: ‘He has not met with calamity, not met with disaster, the hunter cannot do with him as he likes, and when the hunter comes he can go where he wants.’
Suppose a head-anointed noble king were to assemble here a hundred men of different birth and say to them: ‘Come, sirs, let any here who have been born into a noble clan or a brahmin clan or a royal clan take an upper fire-stick of sāla wood, salala wood, sandalwood, or padumaka wood and light a fire and produce heat.
Suppose a head-anointed noble king were to assemble here a hundred men of different birth”......“For all fire has a flame, a colour, and a radiance, and it is possible to use all fire for the purposes of fire.”
Suppose a king or a king’s minister had a chest full of variously coloured garments.
Suppose a man came here brandishing a sword and spoke thus: ‘In one moment, in one instant, I will make all the living beings in this town of Nāḷandā into one mass of flesh, into one heap of flesh.’
Suppose a man came here thinking: ‘Prince Bodhi knows the art of wielding a goad while riding an elephant; I shall train in that art under him.’
Suppose a man came here thinking: ‘Prince Bodhi knows the art of wielding a goad while riding an elephant; I shall train in that art under him.’
Suppose a man came who wanted to go to Rājagaha, and he approached you and said: ‘Venerable sir, I want to go to Rājagaha.
Suppose a man had only one eye; then his friends and companions, his kinsmen and relatives, would guard his eye, thinking: ‘Let him not lose his one eye.’
Suppose a man seeking one entrance to a hidden treasure came all at once upon five entrances to a hidden treasure; then elation would arise in him because of that.
Suppose a man set out on a journey and murderers leaped out on both sides of him; then fear would arise in him because of that.
Suppose a man took dry sāka wood, lit a fire, and produced heat; and then another man took dry sāla wood, lit a fire, and produced heat; and then another man took dry mango wood, lit a fire, and produced heat; and then another man took dry fig wood, lit a fire, and produced heat.
Suppose a man were to grip a quail loosely; it would fly out of his hands.
Suppose a man were to grip a quail tightly with both hands; it would die then and there.
Suppose a man were to say: ‘I am in love with the most beautiful girl in this country.’
Suppose a man were to throw a heavy stone ball upon a mound of wet clay.
Suppose a man were to throw a light ball of string at a door-panel made entirely of heartwood.
Suppose a man’s hands and feet were cut off.
Suppose a mare were to be mated with a male donkey, and a foal were to be born as the result.
Suppose a merchant…a worker were to kill living beings…and hold wrong view.
Suppose a noble were to abstain from killing living beings, from taking what is not given, from misconduct in sensual pleasures, from false speech, from malicious speech, from harsh speech, and from gossip, and were to be uncovetous, to have a mind without ill will, and to hold right view.
Suppose a noble were to break into houses, plunder wealth, commit banditry, ambush highways, or seduce another’s wife, and if your men arrested him and produced him, saying: ‘Sire, this is the culprit; command what punishment for him you wish,’ how would you treat him?”
Suppose a noble were to kill living beings, take what is not given, misconduct himself in sensual pleasures, speak falsely, speak maliciously, speak harshly, gossip, be covetous, have a mind of ill will, and hold wrong view.
Suppose a noble were to kill living beings, take what is not given, misconduct himself in sensual pleasures, speak falsely, speak maliciously, speak harshly, gossip, be covetous, have a mind of ill will, and hold wrong view.
Suppose a noble youth were to cohabit with a brahmin girl, and a son was born from their cohabitation.
Suppose a noble, having shaved off his hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and gone forth from the home life into homelessness, were to abstain from killing living beings, from taking what is not given, and from false speech.
Suppose a trustworthy and reliable man came to you from the east and said: ‘Please know, great king, that I have come from the east, and there I saw a large country, powerful and rich, very populous and crowded with people.
Suppose a trustworthy and reliable man came to you from the west…from the north…from the south…from across the sea and said: ‘Please know, great king, that I have come from across the sea, and there I saw a large country, powerful and rich…Conquer it then, great king.’
Suppose an oil-lamp is burning with impure oil and an impure wick; because of the impurity of its oil and its wick it burns dimly.
Suppose he saw a householder or a householder’s son enjoying himself, provided and endowed with the five cords of sensual pleasure.
Suppose I ask him a question.”
Suppose I ate some solid food—some boiled rice and porridge.’
Suppose I collect grass, twigs, branches, and leaves and bind them together into a raft, and supported by the raft and making an effort with my hands and feet, I got safely across to the far shore.’
Suppose I endeavour to realise the Dhamma that Rāma declared he entered upon and abided in by realising for himself with direct knowledge.’
Suppose I endeavour to realise the Dhamma that Āḷāra Kālāma declares he enters upon and abides in by realising for himself with direct knowledge?’
Suppose I extol the recluse Gotama to his face with fitting stanzas.”
Suppose I found out whether he did or not.”
Suppose I question this recluse.”
Suppose I shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness.’
Suppose I shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness.’
Suppose I shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness.’
Suppose I shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness.’
Suppose I shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness.’
Suppose I shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness.”
Suppose I shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness.”
Suppose I taught the Dhamma first to them.’
Suppose I taught the Dhamma first to Uddaka Rāmaputta.
Suppose I taught the Dhamma first to Āḷāra Kālāma.
Suppose I teach the brahmin Dhānañjāni the path to the company of Brahmā.’”
Suppose I teach the brahmin Dhānañjāni the path to the company of Brahmā?” “Dhānañjāni, I shall teach you the path to the company of Brahmā.
Suppose I test my lady a little more.’
Suppose I test my lady a little more.’
Suppose I test my lady.’
Suppose I went to Mallikā’s Park, to the wanderer Uggāhamaā̄na Samaṇamaṇḍikāputta?”
Suppose I went to the brahmin Gopaka Moggallāna at his workplace.”
Suppose I went to the wanderer Sakuludāyin in the Peacocks’ Sanctuary, the wanderers’ park.”
Suppose I went to the wanderer Sakuludāyin in the Peacocks’ Sanctuary, the wanderers’ park.”
Suppose I went to the wanderer Vacchagotta in the Wanderers’ Park of the Single White-lotus Mango Tree.”
Suppose I were to abide with a mind abundant and exalted, having transcended the world and made a firm determination with the mind.
Suppose I were to follow the recluse Gotama and observe his behaviour?”
Suppose I were to haul it onto the dry land or set it adrift in the water, and then go wherever I want.’
Suppose I were to hoist it on my head or load it on my shoulder, and then go wherever I want.’
Suppose I were to lead him on further to the destruction of the taints.”
Suppose I were to question him.”
Suppose I were to teach him the Dhamma.”
Suppose some recluse or brahmin came here possessed of supernormal power and attained to mastery of mind, and he spoke thus: ‘I will reduce this town of Nāḷandā to ashes with one mental act of hate.’
Suppose someone here were to behave contrary to the Dhamma, to behave unrighteously for the sake of his parents, and then because of such behaviour the wardens of hell were to drag him off to hell.
Suppose someone here were to behave contrary to the Dhamma, to behave unrighteously for the sake of his wife and children…for the sake of his slaves, servants, and workers…for the sake of his friends and companions…for the sake of his kinsmen and relatives…for the sake of his guests… for the sake of his departed ancestors…for the sake of the deities…for the sake of the king…for the sake of refreshing and nourishing this body, and because of such behaviour the wardens of hell were to drag him off to hell.
Suppose that instead of eating this almsfood I pass the night and day hungry and weak.’
Suppose that King Pasenadi of Kosala while living at Sāvatthī had some urgent business to settle at Sāketa, and that between Sāvatthī and Sāketa seven relay chariots were kept ready for him.
Suppose that they continuously asked me about the four foundations of mindfulness and that I answered them when asked and that they remembered each answer of mine and never asked a subsidiary question or paused except to eat, drink, consume food, taste, urinate, defecate, and rest in order to remove sleepiness and tiredness.
Suppose that, being myself subject to ageing, sickness, death, sorrow, and defilement, having understood the danger in what is subject to ageing, sickness, death, sorrow, and defilement, I seek the unageing, unailing, deathless, sorrowless, and undefiled supreme security from bondage, Nibbāna.’
Suppose that, being myself subject to birth, having understood the danger in what is subject to birth, I seek the unborn supreme security from bondage, Nibbāna.
Suppose there was a man born and raised in the village of Naḷakāra, and as soon as he had left Naḷakāra they asked him about the path to the village.
Suppose there were a beautiful beryl gem of purest water, eight-faceted, well cut, clear and limpid, possessed of all good qualities, and through it a blue, yellow, red, white, or brown thread would be strung.
Suppose there were a big sāla-tree grove near a village or town, and it was choked with castor-oil weeds, and some man would appear desiring its good, welfare, and protection.
Suppose there were a blind turtle that came up once at the end of each century.
Suppose there were a cesspit deeper than a man’s height full of filth; and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way only and directed to that same cesspit.
Suppose there were a charcoal pit deeper than a man’s height full of glowing coals without flame or smoke; and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way only and directed to that same charcoal pit.
Suppose there were a chariot on even ground at the crossroads, harnessed to thoroughbreds, waiting with goad lying ready, so that a skilled trainer, a charioteer of horses to be tamed, might mount it, and taking the reins in his left hand and the goad in his right hand, might drive out and back by any road whenever he likes.
Suppose there were a dry sapless piece of wood lying on dry land far from water, and a man came with an upper fire-stick, thinking: ‘I shall light a fire, I shall produce heat.’
Suppose there were a file of blind men each in touch with the next: the first one does not see, the middle one does not see, and the last one does not see.
Suppose there were a file of blind men each in touch with the next: the first one does not see, the middle one does not see, and the last one does not see.
Suppose there were a gem placed on Kāsi cloth, then the gem would not smear the cloth or the cloth the gem.
Suppose there were a girl of the noble class or the brahmin class or of householder stock, in her fifteenth or sixteenth year, neither too tall nor too short, neither too thin nor too fat, neither too dark nor too fair.
Suppose there were a mansion, and it had an upper chamber plastered within and without, shut off, secured by bars, with shuttered windows, and in it there was a couch spread with rugs, blankets, and sheets, with a deer-skin coverlet, with a canopy as well as crimson pillows for both; and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way only and directed to that same mansion.
Suppose there were a pond with clean, agreeable, cool water, transparent, with smooth banks, delightful, and nearby a dense wood; and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way only towards that same pond.
Suppose there were a tree growing on even ground with thick foliage casting a deep shade; and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way only and directed to that same tree.
Suppose there were a tree growing on uneven ground with scanty foliage casting a dappled shadow; and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way only and directed to that same tree.
Suppose there were a wet sappy piece of wood lying in water, and a man came with an upper fire-stick, thinking: ‘I shall light a fire, I shall produce heat.’
Suppose there were a wet sappy piece of wood lying on dry land far from water, and a man came with an upper fire-stick, thinking: ‘I shall light a fire, I shall produce heat.’
Suppose there were two brahmin students who were brothers, born of the same mother, one studious and acute, and one neither studious nor acute.
Suppose there were two brahmin students who were brothers, born of the same mother, one studious and acute, but immoral and of bad character, and one neither studious nor acute, but virtuous and of good character.
Suppose there were two tamable elephants or tamable horses or tamable oxen that were well tamed and well disciplined, and two tamable elephants or tamable horses or tamable oxen that were untamed and undisciplined.
Suppose we altogether shun that bait food and those material things of the world; shunning that fearful enjoyment, let us go out into the forest wilds and live there.’
Suppose we altogether shun that bait food; shunning that fearful enjoyment, let us go out into the forest wilds and live there.’
Suppose we have the bait that is laid down completely surrounded all round over a wide area with wicker hurdles; then perhaps we might see the fourth deer herd’s dwelling place, where they go to hide.’
Suppose we have the bait that is laid down completely surrounded all round over a wide area with wicker hurdles; then perhaps we might see the third deer herd’s dwelling place, where they go to hide.’
Suppose we make our dwelling place where Māra and his following cannot go.
Suppose we make our dwelling place where the deer-trapper and his following cannot go.
Suppose we make our dwelling place within range of that bait that Māra has laid down and those material things of the world.
Suppose we make our dwelling place within range of the deer-trapper’s bait.
Suppose we treat the fourth deer herd with indifference.’
Suppose we went to him and asked him the meaning of this.”
Suppose we went to him and asked him the meaning of this.”
Suppose we went to him and asked him the meaning of this.”
Suppose we went to the park of the wanderers of other sects.”
Suppose, bhikkhu, a skilled goldsmith or his apprentice were to prepare a furnace, heat up the crucible, take some gold with tongs, and put it into the crucible.
Suppose, Kaccāna, there were a young tender infant lying prone, bound by stout bonds with the fifth at the neck; and later on, as a result of his growth and the maturing of his faculties, those bonds loosened, then he would know ‘I am free’ and there would be no more bondage.
Suppose, Mālunkyāputta, a man were wounded by an arrow thickly smeared with poison, and his friends and companions, his kinsmen and relatives, brought a surgeon to treat him.
Suppose, set out on a stand, there were a water jug full of water right up to the brim so that crows could drink from it.
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.’
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.’
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.’
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.’
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.’
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.’
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.’
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.’
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.’
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.’
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.’
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.’
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.’
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.’
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known’?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”
Surely I had better do good by body, speech, and mind”?’
Surely the venerable one must know quite well if he remembers having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?’
Surely these good people perceive successive states of lofty distinction in the Blessed One’s Dispensation.’
Surely this can be no simple matter.’
Surpassing that in the Brahmā-world.
Surpassing that in the Brahmā-world?’
Surveying the world with the eye of a Buddha, I saw beings with little dust in their eyes and with much dust in their eyes, with keen faculties and with dull faculties, with good qualities and with bad qualities, easy to teach and hard to teach, and some who dwelt seeing fear and blame in the other world.
Sāriputta, even if you have to carry me about on a bed, still there will be no change in the lucidity of the Tathāgata’s wisdom.
Sāriputta, speaking rightly, should speak just as he did.
Sāriputta, you may think that the kola-fruit was bigger at that time, yet you should not regard it so: the kola-fruit was then at most the same size as now.
Sāriputta, you may think that the rice grain was bigger at that time, yet you should not regard it so: the rice grain was then at most the same size as now.
Take care of your wound, good man, and see to it that the wound heals.’
Take care of your wound, good man, and see to it that the wound heals.’
Taking up A for examination first, in A.i he shows the pernicious effect of this view on bodily, verbal, and mental conduct.
Tangibles cognizable by the body are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.
Tathāgatas are marvellous and have marvellous qualities.’
Tathāgatas are marvellous and have marvellous qualities.” 
Tathāgatas do not smile for no reason.”
Tathāgatas do not smile for no reason.”
Tathāgatas do not smile for no reason.”
Tathāgatas do not smile for no reason.”
Tell him just what I have said.”
That answer would occur to me on the spot.”
That any recluse or brahmin could say: “Apart from material form, apart from feeling, apart from perception, apart from formations, I shall describe the coming and going of consciousness, its passing away and reappearance, its growth, increase, and maturation”—that is impossible.
That are the signs of a Great Man—
That are the signs of a Great Man—
That arrow of craving has been pulled out from me; the poisonous humour of ignorance has been expelled.
That arrow of craving has been removed from me; the poisonous humour of ignorance has been expelled.
That arrow of craving has been removed from me; the poisonous humour of ignorance has been expelled.
That arrow of craving has been removed from me; the poisonous humour of ignorance has been expelled.
That being so, do you not adhere to suffering, resort to suffering, hold to suffering, and regard what is suffering thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self’?”
That being so, it is not fitting for the venerable Nigaṇṭhas to declare: “Whatever this person feels, whether pleasure or pain or neither-pain-nor-pleasure, all that is caused by what was done in the past.
That being so, it is not fitting for the venerable Nigaṇṭhas to declare: “Whatever this person feels, whether pleasure or pain or neither-pain-nor-pleasure, all that is caused by what was done in the past.
That being so, the venerable Nigaṇṭhas’ exertion is fruitless, their striving is fruitless.’
That being so, those who are murderers, bloody-handed evil-doers in the world, when they are reborn among human beings, go forth into homelessness as Nigaṇṭhas.’ 
That being so, who dwells in greater pleasure, King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha or I?’
That bhikkhu should continue living in that jungle thicket as long as life lasts; he should not depart.
That bhikkhu should depart from that jungle thicket that very night or that very day; he should not continue living there.
That birth would not come to us!’ But this is not to be obtained by wishing, and not to obtain what one wants is suffering.
That consciousness of his changes and becomes otherwise.
That consciousness of his changes and becomes otherwise.
That distinguish a man as well born;
That element of things has been fully penetrated by the Tathāgata, through the full penetration of which the answer occurs to the Tathāgata on the spot.” 
That even I found hard to reach;
That gold would become refined, well refined, completely refined, faultless, rid of dross, malleable, wieldy, and radiant.
That he could know or see or realise a superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones—this is impossible.
That he could know or see or realise a superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones—this is impossible.
That he could know or see or realise a superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones—this is impossible.
That he is the holy one, without an equal, Who has crushed all Māra’s teeming hordes?
That here we should restrain ourselves.
That hermitage is agreeable and delightful.
That I am permanent and eternal?’: 
That is conditioned and gross, but there is cessation of formations.
That is conditioned and gross, but there is cessation of formations.
That is conditioned and gross, but there is cessation of formations.’
That is conditioned and gross, but there is cessation of formations.’
That is conditioned and gross, but there is cessation of formations.’
That is conditioned and gross, but there is cessation of formations.’
That is conditioned and gross, but there is cessation of formations.’
That is conditioned and gross, but there is cessation of formations.’
That is conditioned and gross, but there is cessation of formations.’
That is conditioned and gross, but there is cessation of formations.’
That is dependent, not independent.
That is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating feelings as feelings.
That is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind as mind.
That is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of the five aggregates affected by clinging.
That is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of the five hindrances.
That is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of the Four Noble Truths.
That is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of the seven enlightenment factors.
That is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of the six internal and external bases.
That is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body.
That is how a bhikkhu develops mindfulness of the body.
That is how a bhikkhu does not know the ford.
That is how a bhikkhu does not know the road.
That is how a bhikkhu does not know what it is to have drunk.
That is how a bhikkhu does not milk dry.
That is how a bhikkhu dresses wounds.
That is how a bhikkhu fails to dress wounds.
That is how a bhikkhu fails to pick out flies’ eggs.
That is how a bhikkhu fails to smoke out the sheds.
That is how a bhikkhu has knowledge of form.
That is how a bhikkhu has no knowledge of form.
That is how a bhikkhu is a brahmin.
That is how a bhikkhu is a holy scholar.
That is how a bhikkhu is a noble one.
That is how a bhikkhu is a recluse.
That is how a bhikkhu is an arahant.”
That is how a bhikkhu is one who has attained to knowledge.
That is how a bhikkhu is one who has been washed.
That is how a bhikkhu is skilled in characteristics.
That is how a bhikkhu is skilled in pastures.
That is how a bhikkhu is unskilled in characteristics.
That is how a bhikkhu is unskilled in pastures.
That is how a bhikkhu knows the ford.
That is how a bhikkhu knows what it is to have drunk.
That is how a bhikkhu milks dry.
That is how a bhikkhu picks out flies’ eggs.
That is how a bhikkhu shows extra veneration to those elder bhikkhus of long-standing who have long gone forth, the fathers and leaders of the Sangha.
That is how a bhikkhu shows no extra veneration to those elder bhikkhus of long-standing who have long gone forth, the fathers and leaders of the Sangha.
That is how a bhikkhu smokes out the sheds.
That is how a bhikkhu steadies his mind internally, quiets it, brings it to singleness, and concentrates it.
That is how a bhikkhu understands the road.
That is how a noble disciple guards the doors of his sense faculties.
That is how a noble disciple is devoted to wakefulness.
That is how a noble disciple is moderate in eating.
That is how a noble disciple is one who obtains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and provide a pleasant abiding here and now.
That is how a noble disciple possesses seven good qualities.
That is how a true man acts as a true man.
That is how a true man associates as a true man.
That is how a true man counsels as a true man.
That is how a true man gives gifts as a true man.
That is how a true man holds views as a true man.
That is how a true man is possessed of good qualities.
That is how a true man speaks as a true man.
That is how a true man wills as a true man.
That is how an untrue man acts as an untrue man.
That is how an untrue man associates as an untrue man.
That is how an untrue man counsels as an untrue man.
That is how an untrue man gives gifts as an untrue man.
That is how an untrue man holds views as an untrue man.
That is how an untrue man is possessed of bad qualities.
That is how an untrue man speaks as an untrue man.
That is how an untrue man wills as an untrue man.
That is how I have given up all my works and cut off all my affairs.”
That is how I recall stating in brief to Sakka, ruler of gods, deliverance in the destruction of craving.”
That is how identity view comes to be.”
That is how identity view comes to be.” 
That is how identity view does not come to be.”
That is how identity view does not come to be.”
That is how in the first jhāna five factors are abandoned and five factors are possessed.”
That is how it appears to me in this case, and thus I have heard from the arahants.”
That is how it appears to me in this case, and thus I have heard from the arahants.”
That is how it appears to me in this case, and thus I have heard from the arahants.”
That is how it appears to me in this case, and thus I have heard from the arahants.”
That is how it is with one who does not fulfil the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.
That is how it is with one who fulfils the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.
That is how it is with one who fulfils the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.
That is how it is with one who fulfils the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.
That is how it is with one who fulfils the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.
That is how it is with one who fulfils the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.”
That is how one builds up hope upon the future.
That is how one does not build up hope upon the future.
That is how one does not revive the past.
That is how one does not revive the past.
That is how one is a disciple in higher training, one who has entered upon the way.
That is how one is a noble one with developed faculties.
That is how one is invincible in regard to presently arisen states.
That is how one is invincible in regard to presently arisen states.
That is how one is vanquished in regard to presently arisen states.
That is how one is vanquished in regard to presently arisen states.
That is how one revives the past.
That is how one revives the past.
That is how the bhikkhu is a noble one whose banner is lowered, whose burden is lowered, who is unfettered.
That is how the bhikkhu is one who has no bolt.
That is how the bhikkhu is one whose cross-bar has been lifted.
That is how the bhikkhu is one whose pillar has been uprooted.
That is how the bhikkhu is one whose trench has been filled in.
That is how the Blessed One disciplines his disciples, and that is how the Blessed One’s instruction is usually presented to his disciples.”
That is how the Blessed One stated to me in brief deliverance in the destruction of craving, good sir Moggallāna.”
That is how the brahmin Pārāsariya teaches his disciples the development of the faculties.”
That is how the deer of the first herd failed to get free from the deertrapper’s power and control.
That is how the Dhamma has been shown by me in presentations.
That is how the first jhāna has five factors.”
That is how the mind is called ‘not stuck internally.’
That is how the mind is called ‘stuck internally.’ 
That is how the recluses and brahmins of the first kind failed to get free from Māra’s power and control.
That is how the rich enjoy their wealth!’ Then the owners, whenever they saw him, would take back their things.
That is how the wanderer Sakuludāyin’s assembly obstructed him from leading the holy life under the Blessed One.
That is how the wanderer Sandaka exhorted his own assembly to live the holy life under the Blessed One.
That is how there are four kinds of verbal conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
That is how there are four kinds of verbal conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.
That is how there are three kinds of bodily conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
That is how there are three kinds of bodily conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.
That is how there are three kinds of mental conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
That is how there are three kinds of mental conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.
That is how there is agitation about what is non-existent externally.”
That is how there is agitation about what is non-existent internally.”
That is how there is agitation due to clinging.
That is how there is increase and decrease of this body.
That is how there is no agitation about what is non-existent externally.”
That is how there is no agitation about what is non-existent internally.
That is how there is non-agitation due to non-clinging.
That is how those recluses and brahmins of the second kind failed to get free from Māra’s power and control.
That is how we abide diligent, ardent, and resolute.”
That is how we abide diligent, ardent, and resolute.”
That is how you should train, bhikkhus.
That is how you should train, bhikkhus.
That is how you should train, bhikkhus.
That is how you should train, bhikkhus.
That is how you should train, bhikkhus.
That is how you should train, bhikkhus.
That is how you should train, Phagguna.
That is how you should train, Phagguna.
That is how, bhikkhus, there is an investigation of the Tathāgata in accordance with the Dhamma, and that is how the Tathāgata is well investigated in accordance with the Dhamma.”
That is impossible.
That is impossible.’”
That is so when he attains to the rapture and pleasure that are secluded from sensual pleasures and secluded from unwholesome states, or to something more peaceful than that.
That is so while he still does not attain to the rapture and pleasure that are secluded from sensual pleasures and secluded from unwholesome states, or to something more peaceful than that.
That is the fixed and ageless law.
That is the level of service towards a brahmin that the brahmins prescribe.
That is the level of service towards a merchant that the brahmins prescribe.
That is the level of service towards a noble that the brahmins prescribe.
That is the level of service towards a worker that the brahmins prescribe.
That is the way I discipline my disciples, and that is how my instruction is usually presented to my disciples.”
That is the wealth of a brahmin which the brahmins prescribe.
That is the wealth of a merchant which the brahmins prescribe.
That is the wealth of a noble which the brahmins prescribe.
That is the wealth of a worker which the brahmins prescribe.
That is what happens to one who does not see.
That is what happens to one who does not see.
That is what happens to one who does not see.
That is what happens to one who does not see.
That is what happens to one who does not see.
That is what happens to one who sees.
That is what happens to one who sees.
That is what happens to one who sees.
That is what happens to one who sees.
That is what happens to one who sees.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the Blessed One said.
That is what the venerable Mahā Moggallāna said.
That is what the venerable Raṭṭhapāla said.
That is what the venerable Sāriputta said.
That is what the venerable Sāriputta said.
That is what the venerable Sāriputta said.
That is what the venerable Sāriputta said.
That is what the venerable Sāriputta said.
That is what the venerable Ānanda said.
That is what the venerable Ānanda said.
That is what the young god Anāthapiṇḍika said, and the Teacher approved.
That is what the young god said.
That is what was said by Candana the young deity, who thereupon vanished at once.
That is what was said by the deity, who thereupon vanished at once.
That is what was said by the deity, who thereupon vanished at once.
That is why a reflective acceptance of the teachings is most helpful for zeal.”
That is why application of the will is most helpful for scrutiny.”
that is why at a later time he does not exert himself in what is painful.
That is why examination of the meaning is most helpful for a reflective acceptance of the teachings.”
That is why faith is most helpful for visiting.”
That is why giving ear is most helpful for hearing the Dhamma.”
That is why hearing the Dhamma is most helpful for memorising the teachings.”
That is why I have declared it.
That is why I have left it undeclared.
That is why I have stopped and you have not.” 
That is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, ‘The body is self.’
That is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, ‘The ear is self.’
That is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, ‘The eye is self.’
That is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, ‘The mind is self.’
That is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, ‘The nose is self.’
That is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, ‘The tongue is self.’
That is why on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating feelings as feelings, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
That is why on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind as mind, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
That is why on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
That is why on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
That is why paying respect is most helpful for giving ear.”
That is why scrutiny is most helpful for striving.”
That is why striving is most helpful for the final arrival at truth.”
That is why the Tathāgata uses one thing after reflecting, endures another thing after reflecting, avoids another thing after reflecting, and removes another thing after reflecting.”
That is why the Tathāgata uses one thing after reflecting, endures another thing after reflecting, avoids another thing after reflecting, and removes another thing after reflecting’?” 
That is why these states are conjoined, not disjoined, and it is impossible to separate each of these states from the other in order to describe the difference between them.” 
That is why these states are conjoined, not disjoined, and it is impossible to separate each of these states from the others in order to describe the difference between them.” 
That is why this kind of person satisfies my mind.
That is why this kind of person satisfies my mind.”
That is why visiting is most helpful for paying respect.”
That is why zeal is most helpful for application of the will.”
That is, with ignorance as condition, formations; with formations as condition, consciousness; with consciousness as condition, mentality-materiality; with mentality-materiality as condition, the sixfold base; with the sixfold base as condition, contact; with contact as condition, feeling; with feeling as condition, craving; with craving as condition, clinging; with clinging as condition, being; with being as condition, birth; with birth as condition, ageing and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair come to be.
That is, with ignorance as condition, formations; with formations as condition, consciousness; with consciousness as condition, mentality-materiality; with mentality-materiality as condition, the sixfold base; with the sixfold base as condition, contact; with contact as condition, feeling; with feeling as condition, craving; with craving as condition, clinging; with clinging as condition, being; with being as condition, birth; with birth as condition, ageing and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair come to be.
That is, with the cessation of ignorance comes cessation of formations; with the cessation of formations, cessation of consciousness; with the cessation of consciousness, cessation of mentality-materiality; with the cessation of mentality-materiality, cessation of the sixfold base; with the cessation of the sixfold base, cessation of contact; with the cessation of contact, cessation of feeling; with the cessation of feeling, cessation of craving; with the cessation of craving, cessation of clinging; with the cessation of clinging, cessation of being; with the cessation of being, cessation of birth; with the cessation of birth, ageing and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair cease.
That kind of bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood.”
That kind of bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood.”
That kind of bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood.”
That kind of bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood.”
That kind of bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood.”
That kind of bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood.”
That kind of bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sālatree Wood.” 
That material form of his changes and becomes otherwise.
That material form of his changes and becomes otherwise.
That mindful and fully aware the Bodhisatta appeared in the Tusita heaven—this I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.
That much is enough, that much has been done, the goal of recluseship has been reached, there is nothing more for us to do’; and you may rest content with that much.
That much is enough, that much has been done, the goal of recluseship has been reached, there is nothing more for us to do’; and you may rest content with that much.
That much is enough, that much has been done, the goal of recluseship has been reached, there is nothing more for us to do’; and you may rest content with that much.
That much is enough…’; and you may rest content with that much.
That much is enough…’; and you may rest content with that much.
That much is enough…’; and you may rest content with that much.
That much is enough…’; and you may rest content with that much.
That much is enough…’; and you may rest content with that much.
That much is enough…’; and you may rest content with that much.
That neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling ceases in him.
That one who is himself untamed, undisciplined, unextinguished, should tame another, discipline him, and help extinguish is impossible; that one who is himself tamed, disciplined, extinguished, should tame another, discipline him, and help extinguish is possible.
That pasture in the liquid world:
That pleasant feeling of his ceases.
That pleasant feeling of his ceases.
That rapture of seclusion ceases in him.
That sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair would not come to us!’ But this is not to be obtained by wishing, and not to obtain what one wants is suffering.
That surmounts it.
That surmounts it.
That surmounts it.
That surmounts it.
That surmounts it.
That the recluse Gotama teaches the Dhamma for the sake of robes?
That this reading is correct is supported by the king’s statement just below that Ānanda has done with his answer what he himself could not do with the question, namely, distinguish between the wise and the foolish.
That those recluses and brahmins who understand as it actually is the gratification as gratification, the danger as danger, and the escape as escape in the case of feelings, can either themselves fully understand feelings or instruct another so that he can fully understand feelings—that is possible.”
That those recluses and brahmins who understand as it actually is the gratification as gratification, the danger as danger, and the escape as escape in the case of material form, can either themselves fully understand material form or instruct another so that he can fully understand material form—that is possible.
That those recluses and brahmins who understand as it actually is the gratification as gratification, the danger as danger, and the escape as escape in the case of sensual pleasures, can either themselves fully understand sensual pleasures or instruct another so that he can fully understand sensual pleasures—that is possible.
That too is a Tathāgata’s power that the Tathāgata has, by virtue of which he claims the herd-leader’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahmā.
That too is a Tathāgata’s power...
That too is a Tathāgata’s power...
That too is a Tathāgata’s power...
That too is a Tathāgata’s power...
That too is a Tathāgata’s power...
That too is a Tathāgata’s power...
That too is a Tathāgata’s power…
That too is a Tathāgata’s power…
That too is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body.
That too is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body.
That too is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body.
That too is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body.
That too is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body.
That too is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body.
That too is how a bhikkhu develops mindfulness of the body.
That unworldly pleasure ceases in him.
That was how the venerable Vidhura came to have the designation ‘Vidhura.’
That was one of my companions in the holy life, the venerable Mahā Moggallāna.” —“Good sir, it is a gain for you that your companion in the holy life is so powerful and mighty.
That was the time when we should have asked the Blessed One the meaning.
That was the time when we should have asked the Blessed One the meaning.
That was the time when you should have asked the Blessed One the meaning.
That was the time when you should have asked the Blessed One the meaning.
That when the Bodhisatta came forth from his mother’s womb, then a great immeasurable light surpassing the splendour of the gods appeared…this too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.”
That will lead to their welfare and happiness for a long time.” 
That will lead to your welfare and happiness for a long time.
That will lead to your welfare and happiness for a long time.
That will lead to your welfare and happiness for a long time.”
That will lead to your welfare and happiness for a long time.”
That you can neither convince each other nor be convinced by others, that you can neither persuade each other nor be persuaded by others?
That young god was Anāthapiṇḍika, no one else.”
That your evil will not ripen?
Thānissaro Bhikkhu, however, I have changed it to “a single excellent night,” which seems more likely to be correct.
The acquisition of individuality is of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.
The acquisition of perception is of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.
The acquisition of view is of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.
The activity of conceiving thus seems to comprise the entire range of subjectively tinged cognition, from the impulses and thoughts in which the sense of personal identity is still inchoate to elaborate intellectual structures in which it has been fully explicated.
The ageing of beings in the various orders of beings, their old age, brokenness of teeth, greyness of hair, wrinkling of skin, decline of life, weakness of faculties—this is called ageing.
The ageing of beings in the various orders of beings, their old age, brokenness of teeth, greyness of hair, wrinkling of skin, decline of life, weakness of faculties—this is called ageing.
The agreeable that arose, the disagreeable that arose, and the both agreeable and disagreeable that arose cease in him and equanimity is established.
The air element may be either internal or external.
The air element may be either internal or external.
The air element may be either internal or external.
The anger and bitterness are both a blemish.
The anger and bitterness are both a blemish.
The anger and bitterness are both a blemish.
The anger and bitterness are both a blemish.
The anger and bitterness are both a blemish.
The anger and the bitterness are both a blemish.
The announcing, teaching, describing, establishing, revealing, expounding, and exhibiting of the noble truth of the origin of suffering…of the noble truth of the cessation of suffering…of the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering.
The answer to that is: the five aggregates affected by clinging, that is, the material form aggregate affected by clinging, the feeling aggregate affected by clinging, the perception aggregate affected by clinging, the formations aggregate affected by clinging, the consciousness aggregate affected by clinging.
The applied thought and sustained thought that have not ceased therein, that is what belongs to the perturbable.
The assembly saw him coming in the distance, and they at once made way for him as for one who was well known and famous.
The bandit Angulimāla saw the Blessed One coming in the distance.
The bandit worshipped the Sublime One’s feet, And then and there asked for the going forth.
The best of people as to lineage;
The best of seers, with no deceptive schemes, gained the triple knowledge, attained to holiness;
The bhikkhu accepts, if he likes.
The bhikkhu accepts, if he likes…What do you think, Jīvaka?
The bhikkhu should consider thus: ‘I am living in this jungle thicket.
The bhikkhu should consider thus: ‘I am living in this jungle thicket.
The bhikkhu should consider thus: ‘I am living in this jungle thicket.
The bhikkhu should consider thus: ‘I am living in this jungle thicket.
The bhikkhu thinks: ‘Oh, that on the dissolution of the body, after death, I might reappear in the company of the Brahmā of a Thousand!’ He fixes his mind on that…This, bhikkhus, is the path, the way that leads to reappearance there.
The bhikkhu thinks: ‘Oh, that on the dissolution of the body, after death, I might reappear in the company of the Brahmā of Five Thousand!’ He fixes his mind on that…This, bhikkhus, is the path, the way that leads to reappearance there.
The bhikkhu thinks: ‘Oh, that on the dissolution of the body, after death, I might reappear in the company of the Brahmā of Ten Thousand!’ He fixes his mind on that…This, bhikkhus, is the path, the way that leads to reappearance there.
The bhikkhu thinks: ‘Oh, that on the dissolution of the body, after death, I might reappear in the company of the Brahmā of a Hundred Thousand!’ He fixes his mind on that…This, bhikkhus, is the path, the way that leads to reappearance there.
The bhikkhunīs paid homage to him and sat down at one side.
The bhikkhunīs saw the venerable Nandaka coming in the distance and prepared a seat and set out water for the feet.
The bhikkhus heard that Dhamma, and they emerged from the unwholesome and became established in the wholesome.’
The bhikkhus of the countryside heard: “The Blessed One will wait there at S̄āvatthī for the Komudī full moon of the fourth month.”
The bhikkhus saw me coming in the distance, and they agreed among themselves thus: ‘Friends, here comes the recluse Gotama who lives luxuriously, who gave up his striving, and reverted to luxury.
The bhikkhus sustain themselves with blameless food.
The bhikkhus sustain themselves with permissible food.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the venerable Mahā Moggallāna’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the venerable Ānanda’s words.
The birth of beings in the various orders of beings, their coming to birth, precipitation, generation, manifestation of the aggregates, obtaining the bases for contact —this is called birth.
The birth of beings into the various orders of beings, their coming to birth, precipitation, generation, the manifestation of the aggregates, obtaining the bases for contact—this is called birth.
The Blessed One and the Sangha of bhikkhus ascended the Kokanada Palace and sat down on the seats that had been prepared.
The Blessed One answers showing that he was not intimate with families.”
The Blessed One asked him:
The Blessed One asked him: “Bhāradvāja, did you have any conversation with the wanderer Māgandiya about this very same spread of grass?”
The Blessed One asked them: “Bhikkhus, who in native land is esteemed by the bhikkhus there, by his companions in the holy life, in this way: ‘Having few wishes himself, he talks to the bhikkhus on fewness of wishes; content himself, he talks to the bhikkhus on contentment; secluded himself, he talks to the bhikkhus on seclusion; aloof from society himself, he talks to the bhikkhus on aloofness from society; energetic himself, he talks to the bhikkhus on arousing energy; attained to virtue himself, he talks to the bhikkhus on the attainment of virtue; attained to concentration himself, he talks to the bhikkhus on the attainment of concentration; attained to wisdom himself, he talks to the bhikkhus on the attainment of wisdom; attained to deliverance himself, he talks to the bhikkhus on the attainment of deliverance; attained to the knowledge and vision of deliverance himself, he talks to the bhikkhus on the attainment of the knowledge and vision of deliverance; he is one who advises, informs, instructs, urges, rouses, and gladdens his companions in the holy life’?”
The Blessed One can well hear about it later.
The Blessed One can well hear about it later.
The Blessed One consented in silence.
The Blessed One consented in silence.
The Blessed One consented in silence.
The Blessed One consented in silence.
The Blessed One consented in silence.
The Blessed One consented in silence.
The Blessed One consented in silence.
The Blessed One consented in silence.
The Blessed One did not praise that kind of meditation.
The Blessed One does not declare these to me, and I do not approve of and accept the fact that he does not declare these to me, so I shall go to the Blessed One and ask him the meaning of this.
The Blessed One entered, sat down on a seat made ready, and addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus, for what discussion are you sitting together here now?
The Blessed One has attained Nibbāna and he teaches the Dhamma for attaining Nibbāna.’”
The Blessed One has been very helpful to Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī.”
The Blessed One has crossed over and he teaches the Dhamma for crossing over.
The Blessed One has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
The Blessed One has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
The Blessed One has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to see forms.
The Blessed One has made the Dhamma clear in many ways…From today let the Blessed One remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life.”
The Blessed One has made the Dhamma clear in many ways…From today let the Blessed One remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life.”
The Blessed One has stated that sensual pleasures provide little gratification, much suffering and despair, and that the danger in them is still more.
The Blessed One has stated that sensual pleasures provide little gratification, much suffering and despair, and that the danger in them is still more.
The Blessed One instructed, urged, roused, and gladdened him with a talk on the Dhamma.
The Blessed One is at peace and he teaches the Dhamma for the sake of peace.
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.”
The Blessed One is tamed and he teaches the Dhamma for taming oneself.
The Blessed One Kakusandha, accomplished and fully enlightened, had an auspicious pair of chief disciples named Vidhura and Sañjīva.
The Blessed One looked at the venerable Ānanda.
The Blessed One opened the door.
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this:
The Blessed One said this: 
The Blessed One said this: 
The Blessed One said to him:
The Blessed One said to him: “Householder, your faculties are not those of one in control of his own mind.
The Blessed One said to him: “There are seats, householder, sit down if you like.”
The Blessed One said:
The Blessed One sat down on the seat made ready and washed his feet.
The Blessed One sat down on the seat made ready and washed his feet.
The Blessed One sat down on the seat made ready and washed his feet.
The Blessed One sat down on the seat made ready and washed his feet.
The Blessed One sat down on the seat made ready, and the wanderer Sakuludāyin took a low seat and sat down at one side.
The Blessed One sat down on the seat made ready, and the wanderer Vacchagotta took a low seat, sat down at one side, and said to the Blessed One:
The Blessed One sat down on the seat made ready.
The Blessed One sat down on the seat that had been made ready and addressed the venerable Ānanda thus:
The Blessed One saw him coming in the distance and told him: “Bear it, brahmin!
The Blessed One saw the thunderbolt-wielding spirit and so did Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son.
The Blessed One stood outside the door waiting for their discussion to end.
The Blessed One taught me the Dhamma with its higher and higher levels, with its more and more sublime levels, with its dark and bright counterparts.
The Blessed One taught me the Dhamma.
The Blessed One then asked him: “Ariṭṭha, is it true that the following pernicious view has arisen in you: ‘As I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, those things called obstructions by the Blessed One are not able to obstruct one who engages in them’?”
The Blessed One then asked him: “Sāti, is it true that the following pernicious view has arisen in you: ‘As I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is this same consciousness that runs and wanders through the round of rebirths, not another’?”
The Blessed One then asked him: “Uttara, does the brahmin Pārāsariya teach his disciples the development of the faculties?”
The Blessed One then asked the venerable Sāriputta: “What did you think, Sāriputta, when the Sangha of bhikkhus was dismissed by me?”
The Blessed One then asked them: “Bhikkhus, is it true that you have taken to quarrelling and brawling and are deep in disputes, stabbing each other with verbal daggers; that you can neither convince each other nor be convinced by others, that you can neither persuade each other nor be persuaded by others?”
The Blessed One then gave him progressive instruction, that is, talk on giving, talk on virtue, talk on the heavens; he explained the danger, degradation, and defilement in sensual pleasures and the blessing of renunciation.
The Blessed One then said to him: 
The Blessed One then said to the venerable Rāhula:
The Blessed One then said: “Bhikkhus, is it true that when a number of bhikkhus went and told you: ‘Friends, the Blessed One and the Sangha now abstain from eating at night…Come, friends, abstain from eating at night …,’ you told those bhikkhus: ‘Friends, we eat in the evening…Why should we abandon visible here and now to pursue at a future time?
The Blessed One told them: “Go, sisters, it is time.”
The Blessed One too has been very helpful to Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī, venerable sir.
The Blessed One went to the wanderer Sakuludāyin, who said to him: “Let the Blessed One come, venerable sir!
The Blessed One will not step on a strip of cloth; the Tathāgata has regard for future generations.” 
The Blessed One will now abide inactive, devoted to pleasant abiding here and now.
The Blessed One will now abide inactive, devoted to pleasant abiding here and now; and we too shall now abide inactive, devoted to pleasant abiding here and now.’”
The Blessed One will open the door for you.”
The Blessed One would not speak thus.
The Blessed One would not speak thus.
The Blessed One would not speak thus: ‘Bodily action is vain, verbal action is vain, only mental action is real.’
The Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened, is now living there.”
The Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened, is now living there.”
The Blessed One, indeed, has explained to us the crossing of the flood in dependence upon one support or another.
The Blessed One’s confidence has been restored by the Sakyans of Cātumā and the Brahmā Sahampati with the similes of the seedlings and the young calf.”
The Bodhisatta’s mother gave birth to him after carrying him in her womb for exactly ten months.’
The Bodhisatta’s mother gave birth to him standing up.’
The bodily behaviour and the verbal behaviour of this venerable one are not those of one affected by delusion.
The bodily behaviour and the verbal behaviour of this venerable one are not those of one affected by greed.
The bodily behaviour and the verbal behaviour of this venerable one are not those of one affected by hate.
The bond of being has been cut.
The brahmin Brahmāyu heard: “The recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, has been wandering in the country of the Videhans with a large Sangha of bhikkhus, with five hundred bhikkhus.
The brahmin Brahmāyu heard: “The recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from the Sakyan clan, has arrived in Mithilā and is living in Makhādeva’s Mango Grove in Mithilā.”
The brahmin Brahmāyu then rose and sat down in his own seat..
The brahmin Cankī will also go to see the recluse Gotama.”’”
The brahmin Dhānañjāni saw the venerable Sāriputta coming in the distance, and he went to him and said: “Drink some of this fresh milk, Master Sāriputta, until it is time for the meal.”
The brahmin Gopaka Moggallāna saw the venerable Ānanda coming in the distance and said to him: “Let Master Ānanda come!
The brahmin Gopaka Moggallāna took a low seat, sat down at one side, and asked the venerable Ānanda:
The brahmin householders of Mithil̄ heard: “The recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, has been wandering in the country of the Videhans with a large Sangha of bhikkhus, with five hundred bhikkhus, and he has now come to Mithilā and is living in Makhādeva’s Mango Grove.
The brahmin householders of Nagaravinda heard: “The recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, has been wandering in the Kosalan country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus and has come to Nagaravinda.
The brahmin householders of Opasāda heard: “The recluse Gotama......Now it is good see such arahants.”
The brahmin householders of Sālā heard: “The recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, has been wandering in the Kosalan country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus and has come to Sālā.
The brahmin householders of Sālā heard: “The recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, has been wandering in the Kosalan country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus and has come to Sālā.
The brahmin householders of Thullakoṭṭhita heard: “The recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, has been wandering in the Kuru country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus and has come to Thullakoṭṭhita.
The brahmin Pokkharasāti is obstructed, hindered, blocked, and enveloped by these five hindrances.
The brahmin Pokkharasāti is tied to these five cords of sensual pleasure, infatuated with them and utterly committed to them; he enjoys them without seeing the danger in them or understanding the escape from them.
The brahmin student Bhāradvāja said: “When one is well born on both sides, of pure maternal and paternal descent seven generations back, unassailable and impeccable in respect of birth, then one is a brahmin.”
The brahmin student Jotipāla replied: ‘Enough, my dear Ghaṭīkāra, what is the use of seeing that bald-pated recluse?’ 
The brahmin student Kāpaṭhika is a clansman, he is very learned, he has a good delivery, he is wise; he is capable of taking part in this discussion with Master Gotama.”
The brahmin student Vāseṭṭha said: “When one is virtuous and fulfils the observances, then one is a brahmin.”
The brahmin woman Dhānañjānī heard that the Blessed One had arrived, so she went to the brahmin student Sangārava and told him: “My dear sir, the Blessed One has arrived in Caṇḍalakappa and he is living here in Caṇḍalakappa in the Mango Grove belonging to the brahmins of the Todeyya clan.
The Brahmā Sahampati spoke thus, and then he said further:
The carpenter Pañcakanga was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The carpenter Pañcakanga went out from Sāvatthī at midday in order to see the Blessed One.
The carpenter Pañcakanga went to the wanderer Uggāhamāna and exchanged greetings with him.
The Central Asian Skt version, the Skt title at the head of the Tibetan version, and the Tibetan translation itself all use bhadrakarātri.
The Chinese Madhyama Āgama has merely transliterated the title of the Skt version and thus offers no help.
The clansman Puṇṇa has attained final Nibbāna.”
The clansman Raṭṭhapāla is there, the son of the leading clan in this same Thullakoṭṭhita, of whom you have always spoken highly; he is seated at the root of a tree for the day’s abiding.”
The clansman Raṭṭhapāla then got up, and when he had regained his strength, he went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and told him: “Venerable sir, I have my parents’ permission to go forth from the home life into homelessness.
The cognitive distortion introduced by conceiving consists, in brief, in the intrusion of the egocentric perspective into the experience already slightly distorted by spontaneous perception.
The colour of your skin is pure and bright.
The commentarial explanation of the conditioning factors for each of the four foundations does not imply that the commentary understands -dhamma to mean the actual conditioning factors.
The commentaries identify the springs of this proliferation as the three factors—craving, conceit, and views—on account of which the mind “embellishes” experience by interpreting it in terms of “mine,” “I” and “my self.”
The commentator cites MN.– as an example of the Buddha teaching the abandonment of attachment to serenity, MN.
The compound papañca-saññā-sankhā is more problematic.
The consciousness in what has thus come to be is included in the consciousness aggregate affected by clinging.
The consciousness in what has thus come to be is included in the consciousness aggregate affected by clinging.
The consciousness that makes no showing, Nor has to do with finiteness, Not claiming being with respect to all.
The cowherds, shepherds, ploughmen, and travellers saw the venerable Sañjīva wandering for alms, and they thought: ‘It is wonderful, sirs, it is marvellous!
The deer of that second herd, by reckoning how the deer of the first herd had failed and by planning and acting as they did with the precaution of going to live in the forest wilds, also failed to get free from the deer-trapper’s power and control.
The deer of that second herd, by reckoning how the deer of the first herd had failed and by planning and acting as they did with the precaution of going to live in the forest wilds, also failed to get free from the deer-trapper’s power and control.
The deer-hunter set out the snare
The deity who lived in the tree then realised: ‘This is the future fear they saw in that māluva-creeper seed.
The delving is a symbol for the arousing of energy.
The desire, indulgence, inclination, and holding based on these five aggregates affected by clinging is the origin of suffering.
The desire, indulgence, inclination, and holding based on these five aggregates affected by clinging is the origin of suffering.
The desisting from the four kinds of verbal misconduct, the abstaining, refraining, abstinence from them in one whose mind is noble, whose mind is taintless, who possesses the noble path and is developing the noble path: this is right speech that is noble…a factor of the path.
The desisting from the three kinds of bodily misconduct, the abstaining, refraining, abstinence from them in one whose mind is noble, whose mind is taintless, who possesses the noble path and is developing the noble path: this is right action that is noble…a factor of the path.
The desisting from wrong livelihood, the abstaining, refraining, abstinence from it in one whose mind is noble, whose mind is taintless, who possesses the noble path and is developing the noble path: this is right livelihood that is noble…a factor of the path.
The destruction of all suffering, With burden lowered, and detached:
The Dhamma that the Stainless One has found.
The divine eye born of past action is manifested in him whereby he sees hidden stores of treasure both with owners and ownerless.
The doctrines of others are devoid of recluses.”
The doctrines of others are devoid of recluses: that is how you should rightly roar your lion’s roar.
The doorkeeper saw him coming in the distance and told him: “Wait, venerable sir, do not enter.
The doorkeeper saw him coming in the distance and told him: “Wait, venerable sir, do not enter.
The earth element may be either internal or external.
The earth element may be either internal or external.
The eighteen kinds of mental exploration should be understood.
The elder bhikkhus are to be blamed for these three reasons.
The elder bhikkhus are to be commended for these three reasons.
The elephant tamer next rewards him with grass-fodder and water.
The Enlightened One, the Sage of Great Compassion, The Teacher of the world with its gods, Addressed him with these words, “Come, bhikkhu.”
The evil unwholesome states that defile…and lead to future birth, ageing, and death, have streamed away from him.
The exact import of the word gandhabba in relation to the rebirth process is not explained in the Nikāyas, and the word in this sense occurs only here and at..
The examination of these views unfolds according to the following pattern: The Buddha discloses the wrong view A and its antithesis B.
The expression samudayadhammānupassı̄ kāyasmiṁ viharati is usually translated “he abides contemplating in the body its arising factors”, on the assumption that the compound contains a plural, samudayadhammā.
The Feast of Spring, the Holy Day; 
The features are seen one and all
The feeling in what has thus come to be is included in the feeling aggregate affected by clinging.
The feeling in what has thus come to be is included in the feeling aggregate affected by clinging.
The fifth method involves the avoidance of joy and sorrow in response to the six sense objects, thus enabling one to abide in equanimity, mindful and fully aware.
The fifth phrase, “he delights in X,” explicitly connects conceiving with craving, which is elsewhere said to “delight here and there.”
The fire burned in dependence on its fuel of grass and sticks.
The fire element may be either internal or external.
The fire element may be either internal or external.
The fire element may be either internal or external.
The first of all givers, he is ever capable:
The first part of the formula again seems to be a condensed formulation of a view held by non-Buddhists.
The flames that dash out from the bottom dash against the top.
The flames that surge out from its northern wall dash against its southern wall.
The flames that surge out from its southern wall dash against its northern wall.
The flames that surge out from its western wall dash against its eastern wall.
The food he takes has eight factors: it is neither for amusement nor for intoxication nor for the sake of physical beauty and attractiveness, but only for the endurance and continuance of his body, for the ending of discomfort, and for assisting the holy life; he considers: ‘Thus I shall terminate old feelings without arousing new feelings and I shall be healthy and blameless and shall live in comfort.’ 
The formations in what has thus come to be are included in the formations aggregate affected by clinging.
The formations in what has thus come to be are included in the formations aggregate affected by clinging.
The four great elements and the material form derived from the four great elements—these are called materiality.
The four ways of conceiving: The Buddha shows that the conceiving of any object may occur in any of four ways, expressed by the text as a fourfold linguistic pattern: accusative, locative, ablative, and appropriative.
The four young gods received him and set him before his mother saying: “Rejoice, O queen, a son of great power has been born to you.”’ This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.
The full moon at midnight in a clear cloudless sky on the Uposatha day of the fifteenth, or the full disk of the sun at midday in a clear cloudless sky in autumn in the last month of the rainy season—of these two, which gives off the splendour that is more excellent and sublime?”—“The full disk of the sun at midday in a clear cloudless sky in autumn in the last month of the rainy season, venerable sir.”
The fullest study of the concept of the gandhabba is Wijesekera, “Vedic Gandharva and Pali Gandhabba,” in Buddhist and Vedic Studies, pp.
The Fully Enlightened One has come to me!” Then he rose from his seat, arranged his upper robe over one shoulder, and prostrating himself with his head at the Blessed One’s feet, he said: “Venerable sir, a transgression overcame me, in that like a fool, confused and blundering, I presumed to address the Blessed One as ‘friend.’
The funeral orations last as far as the charnel ground; the bones whiten; burnt offerings end with ashes.
The furrow between his shoulders is filled in…
The gods of the Thirty-three, great king, seated in the Sudhamma Assembly, have expressed themselves thus: “It is a gain, sirs, for the people of Videha…eighth of the fortnight.”
The greatest in grandeur, attained the peak of glory:
The herd’s leader, perfected hero, The great seer whose victory is won, Unperturbed, cleansed, awakened:
The highest gratification in the case of feelings is freedom from affliction, I say.
The highest gratification in the case of feelings is freedom from affliction, I say.
The hindrance of sensual desire, the hindrance of ill will, the hindrance of sloth and torpor, the hindrance of restlessness and remorse, and the hindrance of doubt.
The holy life is to be lived under the recluse Gotama.
The image of the extinguished fire, taken alone, veers in the direction of total extinction, and thus must be balanced by the image of the ocean; the image of the ocean, taken alone, suggests some eternal mode of being, and thus must be balanced by the image of the extinguished fire.
The immaculate tusker, living in remoteness, with fetters all shattered, fully freed;
The implication, of course, is that excruciating pain might motivate even an arahant to take his own life—not from aversion but simply from a wish to be free from unbearable pain.
The intention of renunciation, the intention of non-ill will, and the intention of non-cruelty: this is right intention that is affected by taints…ripening in the acquisitions.
The intention of sensual desire, the intention of ill will, and the intention of cruelty: this is wrong intention.
The interpretation of this cryptic passage hinges on the word papañca and the compound papañca-saññā-sankhā.
The jewel is fine beryl of purest water, eight-faceted, and well cut.
The king addresses his elephant tamer thus: ‘Come, good elephant tamer, tame the forest elephant.
The king lives on the milk in the first teat of a cow with a calf of the same colour while the chief queen lives on the milk in the second teat and the brahmin high priest lives on the milk in the third teat; the milk in the fourth teat they pour onto the fire, and the calf lives on what is left.
The king must put him down!”
The kings have them flogged with whips, beaten with canes, beaten with clubs; they have their hands cut off, their feet cut off, their hands and feet cut off; their ears cut off, their noses cut off, their ears and noses cut off; they have them subjected to the ‘porridge pot,’ to the ‘polished-shell shave,’ to the ‘Rāhu’s mouth,’ to the ‘fiery wreath,’ to the ‘flaming hand,’ to the ‘blades of grass,’ to the ‘bark dress,’ to the ‘antelope,’ to the ‘meat hooks,’ to the ‘coins,’ to the ‘lye pickling,’ to the ‘pivoting pin,’ to the ‘rolled-up palliasse’;  and they have them splashed with boiling oil, and they have them thrown to be devoured by dogs, and they have them impaled alive on stakes, and they have their heads cut off with swords—whereby they incur death or deadly suffering.
The king’s elephant is able to endure blows from spears, blows from swords, blows from arrows, blows from other beings, and the thundering sounds of drums, kettledrums, trumpets, and tomtoms.
The king’s elephant leads him out into the open.
The knife is a symbol for noble wisdom.
The knowledge and vision arose in me: ‘My deliverance is unshakeable; this is my last birth; now there is no renewal of being.’
The knowledge and vision arose in them: ‘Our deliverance is unshakeable; this is our last birth; there is no renewal of being.’
The knowledge we claim of the Triple Veda, For I am Pokkharasāti’s pupil
The latter reading has the support of MA, which explains the distinction by way of mental suffering.
The lay follower Visākha was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The leader of the herd, he cannot be measured, his depths are unfathomed, he attained to the silence; 
The leaves, stirred by the wind, cut his hands and cut his feet and cut his hands and feet; they cut his ears and cut his nose and cut his ears and nose.
The maid Kālī thought: ‘A good report about my lady has spread thus: “Mistress Vedehikā is gentle, Mistress Vedehikā is meek, Mistress Vedehikā is peaceful.”
The man would say: ‘I will not let the surgeon pull out this arrow until I know whether the man who wounded me was a noble or a brahmin or a merchant or a worker.’
The matted-hair ascetic Keṇiya heard: “The recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, has been wandering in the country of the Anguttarāpans with a large Sangha of bhikkhus, with twelve hundred and fifty bhikkhus, and he has come to Āpaṇa.
The meeting of the three is contact.
The meeting of the three is contact.
The middle bhikkhus are to be blamed for these three reasons.
The middle bhikkhus are to be commended for these three reasons.
The Middle Way discovered by the Tathāgata avoids both extremes; giving vision, giving knowledge, it leads to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna.
The monuments to the Dhamma are beneficial, bhikkhus, and they belong to the fundamentals of the holy life.”
The moon is the glory of the stars, The sun is the glory of all that shine;
The morning star towards dawn in a clear cloudless sky or the full moon at midnight in a clear cloudless sky on the Uposatha day of the fifteenth—of these two, which gives off the splendour that is more excellent and sublime?”—“The full moon at midnight in a clear cloudless sky on the Uposatha day of the fifteenth, venerable sir.” 
The name I bear today is true:
The new bhikkhus are to be blamed for these three reasons.
The new bhikkhus are to be commended for these three reasons.
The Nigaṇṭha Dīgha Tapassī has answered the Blessed One like a well-taught disciple who understands his teacher’s dispensation rightly.
The Nigaṇṭha Dīgha Tapassī has answered the recluse Gotama like a well-taught disciple who understands his teacher’s dispensation rightly.
The Nigaṇṭha Dīgha Tapassī heard: “The householder Upāli has gone over to discipleship under the recluse Gotama.”
The Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta saw the Nigaṇṭha Dīgha Tapassī coming in the distance and asked him: “Now where are you coming from in the middle of the day, Tapassī?”
The novice Aciravata was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The one gone forth is not accomplishing the true way, the Dhamma that is wholesome.’
The other says: ‘Do you see?’—‘Yes, I see.’—‘Will you practise restraint in the future?’—‘I will practise restraint in the future.’
The other says: ‘Friend, if you had not been asked, you would not have acknowledged committing this minor offence; so why, when asked, would you acknowledge having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?
The paccekabuddha Tagarasikhin...
The paccekabuddha Upariṭṭha dwelt long on this mountain Isigili.
The Pali does not supply any direct object for the second and third modes, and this suggests that the process at work in conceiving proceeds from a deeper and more general level than that involved in the forming of an explicit view of self, as described for example at MN.
The Pali verb “conceives”, from the root man, “to think,” is often used in the Pali suttas to mean distortional thinking—thought that ascribes to its object characteristics and a significance derived not from the object itself, but from one’s own subjective imaginings.
The park keeper saw the Blessed One coming in the distance and told him: “Do not enter this park, recluse.
The park keeper saw the Blessed One coming in the distance and told him: “Do not enter this park, recluse.
The passing of beings out of the various orders of beings, their passing away, dissolution, disappearance, dying, completion of time, dissolution of aggregates, laying down of the body—this is called death.
The passing of beings out of the various orders of beings, their passing away, dissolution, disappearance, dying, completion of time, dissolution of the aggregates, laying down of the body—this is called death.
The path of arahantship abandons: covetousness and unrighteous greed, obstinacy, rivalry, conceit, arrogance, vanity.
The path of non-returning abandons: ill will, anger, resentment, negligence.
The path of stream-entry abandons: contempt, insolence, envy, avarice, deceit, fraud.
The pattern on which §§– are constructed may be stated simply as follows: no progress and requisites are scarce = depart; no progress and requisites are plentiful = depart; progress and requisites are scarce = stay; progress and requisites are plentiful = stay.
The Paṭisambhidāmagga calls this practice “the noble supernormal power” and explains it thus: To abide perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive, one pervades a repulsive being with loving-kindness, or one attends to a repulsive object as a mere assemblage of impersonal elements.
The perception in what has thus come to be is included in the perception aggregate affected by clinging.
The perception in what has thus come to be is included in the perception aggregate affected by clinging.
The physician would make a medicine for him, yet by means of that medicine the man’s vision would not arise or be purified.
The physician would make medicine for him, and by means of that medicine the man would be cured of his leprosy and would become well and happy, independent, master of himself, able to go where he likes.
The physician would make medicine for him, and by means of that medicine the man would be cured of his leprosy and would become well and happy, independent, master of himself, able to go where he likes.
The physician would make medicine—emetics and purgatives, ointments and counter-ointments and nasal treatment—and by means of that medicine the man’s vision would arise and be purified.
The pleasure of equanimity that has not ceased therein, that is what belongs to the perturbable.
The potter Ghaṭīkāra has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha.
The present sutta takes place at an early point in the Buddha’s ministry, on one of his return visits to his native city.
The primary significance of this modal pattern—enigmatic in the Pali as well—seems to be ontological.
The purpose for which that arrowsmith had warmed and heated the arrow and made it straight and workable has been achieved; that is why at a later time he would not again warm and heat the arrow shaft and make it straight and workable.
The purpose for which that bhikkhu exerted himself in what is painful has been achieved; that is why at a later time he does not exert himself in what is painful.
The range is a full hundred leagues
The range is a full hundred leagues
The rapture and pleasure that have not ceased therein, that is what belongs to the perturbable.
The recluse Gotama has been invited by me for tomorrow’s meal together with the Sangha of bhikkhus.
The recluse Gotama is praised by the praised as best among gods and humans.
The recluse Gotama is praised by the praised as best among gods and humans.”
The recluse Gotama teaches a Dhamma hammered out by reasoning, following his own line of inquiry as it occurs to him, and when he teaches the Dhamma to anyone, it leads him when he practises it to the complete destruction of suffering.” 
The recluse Gotama teaches a Dhamma hammered out by reasoning, following his own line of inquiry as it occurs to him’—unless he abandons that assertion and that state of mind and relinquishes that view, then as carried off and put there he will wind up in hell.
The recluse Gotama teaches a Dhamma hammered out by reasoning, following his own line of inquiry as it occurs to him’—unless he abandons that assertion and that state of mind and relinquishes that view, then as carried off and put there he will wind up in hell.
The recluse Gotama teaches the Dhamma through direct knowledge, not without direct knowledge; he teaches the Dhamma with a sound basis, not without a sound basis; he teaches the Dhamma in a convincing manner, not in an unconvincing manner.’
The recluse Gotama together with the Sangha of good bhikkhus has been invited by me for tomorrow’s meal.
The recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, has been wandering in the country of the Anguttarāpans with a large Sangha of bhikkhus, with twelve hundred and fifty bhikkhus, and has come to Āpaṇa.
The removal of desire and lust, the abandonment of desire and lust for consciousness—this is the escape in the case of consciousness.”
The removal of desire and lust, the abandonment of desire and lust for material form—this is the escape in the case of material form.
The removal of desire and lust, the abandonment of desire and lust for these five aggregates affected by clinging is the cessation of suffering.’
The removal of desire and lust, the abandonment of desire and lust for these five aggregates affected by clinging is the cessation of suffering.’
The rich and poor alike shall feel touch, The fool and sage as well shall feel it too;
The rise and fall of the body are discerned, and since its rise and fall are discerned, it would follow: ‘My self rises and falls.’
The rise and fall of the ear are discerned, and since its rise and fall are discerned, it would follow: ‘My self rises and falls.’
The rise and fall of the eye are discerned, and since its rise and fall are discerned, it would follow: ‘My self rises and falls.’
The rise and fall of the mind are discerned, and since its rise and fall are discerned, it would follow: ‘My self rises and falls.’
The rise and fall of the nose are discerned, and since its rise and fall are discerned, it would follow: ‘My self rises and falls.’
The rise and fall of the tongue are discerned, and since its rise and fall are discerned, it would follow: ‘My self rises and falls.’
The round of rebirths is limited, there is no shortening or extending it, no increasing or decreasing it.
The Sakyans of Cātumā and the Brahmā Sahampati were able to restore the Blessed One’s confidence with the similes of the seedlings and the young calf.
The Sakyans of Kapilavatthu were satisfied and delighted in the venerable Ānanda’s words.
The same distinction would apply to the discussion on Brahmās in §.
The Sangha, glory of those who give.”
The sequel will make it clear that the process of cognition is itself “the source through which perceptions and notions mental proliferation beset a man.”
The sevenfold scheme forms, however, the scaffolding for the entire Visuddhimagga, which defines the different stages by means of the fully developed commentarial traditions on concentration and insight meditation.
The sight of these reminded him of the Blessed One thus: “These roots of trees are lovely and inspiring, quiet and undisturbed by voices, with an atmosphere of seclusion, remote from people, favourable for retreat, like the places where we used to pay respect to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened.”
The simile concerns solely the legitimacy of conceptual and linguistic usage and is not intended to suggest, as some scholars have held, that the Tathāgata attains to some mystical absorption in the Absolute.
The simile of the raft thus intimates that even the teachings that are to be rightly grasped must finally be relinquished.
The sisters Somā and Sakulā heard: “Today King Pasenadi of Kosala will go to see the Blessed One after he has had his breakfast.”
The six classes of consciousness should be understood.
The six classes of consciousness should be understood.
The six classes of contact should be understood.
The six classes of contact should be understood.
The six classes of craving should be understood.
The six classes of feeling should be understood.
The six external bases should be understood.
The six external bases should be understood.
The sixfold base has mentality-materiality as its source…And this mentality-materiality has what as its source…?
The sixfold base has mentality-materiality as its source…Mentality-materiality has what as its source…?
The sixteen defilements are abandoned by the noble paths in the following order:
The sorrow, sorrowing, sorrowfulness, inner sorrow, inner sorriness, of one who has encountered some misfortune or is affected by some painful state—this is called sorrow.
The sound core will stand.” 
The space element may be either internal or external.
The space element may be either internal or external.
The speech that issues from his mouth has eight qualities: it is distinct, intelligible, melodious, audible, ringing, euphonious, deep, and sonorous.
The spirit Dīgha Parajana was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The story is found at Vin Cv Kh /ii.–.
The stout leather thongs by which that royal tusker elephant is tethered, which by simply twisting his body a little he could break and burst and then go where he likes, are for him a feeble, weak, rotting, coreless tether.”
The structure of this sutta is fairly simple.
The Sublime One has come to me!
The surgeon cut around the opening of the wound with a knife, probed for the arrow with a probe, pulled out the arrow, and applied a medicinal powder to the opening of the wound, and at each step I felt painful, racking, piercing feelings.
The surgeon would cut around the opening of the wound with a knife, probe for the arrow with a probe, pull out the arrow, and apply a medicinal powder to the opening of the wound, and at each step the man would feel painful, racking, piercing feelings.
The surgeon would cut around the opening of the wound with a knife, then he would probe for the arrow with a probe, then he would pull out the arrow and would expel the poisonous humour without leaving a trace of it behind.
The surgeon would cut around the opening of the wound with a knife, then he would probe for the arrow with a probe, then he would pull out the arrow and would expel the poisonous humour, leaving a trace of it behind.
The sutta depicts Mahāpajāpatı̄ Gotamı̄ as a devout lay Buddhist and refers to the Bhikkhunı̄ Sangha as if it were an existing reality, yet the canonical account of the founding of the Bhikkhunı̄ Sangha shows Mahāpajāpatı̄ to have been the first historical bhikkhunı̄.
The taking up of rods and weapons, quarrels, brawls, disputes, recrimination, malice, and false speech are seen to occur based on material form, but this does not exist at all in the immaterial realms.’
The Tathāgata has abandoned that feeling by which one describing the Tathāgata might describe him…has abandoned that perception by which one describing the Tathāgata might describe him…has abandoned those formations by which one describing the Tathāgata might describe him…has abandoned that consciousness by which one describing the Tathāgata might describe him; he has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, done away with it so that it is no longer subject to future arising.
The Tathāgata has abandoned the taints that defile, bring renewal of being, give trouble, ripen in suffering, and lead to future birth, ageing, and death; he has cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, done away with them so that they are no longer subject to future arising.
The Tathāgata is liberated from reckoning in terms of consciousness, Vaccha; he is profound, immeasurable, hard to fathom like the ocean.
The Tathāgata is liberated from reckoning in terms of material form, Vaccha, he is profound, immeasurable, hard to fathom like the ocean.
The Tathāgata is one who shows the way.” 
The Tathāgata would answer thus: ‘No defiled states cognizable through the eye or through the ear are found in the Tathāgata.’
The Tathāgata is an Accomplished One, a Fully Enlightened One.
The Tathāgata is an Accomplished One, a Fully Enlightened One.
The Tathāgata, Aggivessana, has abandoned the taints that defile, bring renewal of being, give trouble, ripen in suffering, and lead to future birth, ageing, and death; he has cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, done away with them so that they are no longer subject to future arising.
The Teacher approved.
The Teacher approved.
The Teacher does not make known the training rule for disciples until certain things that are the basis for taints become manifest here in the Sangha; but when certain things that are the basis for taints become manifest here in the Sangha, then the Teacher makes known the training rule for disciples in order to ward off those things that are the basis for taints.
The Teacher teaches him the Dhamma with its higher and higher levels, with its more and more sublime levels, with its dark and bright counterparts.
The tethers by which that householder or householder’s son is tethered so that he can abandon his vast number of gold ingots…his vast number of men and women slaves, and shave off his hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness—for him those are a feeble, weak, rotting, coreless tether.”
The tethers by which that man is tethered so that he cannot abandon his one dilapidated hovel…and his hag of a wife, not the best kind, and shave off his hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness—for him those are a strong, stout, tough, unrotting tether and a thick yoke.”
The thinking, thought, intention, mental absorption, mental fixity, directing of mind, verbal formation in one whose mind is noble, whose mind is taintless, who possesses the noble path and is developing the noble path: this is right intention that is noble…a factor of the path.
The third and fourth methods involve the application of the first and second contemplations to both repulsive and unrepulsive objects, without discrimination.
The thirty-six positions of beings should be understood.
The three views discussed in §§, and are called wrong views with fixed evil result.
The tides of conceiving do not sweep over one who stands upon these, and when the tides of conceiving no longer sweep over him he is called a sage at peace.
The tips of his body-hairs turn up; the up-turned body-hairs are blue-black, the colour of collyrium, curled and turned to the right…
The touch of the woman-treasure is such that it is like a tuft of kapok or a tuft of cotton-wool.
The town and realm, you should know
The trouble and despair, the tribulation and desperation, of one who has encountered some misfortune or is affected by some painful state—this is called despair.
The two images—of the extinguished fire and the deep ocean—establish between themselves a dialectical tension, and thus both must be taken into account to avoid falling into one-sided views.
The two key terms that here distinguish the two types of gods appear in the PTS ed.
The underlying tendency to aversion does not have to be abandoned in regard to all painful feeling.
The underlying tendency to aversion does not underlie all painful feeling.
The underlying tendency to aversion should be abandoned in regard to painful feeling.
The underlying tendency to aversion underlies painful feeling.
The underlying tendency to ignorance does not have to be abandoned in regard to all neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.
The underlying tendency to ignorance does not underlie all neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.”
The underlying tendency to ignorance should be abandoned in regard to neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.”
The underlying tendency to ignorance underlies neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.” 
The venerable Anuruddha consented in silence.
The venerable Anuruddha does not say: ‘Thus have I heard’ or ‘It should be thus.’
The venerable Anuruddha heard the park keeper speaking to the Blessed One and told him: “Friend park keeper, do not keep the Blessed One out.
The venerable Anuruddha heard the park keeper speaking to the Blessed One and told him: “Friend park keeper, do not keep the Blessed One out.
The venerable Anuruddha was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Anuruddha was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Bhaddāli was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Bhagu paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side, and the Blessed One said to him: “I hope you are keeping well, bhikkhu, I hope you are comfortable, I hope you are not having any trouble getting almsfood.”
The venerable Bhūmija was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Kumāra Kassapa was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The Venerable Lomasakangiya was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Mahā Kaccāna expounded the meaning to us with these terms, statements, and phrases.”
The venerable Mahā Kaccāna expounded the meaning to us with these terms, statements, and phrases.”
The venerable Mahā Kaccāna is capable of expounding the detailed meaning of this summary given in brief by the Blessed One without expounding the detailed meaning.
The venerable Mahā Kaccāna said this:
The venerable Mahā Kaccāna said this:
The venerable Mahā Moggallāna saw him standing there and said: “I see you there too, Evil One.
The venerable Mahā Cunda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Mahā Kaccāna expounded the meaning to us with these terms, statements, and phrases.”
The venerable Mahā Kaccāna is capable of expounding the detailed meaning of this summary given in brief by the Blessed One without expounding the detailed meaning.
The venerable Mahā Kaccāna said this:
The venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita was satisfied and delighted in the venerable Sāriputta’s words.
The venerable Mahā Moggallāna consented in silence.
The venerable Mahā Moggallāna said this:
The venerable Mahā Moggallāna sat down on the seat made ready, and Sakka took a low seat and sat down at one side.
The venerable Mahā Moggallāna then asked him:
The venerable Mahā Moggallāna was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Mālunkyāputta was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Nandaka sat down on the seat made ready and washed his feet.
The venerable Nandiya and the venerable Kimbila each spoke likewise, adding: “That is how, venerable sir, we are living in concord, with mutual appreciation, without disputing, blending like milk and water, viewing each other with kindly eyes.”
The venerable Nandiya and the venerable Kimbila each spoke likewise, adding: “That is how, venerable sir, we are living in concord, with mutual appreciation, without disputing, blending like milk and water, viewing each other with kindly eyes.”
The venerable Nāgasamāla was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable ones should know that it is for this reason that there is agreement about both the meaning and the phrasing; let the venerable ones not fall into a dispute.’
The venerable ones should know that it is for this reason that there is agreement about both the meaning and the phrasing; let the venerable ones not fall into a dispute.’
The venerable ones should know that it is for this reason that there is agreement about the meaning but difference about the phrasing.
The venerable ones should know that it is for this reason that there is agreement about the meaning but difference about the phrasing.
The venerable ones should know that it is for this reason that there is difference about the meaning and difference about the phrasing; let them not fall into a dispute.’
The venerable ones should know that it is for this reason that there is difference about the meaning and difference about the phrasing; let them not fall into a dispute.’
The venerable ones should know that it is for this reason that there is difference about the meaning but agreement about the phrasing; let them not fall into a dispute.’
The venerable ones should know that it is for this reason that there is difference about the meaning but agreement about the phrasing; let them not fall into a dispute.’
The venerable Puṇṇa Mantāṇiputta heard: “The Blessed One has arrived at Sāvatthī and is living in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.”
The venerable Rāhula also dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, followed close behind the Blessed One.
The venerable Rāhula paid homage to him and sat down at one side.
The venerable Rāhula saw the Blessed One coming in the distance and made a seat ready and set out water for washing the feet.
The venerable Rāhula was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Rāhula was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Rāhula was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Raṭṭhapāla consented in silence.
The venerable Sāriputta addressed the bhikkhus with reference to the bhikkhu Gulissāni thus:
The venerable Sāriputta consented in silence.
The venerable Sāriputta consented in silence.
The venerable Sāriputta said this:
The venerable Sāriputta said this:
The venerable Sāriputta saw him sitting there and addressed him thus: “Rāhula, develop mindfulness of breathing.
The venerable Sāriputta was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Sāriputta was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Sāriputta was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Sāriputta also entered the Blind Men’s Grove and sat down for the day’s abiding at the root of a tree.
The venerable Sāriputta said this:
The venerable Sāriputta said this:
The venerable Sāriputta said this:
The venerable Sāriputta said this:
The venerable Sāriputta said this:
The venerable Sāriputta said this:
The venerable Sāriputta said to the Blessed One:
The venerable Sāriputta saw the venerable Revata and the venerable Ānanda coming in the distance and said to the venerable Ānanda: “Let the venerable Ānanda come, welcome to the venerable Ānanda, the Blessed One’s attendant, who is always in the Blessed One’s presence.
The venerable Sāriputta with his discourse on the Dhamma planes out their faults just as if he knew my heart with his heart!
The venerable Tapassī has answered the recluse Gotama like a well-taught disciple who understands his teacher’s dispensation rightly.
The venerable Udāyin was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Udena said this:
The venerable Vacchagotta saw them coming in the distance.
The venerable Ānanda accepted the cloak.
The venerable Ānanda consented in silence.
The venerable Ānanda consented in silence.
The venerable Ānanda heard their conversation.
The venerable Ānanda reported to the Blessed One the entire conversation between the venerable Samiddhi and the wanderer Potaliputta.
The venerable Ānanda said this:
The venerable Ānanda said to Prince Bodhi: “Prince, let the cloth be removed.
The venerable Ānanda sat down on the seat made ready, and the wanderer Sandaka took a low seat and sat down at one side.
The venerable Ānanda sat down on the seat made ready.
The venerable Ānanda saw him coming in the distance and said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, here comes Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son, a debater and a clever speaker regarded by many as a saint.
The venerable Ānanda saw them going to the venerable Sāriputta to listen to the Dhamma.
The venerable Ānanda then said to the novice Cunda: “Friend Cunda, this is news that should be told to the Blessed One.
The venerable Ānanda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Ānanda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Ānanda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Ānanda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Ānanda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Ānanda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Ānanda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Ānanda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Ānanda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Ānanda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Ānanda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Ānanda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Ānanda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Ānanda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The venerable Ānanda went to the wanderer Sandaka who said to him: “Let Master Ānanda come!
The view of those good recluses and brahmins who hold the doctrine and view “there definitely is no cessation of being” is close to lust, close to bondage, close to delighting, close to holding, close to clinging; but the view of those good recluses and brahmins who hold the doctrine and view “there definitely is cessation of being” is close to non-lust, close to non-bondage, close to non-delighting, close to non-holding, close to non-clinging.’
The view of those recluses and brahmins who hold the doctrine and view ‘Nothing is acceptable to me’ is close to non-lust, close to non-bondage, close to non-delighting, close to non-holding, close to non-clinging.”
The view ‘self exists for me’ arises in him as true and established; or the view ‘no self exists for me’ arises in him as true and established; or the view ‘I perceive self with self’ arises in him as true and established; or the view ‘I perceive not-self with self’ arises in him as true and established; or the view ‘I perceive self with not-self’ arises in him as true and established; or else he has some such view as this: ‘It is this self of mine that speaks and feels and experiences here and there the result of good and bad actions; but this self of mine is permanent, everlasting, eternal, not subject to change, and it will endure as long as eternity.’
The wail and lament, wailing and lamenting, bewailing and lamentation, of one who has encountered some misfortune or is affected by some painful state—this is called lamentation.
The wanderer Dīghanakha saw the Dhamma, attained the Dhamma, understood the Dhamma, fathomed the Dhamma; he crossed beyond doubt, did away with perplexity, gained intrepidity, and became independent of others in the Teacher’s Dispensation.
The wanderer Udāyin was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The wanderer Uggāhamāna Samaṇamaṇḍikāputta saw the carpenter Pañcakanga coming in the distance.
The wanderer Uggāhamāna then said to him:
The wanderer Vacchagotta saw the Blessed One coming in the distance and said to him: “Let the Blessed One come, venerable sir!
The wanderer Vacchagotta was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
The wanderers said to them:
The water element may be either internal or external.
The water element may be either internal or external.
The water element may be either internal or external.
The way leading to the cessation of ageing and death is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view…right concentration.
The way leading to the cessation of being is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view…right concentration.
The way leading to the cessation of birth is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view…right concentration.
The way leading to the cessation of clinging is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view…right concentration.
The way leading to the cessation of consciousness is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view…right concentration.
The way leading to the cessation of contact is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view…right concentration.
The way leading to the cessation of craving is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view…right concentration.
The way leading to the cessation of feeling is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view… right concentration.
The way leading to the cessation of formations is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view…right concentration.
The way leading to the cessation of ignorance is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view…right concentration.
The way leading to the cessation of mentality-materiality is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view…right concentration.
The way leading to the cessation of nutriment is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
The way leading to the cessation of the sixfold base is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view…right concentration.
The way leading to the cessation of the taints is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
The Wheel of Dhamma set in motion by you?”
The Wheel-turning Monarch speaks thus: ‘You should not kill living beings; you should not take what has not been given; you should not misconduct yourselves in sensual pleasures; you should not speak falsehood; you should not drink intoxicants; you should eat what you are accustomed to eat.’
The wisdom, the faculty of wisdom, the power of wisdom, the investigation-of-states enlightenment factor, the path factor of right view in one whose mind is noble, whose mind is taintless, who possesses the noble path and is developing the noble path: this is right view that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path.
The wise one is a symbol for a bhikkhu in higher training.
The word anidassana occurs at MN.
The word dhammā is ambiguous here.
The words “profound, immeasurable, hard to fathom” point to the transcendental dimension of the liberation attained by the Accomplished One, its inaccessibility to discursive thought.
The worthy ones are meditators and cultivate meditation.
The youthful bhikkhu who devotes
The “vanishing nature” of the body is seen in the cessation of bodily phenomena through the cessation of their conditions as well as in the momentary dissolution of bodily phenomena.
Their birth is their distinctive mark;
Their birth is their distinctive mark;
Their birth is their distinctive mark;
Their birth is their distinctive mark;
Their birth is their distinctive mark;
Their cessation is stated: here a bhikkhu abandons bodily misconduct and develops good bodily conduct; he abandons verbal misconduct and develops good verbal conduct; he abandons mental misconduct and develops good mental conduct; he abandons wrong livelihood and gains a living by right livelihood.
Their cessation is stated: here a bhikkhu is virtuous, but he does not identify with his virtue, and he understands as it actually is that deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom where these wholesome habits cease without remainder.
Their cessation is stated: here with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
Their cessation is stated: here, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
Their origin is stated: they should be said to originate from mind.
Their origin is stated: they should be said to originate from mind.
Their origin is stated: they should be said to originate from perception.
Their origin is stated: they should be said to originate from perception.
Their reply was: ‘It is our family sickness, great king.’
Then a certain bhikkhu asked the Blessed One:
Then a certain bhikkhu rose from his seat, arranged his upper robe on one shoulder, and extending his hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One, said to him: “Venerable sir, I would ask the Blessed One about a certain point, if the Blessed One would grant me an answer to my question.” —“Sit on your own seat, bhikkhu, and ask what you like.”
Then a certain bhikkhu went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and informed him of what was happening.
Then a certain bhikkhu went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and told the Blessed One what was taking place.
Then a certain bhikkhu went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he stood at one side and said: “Venerable sir, the bhikkhus here at Kosambī have taken to quarrelling and brawling and are deep in disputes, stabbing each other with verbal daggers.
Then a certain bhikkhu went to the venerable Sāriputta and said to him: “Friend Sāriputta, the bhikkhu Puṇṇa Mantāṇiputta of whom you have always spoken highly has just been instructed, urged, roused, and gladdened by the Blessed One with talk on the Dhamma; after delighting and rejoicing in the Blessed One’s words, he rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he has gone to the Blind Men’s Grove for the day’s abiding.”
Then a certain bhikkhu who had spent the Rains at Rājagaha went to the venerable Sāriputta in the Southern Hills and exchanged greetings with him.
Then a certain disciple of his made a noise thus: “Sirs, do not ask Pūraṇa Kassapa this question.
Then a deity living in that tree became fearful, perturbed, and frightened; but the deity’s friends and companions, kinsmen and relatives—garden deities, park deities, tree deities, and deities inhabiting medicinal herbs, grass, and forest-monarch trees—gathered together and reassured that deity thus: ‘Have no fear, sir, have no fear.
Then a householder or a householder’s son comes to him and invites him for the next day’s meal.
Then a householder or a householder’s son comes to him and invites him for the next day’s meal.
Then a householder or a householder’s son goes to him and investigates him in regard to three kinds of states: in regard to states based on greed, in regard to states based on hate, and in regard to states based on delusion: ‘Are there in this venerable one any states based on greed such that, with his mind obsessed by those states, while not knowing he might say, “I know,” or while not seeing he might say, “I see,” or he might urge others to act in a way that would lead to their harm and suffering for a long time?’
Then a man announced to King Pasenadi of Kosala: “Great king, Sañjaya, the brahmin of the Ākāsa clan, has come.”
Then a man announced to King Pasenadi of Kosala: “Sire, it is time to depart.”
Then a man appeared desiring their ruin, harm, and bondage, and he closed off the safe and good path to be traveled joyfully, and he opened up a false path, and he put out a decoy and set up a dummy so that the large herd of deer might later come upon calamity, disaster, and loss.
Then a man came needing fruit, seeking fruit, wandering in search of fruit, and he entered the grove and saw the tree laden with fruit.
Then a man came who wanted to live and not to die, who wanted pleasure and recoiled from pain, and two strong men seized him by both arms and dragged him towards that charcoal pit.
Then a man with good sight on seeing him would say: ‘This person so behaves, so conducts himself, has taken such a path, that he will come to this same charcoal pit’; and then later on he sees that he has fallen into that charcoal pit and is experiencing exclusively painful, racking, piercing feelings.
Then a man with good sight on seeing him would say: ‘This person so behaves… that he will come to this same tree’; and then later on he sees that he is sitting or lying in the shade of that tree experiencing much painful feeling.
Then a man with good sight on seeing him would say: ‘This person so behaves…that he will come to this same cesspit’; and then later on he sees that he has fallen into that cesspit and is experiencing painful, racking, piercing feelings.
Then a man with good sight on seeing him would say: ‘This person so behaves…that he will come to this same mansion’; and then later on he sees that he is sitting or lying in that upper chamber in that mansion experiencing exclusively pleasant feelings.
Then a man with good sight on seeing him would say: ‘This person so behaves…that he will come to this same pond’; and then later on he sees that he has plunged into the pond, bathed, drunk, and relieved all his distress, fatigue, and fever and has come out again and is sitting or lying in the wood experiencing exclusively pleasant feelings.
Then a man with good sight on seeing him would say: ‘This person so behaves…that he will come to this same tree’; and then later on he sees that he is sitting or lying in the shade of that tree experiencing much pleasant feeling.
Then a man with good sight, seeing him, might say: ‘This good man did not know the heartwood, the sapwood, the inner bark, the outer bark, or the twigs and leaves.
Then a man with good sight, seeing him, might say: ‘This good man did not know the heartwood, the sapwood, the inner bark, the outer bark, or the twigs and leaves.
Then a man with good sight, seeing him, might say: ‘This good man did not know the heartwood…or the twigs and leaves.
Then a man with good sight, seeing him, might say: ‘This good man did not know the heartwood…or the twigs and leaves.
Then a man with good sight, seeing him, might say: ‘This good man did not know the heartwood…or the twigs and leaves.
Then a man with good sight, seeing him, might say: ‘This good man did not know the heartwood…or the twigs and leaves.
Then a man with good sight, seeing him, might say: ‘This good man did not know the heartwood…or the twigs and leaves.
Then a man with good sight, seeing him, might say: ‘This good man did not know the heartwood…or the twigs and leaves.
Then a man with good sight, seeing him, might say: ‘This good man knew the heartwood, the sapwood, the inner bark, the outer bark, and the twigs and leaves.
Then a man with good sight, seeing him, might say: ‘This good man knew the heartwood, the sapwood, the inner bark, the outer bark, and the twigs and leaves.
Then a man with good sight, taking it in his hand, might review it thus: ‘This is a beautiful beryl gem of purest water, eight-faceted, well cut, clear and limpid, possessed of all good qualities, and through it is strung a blue, yellow, red, white, or brown thread.’
Then a man would cheat him with a dirty soiled garment thus: ‘Good man, here is a white cloth for you, beautiful, spotless, and clean.’
Then a man would cheat him with a dirty soiled garment thus: ‘Good man, here is a white cloth for you, beautiful, spotless, and clean.’
Then a number of bhikkhus from native land’ who had spent the Rains there, went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, sat down at one side.
Then a number of bhikkhus went and told them: “Friends, the Blessed One and the Sangha of bhikkhus now abstain from eating at night.
Then a number of bhikkhus went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, they sat down at one side and said: “Venerable sir, the brahmin Brahmāyu has died.
Then a number of bhikkhus went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, they sat down at one side and told him: “Venerable sir, the clansman Pukkusāti, who was given brief instruction by the Blessed One, has died.
Then a number of bhikkhus went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, they sat down at one side and told him: “Venerable sir, the clansman Puṇṇa, who was given brief advice by the Blessed One, has died.
Then a number of bhikkhus went to the venerable Ānanda and said to him: “Friend Ānanda, it is long since we heard a talk on the Dhamma from the Blessed One’s own lips.
Then a second man came needing fruit, seeking fruit, wandering in search of fruit, and taking a sharp axe, he too entered the grove and saw that tree laden with fruit.
Then a second man came who wanted to go to Rājagaha, and he approached you and said: ‘Venerable sir, I want to go to Rājagaha.
Then a skilled butcher or his apprentice would toss the dog a well hacked, clean hacked skeleton of meatless bones smeared with blood.
Then Acela Kassapa, a former companion of the venerable Bakkula in his lay life, went to the venerable Bakkula and exchanged greetings with him.
Then all the villages nearby begin their work by its light, thinking that it is day.
Then all three went to meet the Blessed One.
Then all three went to meet the Blessed One.
Then although the snake might wrap its coils round his hand or his arm or his limbs, still he would not come to death or deadly suffering because of that.
Then Assumegha, Anīgha, Sudāṭha—
Then at his own father’s house the venerable Raṭṭhapāla received neither alms nor a polite refusal; instead, he received only abuse.
Then at noon the king asked: ‘How is that man?’—‘Sire, he is still alive.’
Then at that point the Blessed One uttered this exclamation:
Then Bodhi, Mahānāma the supreme, Bhāradvāja with fair-crested mane;
Then brahmins and householders went to him and spoke thus: ‘Sire, drive slowly that we may see you longer.’
Then deities approached me and said: ‘Venerable sir, Uddaka Rāmaputta died last night.’
Then deities approached me and said: ‘Venerable sir, Āḷāra Kālāma died seven days ago.’
Then deities came to me and said: ‘Good sir, do not practise entirely cutting off food.
Then Dummukha, the son of the Licchavis, seeing Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son in such a condition, said to the Blessed One: “A simile occurs to me, Master Gotama.”
Then Dīgha Kārāyaṇa thought: “So the king is going into secret session now!
Then Ghaṭīkāra said to Jotipāla: ‘My dear Jotipāla, there is the monastery of the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, quite nearby.
Then go to the venerable Sāriputta, pay homage in my name with your head at his feet, and say: ‘Venerable sir, the brahmin Dhānañjāni is afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill; he pays homage with his head at the venerable Sāriputta’s feet.’
Then go to the venerable Sāriputta, pay homage in my name with your head at his feet, and say: ‘Venerable sir, the householder Anāthapiṇḍika is afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill; he pays homage with his head at the venerable Sāriputta’s feet.’
Then having cut, severed, and carved all this away, he would remove the outer hide and cover the cow again with that same hide.
Then he addressed a certain brahmin student: “Come, brahmin student, go to the recluse Gotama and ask in my name whether the recluse Gotama is free from illness and affliction, and is healthy, strong, and abiding in comfort, saying: ‘Master Gotama, the brahmin Brahmāyu asks whether Master Gotama is free from illness...abiding in comfort,’ and say this: ‘The brahmin Brahmāyu, Master Gotama, is old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, and come to the last stage; he is in his hundred and twentieth year.
Then he addressed a certain man thus: “Come, good man, go to the Blessed One, pay homage in my name with your head at his feet, and say: ‘Venerable sir, the householder Anāthapiṇḍika is afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill; he pays homage with his head at the Blessed One’s feet.’
Then he addressed Dīgha Kārāyaṇa: “Dear Kārāyaṇa, have the state carriages prepared.
Then he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus, for what discussion are you sitting together here now?
Then he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus, for what discussion are you sitting together here now?
Then he addressed the Blessed One in stanzas:
Then he addressed the brahmin student Sañjikāputta thus: “Come, my dear Sañjikāputta, go to the Blessed One and announce that it is time thus: ‘It is time, venerable sir, the meal is ready.’”
Then he addressed the venerable Anuruddha thus: “Anuruddha, do you all delight in the holy life?”
Then he arranged his hair and beard, dressed in ochre-coloured garments, put on stout sandals, and taking a staff made of gold, he appeared in the courtyard of the seven brahmin seers.
Then he arranged his upper robe on one shoulder, and extending his hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One, he said:
Then he asked her a further question:
Then he asked him a further question:
Then he asked him a further question:
Then he asked: “Venerable sir, what is the ant-hill, what the fuming by night, what the flaming by day?
Then he considered: “Did that spirit penetrate to the meaning of the Blessed One’s words when he rejoiced, or did he not?
Then he departed, leaning on his stick.
Then he drank from it after reflecting, and did not relinquish it.
Then he drank from it after reflecting, and did not relinquish it.
Then he drank from it without reflecting and did not relinquish it.
Then he drank from it without reflecting and did not relinquish it.
Then he extolled the Blessed One to his face with fitting stanzas:
Then he followed the Blessed One for seven months like a shadow, never leaving him.
Then he gives attention to voidness internally.
Then he heard Sunakkhatta, son of the Licchavis, making this statement before the Vesālī assembly.
Then he is energetic in abandoning unwholesome states and in undertaking wholesome states, steadfast, launching his effort with firmness and persevering in cultivating wholesome states.
Then he is free from illness and affliction, possessing a good digestion that is neither too cool nor too warm but medium and able to bear the strain of striving.
Then he is honest and sincere, and shows himself as he actually is to his teacher and his companions in the holy life.
Then he is wise; he possesses wisdom regarding rise and disappearance that is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
Then he might see another leper with sores and blisters on his limbs, being devoured by worms, scratching the scabs off the openings of his wounds with his nails, cauterising his body over a burning charcoal pit.
Then he rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, keeping him on his right, he left and went to the Blessed One.
Then he said to the Blessed One: “But does Master Gotama go to the Bāhukā River to bathe?”
Then he said to the Blessed One: “It is wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous!
Then he said to the Blessed One: “Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Then he said to the Blessed One: “Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Then he said to the Blessed One: “Master Gotama, in regard to the ancient brahmanic hymns that have come down through oral transmission, preserved in the collections, the brahmins come to the definite conclusion: ‘Only this is true, anything else is wrong.’
Then he said to the Blessed One: “Master Gotama, the brahmin Pokkharasāti of the Upamaññā clan, lord of the Subhaga Grove, says thus: ‘Some recluses and brahmins here claim superhuman states, distinctions in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
Then he said to the Blessed One: “Now, venerable sir, we must go.
Then he said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, let the Blessed One with three others consent to accept tomorrow’s meal from me.”
Then he said to them: ‘Sirs, I heard that while the seven brahmin seers were dwelling in leaf huts in the forest, this pernicious view arose in them: “Brahmins are the highest caste…heirs of Brahmā.”’—‘That is so, sir.’
Then he saw the brahmin householders of Opasāda setting forth from Opasāda in groups and bands and heading northwards to the Gods’ Grove, the Sāla-tree Grove.
Then he sees that contact is impermanent, that feeling is impermanent, that perception is impermanent, that formations are impermanent, and that consciousness is impermanent.
Then he thinks: ‘Formerly, when we were in the home life, we advised and instructed others, and now these, who seem like they might be our sons or our grandsons, think that they can advise and instruct us.’
Then he thought: ‘There is this great expanse of water, whose near shore is dangerous and fearful and whose further shore is safe and free from fear, but there is no ferryboat or bridge for going to the far shore.
Then he thought: “I am skilled in the good of this life, and others too ask me about good in this life.
Then he thought: “It is not the right time to see the Blessed One; he is still in retreat.
Then he thought: “It is still too early to wander for alms in Rājagaha.
Then he thought: “It is still too early to wander for alms in Rājagaha.
Then he thought: “The Blessed One, indeed, speaks to us of the abandoning of these things through direct knowledge; the Sublime One, indeed, speaks to us of the relinquishing of these things through direct knowledge.”
Then he told a man: “Come, good man, go to the Blessed One and pay homage in my name with your head at his feet, and ask whether he is free from illness and affliction, and is healthy, strong, and abiding in comfort, saying: ‘Venerable sir, King Pasenadi of Kosala pays homage with his head at the Blessed One’s feet, and he asks whether the Blessed One is free from illness…and abiding in comfort.’
Then he told a man: “Come, good man, go to the Blessed One, pay homage in my name with your head at his feet, and say: ‘Venerable sir, the brahmin Dhānañjāni is afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill; he pays homage with his head at the Blessed One’s feet.’
Then he told Dīgha Kārāyaṇa what he had thought and asked: “Where is he living now, the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened?”
Then he told the doorkeeper: “Now, good doorkeeper, go to the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta and tell him: ‘Venerable sir, the householder Upāli says: “Enter, venerable sir, if you wish.”’”
Then he told the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s former wives: “Come, daughters-in-law, adorn yourselves with ornaments in the way Raṭṭhapāla found you most dear and loveable.”
Then he went to a certain bhikkhu in Kukkuṭa’s Park, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and asked him: “Where does the venerable Ānanda live now, venerable sir?
Then he went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and looked for the thirty-two marks of a Great Man on the Blessed One’s body.
Then he went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Then he went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and reported to the Blessed One his entire conversation with the wanderer Uggāhamāna.
Then he went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and reported to the Blessed One the entire conversation between the venerable Udāyin and the carpenter Pañcakanga.
Then he went to the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta and told him: “Venerable sir, I have heard thus: ‘The householder Upāli has gone over to discipleship under the recluse Gotama.’”
Then he went to the venerable Sāriputta and after paying homage to the venerable Sāriputta, he delivered his message, saying: “It would be good, venerable sir, if the venerable Sāriputta would come to the residence of the brahmin Dhānañjāni, out of compassion.”
Then he went to the venerable Sāriputta, and after paying homage to the venerable Sāriputta, he delivered his message, saying: “It would be good, venerable sir, if the venerable Sāriputta would come to the residence of the householder Anāthapiṇḍika, out of compassion.”
Then he would cut it down at the root, cut off the crown, and unroll the leaf-sheaths; but as he went on unrolling the leaf sheaths, he would never come even to any sapwood, let alone heartwood.
Then his father had the pile of gold coins and bullion uncovered and said: “Dear Raṭṭhapāla, this is your maternal fortune; your paternal fortune is another and your ancestral fortune is yet another.
Then his friends and companions, his kinsmen and relatives, brought a physician to treat him.
Then his friends and companions, his kinsmen and relatives, would bring a physician to treat him.
Then his friends and companions, his kinsmen and relatives, would bring a physician to treat him.
Then his friends and companions, his kinsmen and relatives, would bring a physician to treat him.
Then his friends and companions, kinsmen and relatives, brought a surgeon.
Then his rider would think: ‘This royal tusker elephant with tusks as long as chariot poles…performs his task in battle with his forefeet and his hindfeet…yet he keeps back his trunk.
Then I addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Go, bhikkhus, and find out if there is any grass at the potter Ghaṭīkāra’s house.”—“Venerable sir, there is no grass at the potter Ghaṭīkāra’s house; there is the grass thatch over his workshop.” —“Go, bhikkhus, and remove the grass from the potter Ghaṭīkāra’s workshop.”
Then I considered thus: ‘Doubt arose in me, and because of the doubt my concentration fell away; when my concentration fell away, the light and the vision of forms disappeared.
Then I considered thus: ‘Inattention arose in me, and because of inattention my concentration fell away; when my concentration fell away, the light and the vision of forms disappeared.
Then I considered thus: ‘On the occasion when concentration is limited, my vision is limited, and with limited vision I perceive limited light and limited forms.
Then I considered thus: ‘On the occasion when I do not attend to the sign of forms but attend to the sign of light, I then perceive light but do not see forms.
Then I considered thus: ‘Why, being myself subject to birth, do I seek what is also subject to birth?
Then I declared it when directly questioned by the Blessed One.”
Then I replied to the Brahmā Sahampati in stanzas:
Then I set aside what I wish to do and do what these venerable ones wish to do.
Then I set aside what I wish to do and do what these venerable ones wish to do.
Then I shall think thus, Blessed One; then I shall think thus, Sublime One.”
Then I shall think thus, Blessed One; then I shall think thus, Sublime One.”
Then I shall think thus, Blessed One; then I shall think thus, Sublime One.”
Then I shall think thus, Blessed One; then I shall think thus, Sublime One.”
Then I shall think thus, Blessed One; then I shall think thus, Sublime One.”
Then I shall think thus, Blessed One; then I shall think thus, Sublime One.” 
Then I sometimes instructed two bhikkhus while the other three went for alms, and the six of us lived on what those three bhikkhus brought back from their almsround.
Then I thought: ‘Where are the bhikkhus of the group of five now living?’
Then I went there and approached Master Gotama, and in many ways he gave a talk about meditation.
Then I went to Uddaka Rāmaputta and asked him: ‘Friend, in what way did Rāma declare that by realising for himself with direct knowledge he entered upon and abided in this Dhamma?ʹ In reply Uddaka Rāmaputta declared the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
Then I went to Uddaka Rāmaputta and asked him: ‘Friend, was it in this way that Rāma declared that he entered upon and abided in this Dhamma by realising for himself with direct knowledge?’—‘That is the way, friend.’—‘It is in this way, friend, that I also enter upon and abide in this Dhamma by realising for myself with direct knowledge.’—‘It is a gain for us, friend, it is a great gain for us that we have such a venerable one for our companion in the holy life.
Then I went to Āḷāra Kālāma and asked him: ‘Friend Kālāma, in what way do you declare that by realising for yourself with direct knowledge you enter upon and abide in this Dhamma?’
Then I went to Āḷāra Kālāma and asked him: ‘Friend Kālāma, is it in this way that you declare that you enter upon and abide in this Dhamma by realising for yourself with direct knowledge?’—‘That is the way, friend.’—‘It is in this way, friend, that I also enter upon and abide in this Dhamma by realising for myself with direct knowledge.’—‘It is a gain for us, friend, it is a great gain for us that we have such a venerable one for our companion in the holy life.
Then in a certain place the Blessed One smiled.
Then in A.iii he shows how a wise person comes to the conclusion that whether or not the view is true, it serves his best interest to reject it.
Then in the evening the king asked: ‘How is that man?’—‘Sire, he is still alive.’
Then in the middle of the day King Pasenadi of Kosala drove out of Sāvatthī with a cavalry of five hundred men and set out for the park.
Then it occurred to him: “As I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not easy while living in a home to lead the holy life, utterly perfect and pure as a polished shell.
Then it occurred to the Blessed One: “This brahmin Brahmāyu sees, more or less, the thirty-two marks of a Great Man on me, except two; he is doubtful and uncertain about two of the marks, and he cannot decide and make up his mind about them: about the male organ being enclosed in a sheath and about the largeness of the tongue.”
Then it occurred to the Blessed One: “This brahmin Sela sees the thirty-two marks of a Great Man on me, except two; he is doubtful and uncertain about two of the marks, and he cannot decide and make up his mind about them: about the male organ being enclosed in a sheath and about the largeness of the tongue.”
Then it occurred to the Blessed One: “This brahmin student Uttara sees, more or less, the thirty-two marks of a Great Man on me, except two; he is doubtful and uncertain about two of the marks, and he cannot decide and make up his mind about them: about the male organ being enclosed in a sheath and about the largeness of the tongue.”
Then it occurred to the brahmin Sela: “Even this sound ‘Buddha’ is hard to come across in this world.
Then it occurred to the venerable Sāriputta: “It is a gain for the venerable Puṇṇa Mantāṇiputta, it is a great gain for him that his wise companions in the holy life praise him point by point in the Teacher’s presence.
Then Jīvaka Komārabhacca went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said to the Blessed One:
Then King Avantiputta of Madhurā had a number of state carriages made ready, and mounting a state carriage, he drove out from Madhurā with the full pomp of royalty in order to see the venerable Mahā Kaccāna.
Then King Koravya addressed his gamekeeper thus: “Good gamekeeper, tidy up the Migācīra Garden so that we may go to the pleasure garden to see a pleasing spot.”—“Yes, sire,” he replied.
Then King Pasenadi entered the dwelling.
Then King Pasenadi mounted a state carriage, and accompanied by the other carriages, he drove out from Nagaraka with the full pomp of royalty and proceeded towards the park.
Then King Pasenadi mounted a state carriage, and accompanied by the other carriages, set out from Nagaraka towards the Sakyan town of Medaḷumpa.
Then King Pasenadi of Kosala addressed General Viḍūḍabha: “General, who introduced this story into the palace?” “It was Sañjaya, sire, the brahmin of the Ākāsa clan.”
Then King Pasenadi of Kosala asked the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, what is this bhikkhu’s name?”
Then King Pasenadi of Kosala rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he departed.
Then King Pasenadi of Kosala rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he departed.
Then King Pasenadi of Kosala rose from his seat, and arranging his upper robe on one shoulder, he extended his hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One and uttered this exclamation three times: “Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened!
Then King Pasenadi of Kosala said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, I have heard this: ‘The recluse Gotama says: “There is no recluse or brahmin who is omniscient and all-seeing, who can claim to have complete knowledge and vision; that is not possible.”’ Venerable sir, do those who speak thus say what has been said by the Blessed One, and not misrepresent him with what is contrary to fact?
Then King Pasenadi of Kosala said: “And now, venerable sir, we depart.
Then King Pasenadi of Kosala told a man: “Come, good man, go to the venerable Ānanda and pay homage in my name with your head at his feet, saying: ‘Venerable sir, King Pasenadi of Kosala pays homage with his head at the venerable Ānanda’s feet.’
Then King Pasenadi of Kosala told a man: “Come, good man, in my name tell Sañjaya, the brahmin of the Ākāsa clan: ‘Venerable sir, King Pasenadi of Kosala calls you.’”
Then King Pasenadi of Kosala told Queen Mallikā: “This is what has been said by the recluse Gotama, Mallikā: ‘Sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair are born from those who are dear, arise from those who are dear.’”
Then King Pasenadi of Kosala, having delighted and rejoiced in the Blessed One’s words, rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he departed.
Then King Pasenadi of Kosala, having delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Ānanda’s words, rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the venerable Ānanda, keeping him on his right, he departed.
Then King Pasenadi of Kosala, leaving Sāvatthī through the inner palace door, would mount the first relay chariot, and by means of the first relay chariot he would arrive at the second relay chariot; then he would dismount from the first chariot and mount the second chariot, and by means of the second chariot, he would arrive at the third chariot…by means of the third chariot, he would arrive at the fourth chariot…by means of the fourth chariot, he would arrive at the fifth chariot…by means of the fifth chariot, he would arrive at the sixth chariot…by means of the sixth chariot, he would arrive at the seventh chariot, and by means of the seventh chariot he would arrive at the inner palace door in Sāketa.
Then King Pasenadi was frightened, alarmed, and terrified.
Then King Pasenadi went by elephant as far as the elephant could go, and then he dismounted and went to the venerable Ānanda on foot.
Then King Pasenadi went by elephant as far as the elephant could go, and then he dismounted and went to the venerable Ānanda on foot.
Then King Pasenadi went to them and asked: “Venerable sirs, where is he living now, the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened?
Then King Yama says: ‘Good man, have you never seen in the world a man—or a woman—afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill, lying fouled in his own excrement and urine, lifted up by some and set down by others?’
Then King Yama says: ‘Good man, have you never seen in the world a man—or a woman—at eighty, ninety, or a hundred years, aged, as crooked as a roof bracket, doubled up, supported by a walking stick, tottering, frail, youth gone, teeth broken, grey-haired, scanty-haired, bald, wrinkled, with limbs all blotchy?’
Then King Yama says: ‘Good man, have you never seen in the world a man—or a woman—one-day dead, two-days dead, three-days dead, bloated, livid, and oozing with matter?’
Then King Yama says: ‘Good man, have you never seen in the world a young tender infant lying prone, fouled in his own excrement and urine?’
Then King Yama says: ‘Good man, have you never seen in the world, when a robber culprit is caught, kings having many kinds of tortures inflicted on him: having him flogged with whips......and having his head cut off with a sword?’
Then King Yama says: ‘Good man, through negligence you have failed to do good by body, speech, and mind.
Then King Yama says: ‘Good man, through negligence you have failed to do good by body, speech, and mind.
Then King Yama says: ‘Good man, through negligence you have failed to do good by body, speech, and mind.
Then King Yama says: ‘Good man, through negligence you have failed to do good by body, speech, and mind.
Then King Yama says: ‘Good man, through negligence you have failed to do good by body, speech, and mind.
Then know the kinds of quadrupeds both small and large:
Then later on a bad report about Mistress Vedehikā spread thus: ‘Mistress Vedehikā is rough, Mistress Vedehikā is violent, Mistress Vedehikā is merciless.’
Then Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī together with five hundred bhikkhunīs went to the Blessed One.
Then Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī took a new pair of cloths and went to the Blessed One.
Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said: “Venerable sir, I have long understood the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One thus: ‘Greed is an imperfection that defiles the mind, hate is an imperfection that defiles the mind, delusion is an imperfection that defiles the mind.’
Then Māra the Evil One thought: “The recluse knew me, he saw me when he said that,” whereupon he came up from the venerable Mahā Moggallāna’s mouth and stood against the door bar.
Then Māra the Evil One thought: “This recluse does not know me, he does not see me when he says that.
Then Mistress Vedehikā said: ‘Hey, Kālī!′—′What is it, madam?’—‘What is the matter that you get up later in the day?’—‘Nothing is the matter, madam.’—‘Nothing is the matter, you wicked girl, yet you get up later in the day!’ and she was angry and displeased, and she spoke words of displeasure.
Then Mistress Vedehikā said: ‘Hey, Kālī!′—′What is it, madam?’—‘What is the matter that you get up so late?’—‘Nothing is the matter, madam.’—‘Nothing is the matter, you wicked girl, yet you get up so late!’ and she was angry and displeased, and she scowled.
Then Mistress Vedehikā said: ‘Hey, Kālī!′—′What is it, madam?’—‘What is the matter that you get up still later in the day?’—‘Nothing is the matter, madam.’—‘Nothing is the matter, you wicked girl, yet you get up still later in the day!’ and she was angry and displeased, and she took a rolling-pin, gave her a blow on the head, and cut her head.
Then my friends and companions, kinsmen and relatives, brought a surgeon.
Then my mother, who was pregnant, went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, she sat down at one side and said to him: ‘Venerable sir, the prince or princess in my womb, whichever it may be, goes to the Blessed One for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
Then my nurse, carrying me on her hip, went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, she stood at one side and said to him: ‘Venerable sir, this Prince Bodhi goes to the Blessed One for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
Then not long after the venerable Raṭṭhapāla had received the full admission, a half-month after he had received the full admission, the Blessed One, having stayed at Thullakoṭṭhita as long as he chose, set out to wander towards Sāvatthī.
Then on a later occasion, when the wound was healed and covered with skin, the man would be well and happy, independent, master of himself, able to go where he likes.
Then one bhikkhu thought: ‘The Blessed One has eaten…had what he needed, but there is this almsfood of the Blessed One left over to be thrown away; if we do not eat it the Blessed One will throw it away…But this has been said by the Blessed One: “Bhikkhus, be my heirs in Dhamma, not my heirs in material things.”
Then people, seeing him, would say: ‘Sirs, that is a rich man!
Then perhaps you might think: ‘Indeed, I have long been tricked, cheated, and defrauded by this mind.
Then Pessa, the elephant driver’s son, and Kandaraka the wanderer went to the Blessed One.
Then Pessa, the elephant driver’s son, having delighted and rejoiced in the Blessed One’s words, rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he departed.
Then Prince Abhaya went to the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, and after paying homage to him, sat down at one side.
Then Prince Bodhi addressed the brahmin student Sañjikāputta thus: “Come, my dear Sañjikāputta, go to the Blessed One and pay homage in my name with your head at his feet, and ask whether he is free from illness and affliction and is healthy, strong, and abiding in comfort, saying: ‘Venerable sir, Prince Bodhi pays homage with his head at the Blessed One’s feet, and he asks whether the Blessed One is free from illness…and abiding in comfort.’
Then Prince Jayasena served the venerable Bhūmija from his own dish of milk rice.
Then Prince Jayasena went to the venerable Bhūmija and exchanged greetings with him.
Then Prince Jayasena, while wandering and walking for exercise, went to the novice Aciravata and exchanged greetings with him.
Then Puṇṇa, son of the Koliyans, an ox-duty ascetic, and also Seniya, a naked dog-duty ascetic, went to the Blessed One.
Then Queen Mallikā addressed the brahmin Nāḷijangha: “Come, brahmin, go to the Blessed One and pay homage in my name with your head at his feet, and ask whether he is free from illness and affliction and is healthy, strong, and abiding in comfort, saying: ‘Venerable sir, Queen Mallikā pays homage with her head at the Blessed One’s feet and asks whether the Blessed One is free from illness…and abiding in comfort.’
Then Queen Mallikā went to King Pasenadi of Kosala and asked him: “What do you think, sire?
Then raising the lid and uncovering it, they looked in, and as soon as they saw they were inspired with such liking, appetite, and relish that even those who were full would want to eat, not to speak of those who were hungry.
Then rapture regarding the Blessed One arose in me thus: ‘Ah, surely it is the Blessed One, surely it is the Sublime One who is skilled in these things.’”
Then Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son had good food of various kinds prepared in his own park and had the time announced to the Blessed One: “It is time, Master Gotama, the meal is ready.”
Then Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son was frightened, alarmed, and terrified.
Then Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son went to them and said: “Come forth, good Licchavis, come forth!
Then Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son went up to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Then Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son went up to them and asked: “Where is Master Gotama staying now, sirs?
Then Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son went with five hundred Licchavis to the Hall with the Peaked Roof in the Great Wood.
Then Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son, having delighted and rejoiced in the Blessed One’s words, got up from his seat and departed.
Then Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son, together with a large following of Licchavis, entered the Great Wood and went to the Blessed One.
Then Sakka, ruler of gods, and the divine King Vessavaṇa had the venerable Mahā Moggallāna walk all over and explore the Vejayanta Palace: “See, good sir Moggallāna, this loveliness of the Vejayanta Palace!
Then Sakka, ruler of gods, and the divine King Vessavaṇa went to the Vejayanta Palace, giving precedence to the venerable Mahā Moggallāna.
Then Sakka, ruler of gods, delighting and rejoicing in the Blessed One’s words, paid homage to the Blessed One, and keeping him on his right, he vanished at once.
Then Sakka, ruler of gods, went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he stood at one side and asked: “Venerable sir, how in brief is a bhikkhu liberated in the destruction of craving, one who has reached the ultimate end, the ultimate security from bondage, the ultimate holy life, the ultimate goal, one who is foremost among gods and humans?” 
Then say this: ‘Venerable sir, have these words been uttered by the Blessed One: “Sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair are born from those who are dear, arise from those who are dear”?’
Then say this: ‘Venerable sir, if the venerable Ānanda has no urgent business, perhaps the venerable Ānanda would wait a moment, out of compassion.’”
Then say this: ‘Venerable sir, let the Blessed One together with the Sangha of bhikkhus consent to accept tomorrow’s meal from Prince Bodhi.’”
Then say thus: ‘It would be good, venerable sir, if the venerable Sāriputta would come to the house of the brahmin Dhānañjāni, out of compassion.’”
Then say: ‘It would be good, venerable sir, if the venerable Sāriputta would come to the residence of the householder Anāthapiṇḍika, out of compassion.’”
Then say: ‘The Blessed One has been worshipped by me, the Sublime One has been worshipped by me.’” 
Then Seniya the naked dog-duty ascetic received the going forth under the Blessed One, and he received the full admission.
Then she told him: ‘Go, brahmin, buy a young monkey in the market and bring it back to me as a playmate for my child.’
Then she told him: ‘Go, brahmin, take this young male monkey to Rattapāṇi the dyer’s son and tell him: “Good Rattapāṇi, I want this young male monkey dyed the colour called yellow-unguent, pounded and re-pounded, and smoothened out on both sides.”’ Then, since his mind was bound to her with love, he took the young male monkey to Rattapāṇi the dyer’s son and told him: ‘Good Rattapāṇi, I want this young male monkey dyed the colour called yellow-unguent, pounded and re-pounded, and smoothened out on both sides.’
Then she went to his mother and said: “Please know, my lady, that my lord’s son Raṭṭhapāla has arrived.”
Then soon after he had left, the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus, before rising from his seat and departing, this King Pasenadi uttered monuments to the Dhamma.
Then soon after he had left, the venerable Ānanda went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side, related to him his entire conversation with King Pasenadi of Kosala, and presented the cloak to the Blessed One.
Then that householder went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, sat down at one side.
Then that workshop remained three whole months with the sky for a roof, and yet no rain came in.
Then the bandit Angulimāla addressed the Blessed One in stanzas thus:
Then the bandit Angulimāla thought: “It is wonderful, it is marvellous!
Then the bandit Angulimāla thought: “These recluses, sons of the Sakyans, speak truth, assert truth; but though this recluse is still walking, he says: ‘I have stopped, Angulimāla, you stop too.’
Then the bhikkhunīs paid homage to the Blessed One and departed keeping him on their right.
Then the bhikkhunīs, having delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Nandaka’s words, rose from their seats, and after paying homage to the venerable Nandaka, departed keeping him on their right.
Then the bhikkhus went to the venerable Mahā Kaccāna and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the bhikkhus went to the venerable Mahā Kaccāna and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the bhikkhus, having delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Mahā Kaccāna’s words, rose from their seats and went to the Blessed One.
Then the bhikkhus, having delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Mahā Kaccāna’s words, rose from their seats and went to the Blessed One.
Then the bhikkhus, having delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Mahā Kaccāna’s words, rose from their seats and went to the Blessed One.
Then the Blessed One addressed a certain bhikkhu thus: “Come, bhikkhu, tell the bhikkhu Ariṭṭha, formerly of the vulture killers, in my name that the Teacher calls him.”— “Yes, venerable sir,” he replied, and he went to the bhikkhu Ariṭṭha and told him: “The Teacher calls you, friend Ariṭṭha.”
Then the Blessed One addressed a certain bhikkhu thus: “Come, bhikkhu, tell the bhikkhu Moliya Phagguna in my name that the Teacher calls him.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” he replied, and he went to the venerable Moliya Phagguna and told him: “The Teacher calls you, friend Phagguna.”—“Yes, friend,” he replied, and he went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, sat down at one side.
Then the Blessed One addressed a certain bhikkhu thus: “Come, bhikkhu, tell the bhikkhu Sāti, son of a fisherman, in my name that the Teacher calls him.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” he replied, and he went to the bhikkhu Sāti and told him: “The Teacher calls you, friend Sāti.”
Then the Blessed One addressed a certain bhikkhu thus: “Come, bhikkhu, tell the bhikkhus led by Assaji and Punabbasuka in my name that the Teacher calls them.”
Then the Blessed One addressed a certain bhikkhu thus: “Come, bhikkhu, tell those bhikkhus in my name that the Teacher calls them.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” he replied, and he went to those bhikkhus and told them: “The Teacher calls the venerable ones.”
Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:
Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus, do you understand the Dhamma taught by me as this bhikkhu Sāti, son of a fisherman, does when he misrepresents us by his wrong grasp and injures himself and stores up much demerit?”
Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus, Sāriputta, having established the brahmin Dhānañjāni in the inferior Brahma-world, rose from his seat and departed while there was still more to be done.”
Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus, there are these six principles of cordiality that create love and respect and conduce to cohesion, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity.
Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus, there was an occasion when the bhikkhus satisfied my mind.
Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus, what do you think?
Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus: “It is a gain, bhikkhus, for King Pasenadi of Kosala, it is a great gain for King Pasenadi of Kosala that he has had the opportunity of seeing and paying respect to Ānanda.”
Then the Blessed One addressed the brahmin Sundarika Bhāradvāja in stanzas:
Then the Blessed One addressed the venerable Mahā Moggallāna: “What did you think, Moggallāna, when the Sangha of bhikkhus was dismissed by me?”
Then the Blessed One addressed the venerable Nandaka: “Advise the bhikkhunīs, Nandaka.
Then the Blessed One addressed the venerable Ānanda thus: “Ānanda, who are these loud and noisy people?
Then the Blessed One addressed the venerable Ānanda: “See, Ānanda, how this misguided man Udāyin interferes.
Then the Blessed One addressed the venerable Ānanda: “That being so, Ānanda, explain more fully the Tathāgata’s wonderful and marvellous qualities.”
Then the Blessed One addressed the venerable Ānanda: “Ānanda, whose turn is it today to advise the bhikkhunīs?”
Then the Blessed One addressed thebhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus, do you understand the Dhamma taught by me as this bhikkhu Ariṭṭha, formerly of the vulture killers, does when by his wrong grasp he misrepresents us, injures himself and stores up much demerit?”
Then the Blessed One addressed thebhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus, what do you think?
Then the Blessed One arrived.”
Then the Blessed One asked him: “Tapassī, how many kinds of action does the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta describe for the performance of evil action, for the perpetration of evil action?”
Then the Blessed One asked the venerable Ānanda: “Ānanda, how were you instructing, urging, rousing, and gladdening the bhikkhus with talk on the Dhamma, and reciting the summary and exposition of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night’?”
Then the Blessed One considered thus: “Suppose I question those clansmen?”
Then the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, he went with the Sangha of bhikkhus to the assembly hall.
Then the Blessed One entered the potter’s workshop, prepared a spread of grass at one end, and sat down, folding his legs crosswise, setting his body erect, and establishing mindfulness in front of him.
Then the Blessed One extended his right arm and said to King Pasenadi of Kosala: “Great king, this is Angulimāla.”
Then the Blessed One gave the householder Upāli progressive instruction, that is, talk on giving, talk on virtue, talk on the heavens; he explained the danger, degradation, and defilement in sensual pleasures and the blessing of renunciation.
Then the Blessed One instructed, urged, roused, and gladdened the venerable Bhagu with talk on the Dhamma, after which he rose from his seat and went to the Eastern Bamboo Park.
Then the Blessed One Kakusandha, accomplished and fully enlightened, turned around and looked at him with the elephant look: ‘This Māra Dūsī knows no bounds.’
Then the Blessed One left a little water in the water vessel and asked the venerable Rāhula: “Rāhula, do you see this little water left in the water vessel?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”—“Even so little, Rāhula, is the recluseship of those who are not ashamed to tell a deliberate lie.”
Then the Blessed One left the main road and, at a certain place, he smiled.
Then the Blessed One looked back and addressed the venerable Rāhula thus: “Rāhula, any kind of material form whatever, whether past, future, or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near, all material form should be seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’”
Then the Blessed One penetrated mentally the thoughts in venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s mind.
Then the Blessed One performed such a feat of supernormal power that the bandit Angulimāla, though running as fast as he could, could not catch up with the Blessed One, who was walking at his normal pace.
Then the Blessed One prepared his patchwork cloak folded in four and lay down on his right side in the lion’s pose, with one foot overlapping the other, mindful and fully aware, after noting in his mind the time for rising.
Then the Blessed One rebuked the brahmin student Kāpaṭhika thus: “Let not the venerable Bhāradvāja break in and interrupt the talk of the very senior brahmins while they are conversing.
Then the Blessed One related to the householder Upāli his entire conversation with the Nigaṇṭha Dīgha Tapassī.
Then the Blessed One rose and addressed the venerable Ānanda thus: “Good, good, Ānanda!
Then the Blessed One said to him: “Aggivessana, answer now.
Then the Blessed One said to Prince Abhaya: “What do you think, prince?
Then the Blessed One said to the brahmin Brahmāyu: “Enough, brahmin, arise; sit down in your own seat since your mind has confidence in me.”
Then the Blessed One set out to wander back to Sāvatthī with Angulimāla as his attendant.
Then the Blessed One spent most of the night seated, and the venerable Pukkusāti also spent most of the night seated.
Then the Blessed One spoke these stanzas in reply to the brahmin Brahmāyu:
Then the Blessed One spoke these stanzas in reply:
Then the Blessed One thought: “It is still too early to wander for alms in Vesālī.
Then the Blessed One thought: “Surely, since the brahmins honour him thus, the brahmin student Kāpaṭhika must be accomplished in the scriptures of the Three Vedas.”
Then the Blessed One thought: “This clansman conducts himself in a way that inspires confidence.
Then the Blessed One thought: “This clansman has gone forth from the home life into homelessness under me.
Then the Blessed One threw away the little water that was left and asked the venerable Rāhula: “Rāhula, do you see that little water that was thrown away?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”—“Even so, Rāhula, those who are not ashamed to tell a deliberate lie have thrown away their recluseship.”
Then the Blessed One told him: “What you have just spoken of as development of body, Aggivessana, is not development of body according to the Dhamma in the Noble One’s Discipline.
Then the Blessed One told Puṇṇa, son of the Koliyans, the ox-duty ascetic: “Puṇṇa, I could not persuade you when I said: ‘Enough, Puṇṇa, let that be.
Then the Blessed One told Seniya the naked dog-duty ascetic: “Seniya, I could not persuade you when I said: ‘Enough, Seniya, let that be.
Then the Blessed One turned the water vessel right way up again and asked the venerable Rāhula: “Rāhula, do you see this hollow, empty water vessel?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”—“Even so hollow and empty, Rāhula, is the recluseship of those who are not ashamed to tell a deliberate lie.”
Then the Blessed One turned the water vessel upside down and asked the venerable Rāhula: “Rāhula, do you see this water vessel turned upside down?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”—“Even so, Rāhula, those who are not ashamed to tell a deliberate lie have turned their recluseship upside down.”
Then the Blessed One went into the Blind Men’s Grove and sat down at the root of a certain tree on a seat made ready.
Then the Blessed One went to the brahmin Rammaka’s hermitage.
Then the Blessed One went to the Peacocks’ Sanctuary, the wanderers’ park.
Then the Blessed One went to the venerable Pukkusāti and said to him: “If it is not inconvenient for you, bhikkhu, I will stay one night in the workshop.”
Then the Blessed One went to the wanderer Vacchagotta in the Wanderers’ Park of the Single White-lotus Mango Tree.
Then the Blessed One went to those bhikkhus and said to them: “Enough, bhikkhus, let there be no quarrelling, brawling, wrangling, or dispute.”
Then the Blessed One went with the venerable Ānanda to the Eastern Bathing Place to bathe.
Then the Blessed One went with the venerable Ānanda to the Eastern Park, the Palace of Migāra’s Mother, for the day’s abiding.
Then the Blessed One worked such a feat of supernormal power that the brahmin Brahmāyu saw that the Blessed One’s male organ was enclosed in a sheath.
Then the Blessed One worked such a feat of supernormal power that the brahmin Sela saw that the Blessed One’s male organ was enclosed in a sheath.
Then the Blessed One worked such a feat of supernormal power that the brahmin student Uttara saw that the Blessed One’s male organ was enclosed in a sheath.
Then the Blessed One, knowing in his mind the thought in the mind of that bhikkhu, addressed the bhikkhus thus: “It is possible, bhikkhus, that some misguided man here, obtuse and ignorant, with his mind dominated by craving, might think that he can outstrip the Teacher’s Dispensation thus: ‘So, it seems, material form is not self…consciousness is not self.
Then the Brahmā Sahampati knew with his mind the thought in the Blessed One’s mind, so just as quickly as a strong man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended arm, he vanished in the Brahma-world and appeared before the Blessed One.
Then the brahmin Brahmāyu addressed the Blessed One in stanzas:
Then the brahmin Brahmāyu said to the assembly: “Enough, sirs, let each sit down in his own seat.
Then the brahmin Brahmāyu saw the Dhamma, attained the Dhamma, understood the Dhamma, fathomed the Dhamma; he crossed beyond doubt, did away with perplexity, gained intrepidity, and became independent of others in the Teacher’s Dispensation.
Then the brahmin Brahmāyu thought: “Permission has been granted me by the recluse Gotama.
Then the brahmin Brahmāyu went to Makhādeva’s Mango Grove with a number of brahmin students.
Then the brahmin Cankī, together with a large company of brahmins, went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the brahmin Dhānañjāni, having delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Sāriputta’s words, rose from his seat and departed.
Then the brahmin Esukārī went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the brahmin Gaṇaka Moggallāna went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the brahmin Ghoṭamukha took a low seat, sat down at one side, and said to the venerable Udena: “Worthy recluse, there is no wanderers’ life that accords with the Dhamma: so it seems to me here, and that may be because I have not seen such venerable ones as yourself or the Dhamma here.”
Then the brahmin Ghoṭamukha went up to the venerable Udena and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the brahmin householders of Mithilā went to the Blessed One.
Then the brahmin householders of Nagaravinda went to the Blessed One.
Then the brahmin householders of Opasāda set forth from Opasāda in groups and bands and headed northwards to the Gods’ Grove, the Sāla-tree Grove.
Then the brahmin householders of Sālā went to the Blessed One.
Then the brahmin householders of Sālā went to the Blessed One.
Then the brahmin householders of Thullakoṭṭhita went to the Blessed One.
Then the brahmin householders of Thullakoṭṭhita, having been instructed, urged, roused, and gladdened by the Blessed One with talk on the Dhamma, delighted and rejoiced in his words.
Then the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the brahmin of the Bhāradvāja clan went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the brahmin Pingalakoccha went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the brahmin Sela and his assembly received the going forth under the Blessed One, and they received the full admission.
Then the brahmin Sela thought: “The recluse Gotama is endowed with the thirty-two marks of a Great Man; they are complete, not incomplete.
Then the brahmin Sela went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the brahmin Sela went with the three hundred brahmin students to the Blessed One.
Then the brahmin Sela, while walking and wandering for exercise attended by his three hundred brahmin students, came to the matted-hair ascetic Keṇiya’s hermitage.
Then the brahmin student Assalāyana went with a large number of brahmins to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the brahmin student Jotipāla undid his belt and said: ‘Enough, my dear Ghaṭīkāra, what is the use of seeing that bald-pated recluse?’
Then the brahmin student Kāpaṭhika thought: “The recluse Gotama has turned towards me.
Then the brahmin student Kāpaṭhika thought: “When the recluse Gotama catches my eye, I shall ask him a question.”
Then the brahmin student Subha, Todeyya’s son, asked the householder in whose residence he was staying: “Householder, I have heard that Sāvatthī is not devoid of arahants.
Then the brahmin student Subha, Todeyya’s son, having delighted and rejoiced in the Blessed One’s words, rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he departed.
Then the brahmin student Subha, Todeyya’s son, went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the brahmin student Uttara thought: “The recluse Gotama is endowed with the thirty-two marks of a Great Man.
Then the brahmin student Uttara, a pupil of the brahmin Pārāsariya, went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the brahmin student Vāseṭṭha addressed the brahmin student Bhāradvāja: “Sir, the recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, is living at Icchānangala, in the wood near Icchānangala.
Then the brahmin student went to the brahmin Brahmāyu and said: “Permission has been granted by the recluse Gotama.
Then the brahmin Vassakāra, the minister of Magadha, having delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Ānanda’s words, rose from his seat and departed.
Then the brahmin Vassakāra, the minister of Magadha, said to the venerable Ānanda: “Where is Master Ānanda living now?”
Then the brahmins thought: “There is this young brahmin student named Assalāyana staying at Sāvatthī.
Then the Brahmā Sahampati thought: ‘The Blessed One has consented to my request that he teach the Dhamma.’
Then the carpenter Pañcakanga addressed a certain man thus: “Come, good man, go to the venerable Anuruddha, pay homage in my name with your head at his feet, and say: ‘Venerable sir, the carpenter Pañcakanga pays homage with his head at the venerable Anuruddha’s feet and says: “Venerable sir, let the venerable Anuruddha with three others consent to accept tomorrow’s meal from the carpenter Pañcakanga; and let the venerable Anuruddha arrive punctually as the carpenter Pañcakanga is very busy and has much work to do for the king.”’”
Then the carpenter Pañcakanga neither approved nor disapproved of the wanderer Uggāhamāna’s words.
Then the carpenter Pañcakanga went to the venerable Udāyin, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and asked him:
Then the cattle bunched together in mid-stream in the river Ganges, and they met with calamity and disaster.
Then the clansman Raṭṭhapāla received the going forth under the Blessed One, and he received the full admission.
Then the clansman Raṭṭhapāla rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, he departed, keeping him on his right.
Then the clansman Raṭṭhapāla’s friends went to him and said: “Friend Raṭṭhapāla, you are your parents’ only son, dear and beloved.
Then the clansman Raṭṭhapāla’s friends went to him and told him: “Get up, friend Raṭṭhapāla.
Then the clansman Raṭṭhapāla’s friends went to his parents and said to them: “Mother and father, the clansman Raṭṭhapāla is lying down there on the bare floor, having said: ‘Right here I shall either die or receive the going forth.’
Then the clansman Raṭṭhapāla’s parents said to him: “Dear Raṭṭhapāla, you are our only son, dear and beloved.
Then the clansman Raṭṭhapāla’s parents went to his friends and said to them: “Dears, the clansman Raṭṭhapāla has lain down on the bare floor, having said: ‘Right here I shall either die or receive the going forth.’
Then the cowherds, shepherds, ploughmen, and travellers collected grass, wood, and cowdung, and having piled it up against the venerable Sañjīva’s body, they set fire to it and went on their way.
Then the deer-hunter and his following considered thus: ‘If we scare the fourth deer herd, being scared they will alert others, and so the deer herds will all desert this bait that we have laid down.
Then the deity living in the sāla tree thought: ‘What future fear did my friends and companions, kinsmen and relatives…see in that māluva-creeper seed when they gathered together and reassured me as they did?
Then the first friend would say: ‘It is impossible, friend, it cannot happen that while standing on top of the mountain you should see lovely parks, lovely groves, lovely meadows, and lovely ponds.’
Then the fool thinks thus: ‘Because of such evil actions as those, when a robber culprit is caught, kings have many kinds of tortures inflicted on him: they have him flogged with whips…and have his head cut off with a sword.
Then the fool thinks: ‘I have not done what is good, I have not done what is wholesome, I have not made myself a shelter from anguish.
Then the friend who remained below at the foot of the mountain would say to the friend who stood on the top: ‘Well, friend, what do you see, standing on top of the mountain?’
Then the householder Dasama of Aṭṭhakanāgara assembled the Sangha of bhikkhus from Pāṭaliputta and Vesālī, and with his own hands he served and satisfied them with various kinds of good food.
Then the householder left thinking: “I agree with the gamblers.”
Then the householder or householder’s son serves him with good almsfood.
Then the householder Upāli went to the hall of the central door and sat down on the highest, best, chief, most excellent seat there.
Then the householder Upāli, having delighted and rejoiced in the Blessed One’s words, rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he left to return to his own house.
Then the householder went to those gamblers and said: “Just now, sirs, I went to the recluse Gotama, and after paying homage to him, I sat down at one side.
Then the king said: ‘Go and strike that man at noon with a hundred spears.’
Then the king said: ‘Go and strike that man in the evening with a hundred spears.’
Then the king said: ‘Go and strike this man in the morning with a hundred spears.’
Then the king’s fear, alarm, and terror subsided.
Then the king’s men went to the potter Ghaṭīkāra and told him: ‘Venerable sir, there are five hundred cartloads of red rice stored in the sheaf, and also sauce materials to go with it, dispatched to you by King Kikī of Kāsi; please accept them.’—‘The king is very busy and has much to do.
Then the lay follower Visākha went to the bhikkhunī Dhammadinnā, and after paying homage to her, he sat down at one side and asked her:
Then the lay follower Visākha, having delighted and rejoiced in the bhikkhunī Dhammadinnā’s words, rose from his seat, and after paying homage to her, keeping her on his right, he went to the Blessed One.
Then the maid Kālī thought: ‘The fact is that while my lady does not show anger, it is actually present in her, not absent; and it is just because my work is neat that my lady shows no anger though it is actually present in her, not absent.
Then the maid Kālī thought: ‘The fact is that while my lady does not show anger, it is actually present in her, not absent; and it is just because my work is neat that my lady shows no anger though it is actually present in her, not absent.
Then the man cut the woman in two and disemboweled himself, thinking: ‘We shall be together in the after-life.’
Then the matted-hair ascetic Keṇiya went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side.
Then the Nigaṇṭha Dīgha Tapassī asked the Blessed One: “And you, friend Gotama, how many kinds of rod do you describe for the performance of evil action, for the perpetration of evil action?”
Then the Nigaṇṭha Dīgha Tapassī related to the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta his entire conversation with the Blessed One.
Then the Nigaṇṭha Dīgha Tapassī went to the householder Upāli’s house.
Then the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta went with a large assembly of Nigaṇṭhas to the householder Upāli’s house.
Then the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta went with the large assembly of Nigaṇṭhas to the hall of the central door.
Then the novice Aciravata taught Prince Jayasena the Dhamma as he had heard it and mastered it.
Then the novice Cunda, who had spent the Rains at Pāvā, went to the venerable Ānanda, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and told him what was taking place.
Then the other would say: ‘Friend, just a little earlier we heard you say: “It is impossible, friend, it cannot happen that while standing on top of the mountain you should see lovely parks...lovely ponds.”
Then the potter Ghaṭīkāra went to his parents and asked: “Who has taken porridge from the vessel and sauce from the saucepan, eaten and gone away?”—“My dear, the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, did.”
Then the potter Ghaṭīkāra went to his parents and asked: “Who has taken rice from the cauldron and sauce from the saucepan, eaten and gone away?”—“My dear, the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, did.”
Then the potter Ghaṭīkāra’s parents asked the bhikkhus: “Who is removing the grass from the workshop?”—“Sister, the hut of the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, is leaking.”—“Take it, venerable sirs, take it, dear ones!”
Then the Sakyans of Cātumā went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, they sat down at one side and said:
Then the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu went to the Blessed One.
Then the second bhikkhu thought: ‘The Blessed One has eaten…had what he needed, but there is this almsfood of the Blessed One left over to be thrown away…Suppose that I eat this almsfood and pass the night and day neither hungry nor weak.’
Then the seven brahmin seers thought: ‘Our asceticism is in vain, our holy life is fruitless; for formerly when we cursed anyone thus: “Be ashes, vile one!
Then the seven brahmin seers thought: ‘Who is walking up and down in the courtyard of the seven brahmin seers like a village lout speaking thus: “Where have those worthy brahmin seers gone?
Then the spirit Dīgha Parajana went to the Blessed One.
Then the steward-treasure plunges both hands into the water and draws up a pot full of gold and bullion, and he tells the Wheel-turning Monarch: ‘Is this enough, sire?
Then the Tathāgata or his disciple taught me the Dhamma.
Then the two brahmin students, Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja, went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the venerable Anuruddha went to the venerable Nandiya and the venerable Kimbila and said: “Come out, venerable sirs, come out!
Then the venerable Anuruddha went to the venerable Nandiya and the venerable Kimbila and said: “Come out, venerable sirs, come out!
Then the venerable Bhaddāli did not present himself to the Blessed One for the whole of that three-month period, as happens with one who does not fulfil the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.
Then the venerable Bhaddāli went to those bhikkhus and exchanged greetings with them, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side.
Then the venerable Mahā Moggallāna addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Get up, friends, take your bowls and outer robes.
Then the venerable Mahā Moggallāna considered thus: “Why is my belly so heavy?
Then the venerable Mahā Moggallāna said: “Even thus I know you, Evil One.
Then the venerable Mahā Moggallāna considered thus: “This spirit is living much too negligently.
Then the venerable Mahā Moggallāna delighted and rejoiced in the words of Sakka, ruler of gods.
Then the venerable Mahā Moggallāna performed such a feat of supernormal power that with his toe he made the Vejayanta Palace shake and quake and tremble.
Then the venerable Mahā Moggallāna went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and asked him: “Venerable sir, does the Blessed One recall stating in brief—to a certain one of the renowned spirits with a great following—deliverance in the destruction of craving?”
Then the venerable Mahā Moggallāna, the venerable Mahā Kassapa, and the venerable Anuruddha went to the venerable Sāriputta to listen to the Dhamma.
Then the venerable Pukkusāti, having delighted and rejoiced in the Blessed One’s words, rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he departed in order to search for a bowl and robes.
Then the venerable Puṇṇa Mantāṇiputta entered the Blind Men’s Grove and sat down for the day’s abiding at the root of a tree.
Then the venerable Puṇṇa Mantāṇiputta set his resting place in order, and taking his outer robe and bowl, set out to wander by stages to Sāvatthī.
Then the venerable Puṇṇa Mantāṇiputta, instructed, urged, roused, and gladdened by the Blessed One’s talk on the Dhamma, delighting and rejoicing in the Blessed One’s words, rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he went to the Blind Men’s Grove for the day’s abiding.
Then the venerable Rāhula considered thus: “Who would go into the town for alms today when personally admonished by the Blessed One?”
Then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, he departed, keeping him on his right.
Then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla told his father: “Householder, if there is a meal to be given, then give it.
Then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and told him: “Venerable sir, I wish to visit my parents, if I have the Blessed One’s permission.”
Then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s former wives clasped his feet and said to him: “What are they like, my lord’s son, the nymphs for whose sake you lead the holy life?”
Then the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s mother went to his father and said: “Please know, householder, they say that the clansman Raṭṭhapāla has arrived.”
Then the venerable Sāriputta and the venerable Mahā Cunda went to the venerable Channa and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the venerable Sāriputta dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, he went to the residence of the brahmin Dhānañjāni, sat down on a seat made ready, and said to the brahmin Dhānañjāni: “I hope you are getting well, brahmin, I hope you are comfortable.
Then the venerable Sāriputta dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went to the residence of the householder Anāthapiṇḍika with the venerable Ānanda as his attendant.
Then the venerable Sāriputta thought: “These brahmins are devoted to the Brahma-world.
Then the venerable Sāriputta went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, the venerable Channa has used the knife.
Then the venerable Sāriputta went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said: “Venerable sir, the brahmin Dhānañjāni is afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill; he pays homage with his head at the Blessed One’s feet.”
Then the venerable Sāriputta, having established the brahmin Dhānañjāni in the inferior Brahma-world, rose from his seat and departed while there was still more to be done.
Then the venerable Sela together with his assembly went to the Blessed One.
Then the venerable Sāriputta addressed those venerable ones thus: “Friends, we have all spoken according to our own inspiration.
Then the venerable Sāriputta hurriedly took his sitting cloth and followed close behind the venerable Puṇṇa Mantāṇiputta, keeping his head in sight.
Then the venerable Udena said to him: “There are seats, brahmin, sit down if you wish.”
Then the venerable Vacchagotta, having delighted and rejoiced in the Blessed One’s words, rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he departed.
Then the venerable Ānanda addressed Mahānāma the Sakyan thus:
Then the venerable Ānanda and the novice Cunda went together to the Blessed One.
Then the venerable Ānanda and the venerable Samiddhi went together to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, they sat down at one side.
Then the venerable Ānanda asked him: “Are you foundering, householder, are you sinking?”
Then the venerable Ānanda folded his patchwork cloak in four, and spreading it out, said to the Blessed One: “Then, venerable sir, let the Blessed One be seated.
Then the venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, let the Blessed One accept the new pair of cloths from Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī.
Then the venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, the brahmin Rammaka’s hermitage is nearby.
Then the venerable Ānanda thought: “It is still too early to wander for alms in Rājagaha.
Then the venerable Ānanda thought: “This General Viḍūḍabha is the son of King Pasenadi of Kosala, and I am the son of the Blessed One.
Then the venerable Ānanda went to the Devakaṭa Pool together with a number of bhikkhus.
Then the wanderer Dīghanakha went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the wanderer Māgandiya received the going forth under the Blessed One, and he received the full admission.
Then the wanderer Māgandiya, while walking and wandering for exercise, went to the fire chamber of the brahmin belonging to the Bhāradvāja clan.
Then the wanderer Potaliputta, while wandering and walking for exercise, went to the venerable Samiddhi and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the wanderer Sakuludāyin quieted those wanderers and asked the Blessed One:
Then the wanderer Sakuludāyin saw the Blessed One coming in the distance.
Then the wanderer Sandaka addressed his own assembly: “Go, sirs.
Then the wanderer Sandaka saw the venerable Ānanda coming in the distance.
Then the wanderer Vacchagotta received the going forth under the Blessed One, and he received the full admission.
Then the wanderer Vacchagotta went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the wanderer Vacchagotta went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the wanderer Vekhanassa went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Then the wanderers became silent.
Then the wanderers became silent.
Then the wanderers became silent.
Then the wardens of hell prise open his mouth with red-hot iron tongs, burning, blazing, and glowing, and they pour into his mouth molten copper, burning, blazing, and glowing.
Then the wardens of hell prise open his mouth with red-hot iron tongs, burning, blazing, and glowing, and they throw into his mouth a red-hot metal ball, burning, blazing, and glowing.
Then the wheel-treasure plunges into the southern ocean and emerges again.
Then the wheel-treasure plunges into the western ocean and emerges again.
Then the wise man thinks: ‘I have not done what is evil, I have not done what is cruel, I have not done what is wicked.
Then the woman said to her husband: ‘Lord, these relatives of mine want to divorce me from you and give me to another whom I do not want.’
Then the young god Anāthapiṇḍika, thinking: “The Teacher has approved of me,” paid homage to the Blessed One, and keeping him on his right, he vanished at once.
Then the young god, thinking: ‘The Teacher has approved of me,’ paid homage to me, and keeping me on his right, he vanished at once.”
Then the Ājīvaka Paṇḍuputta, son of a former cartwright, was glad and he voiced his gladness thus: ‘He planes just as if he knew my heart with his heart!’
Then there was an occasion when the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: ‘Bhikkhus, please abandon that daytime meal, which is outside the proper time.’
Then there was an occasion when the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: ‘Bhikkhus, please abandon that night meal, which is outside the proper time.’
Then these bhikkhus, desiring to detach him from that pernicious view, pressed and questioned and cross-questioned him thus: “Friend Ariṭṭha, do not say so.
Then these two inspectors, Isidatta and Purāṇa, after spending much of the night in talk on the Dhamma, lay down with their heads in the direction where they had heard that the Blessed One was staying and with their feet towards me.
Then they asked him a further question: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view, whose view is straight, who has unwavering confidence in the Dhamma, and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—“There might be, friends.
Then they asked him a further question: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”— “There might be, friends.
Then they asked him a further question: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—“There might be, friends.
Then they asked him a further question: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—“There might be, friends.
Then they asked him a further question: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—“There might be, friends.
Then they asked him a further question: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—“There might be, friends.
Then they asked him a further question: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—“There might be, friends.
Then they asked him a further question: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—“There might be, friends.
Then they asked him a further question: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—“There might be, friends.
Then they asked him a further question: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—“There might be, friends.
Then they asked him a further question: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—“There might be, friends.
Then they asked him a further question: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—“There might be, friends.
Then they asked him a further question: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—“There might be, friends.
Then they asked him a further question: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—“There might be, friends.
Then they asked him a further question: “But, friend, might there be another way in which a noble disciple is one of right view…and has arrived at this true Dhamma?”—“There might be, friends.
Then they considered: “The venerable Mahā Kaccāna is praised by the Teacher and esteemed by his wise companions in the holy life.
Then they considered: “The venerable Mahā Kaccāna is praised by the Teacher and esteemed by his wise companions in the holy life.
Then they considered: “The venerable Mahā Kaccāna is praised by the Teacher and esteemed by his wise companions in the holy life.
Then they thought: “It is still too early to wander for alms in Sāvatthī.
Then they went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, they sat down at one side and told the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, the venerable Vacchagotta pays homage with his head at the Blessed One’s feet, and he says: ‘The Blessed One has been worshipped by me, the Sublime One has been worshipped by me.’”
Then they went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, they stood at one side and said:
Then they went to the brahmin Cankī and asked him: “Sir, is it true that you are going to see the recluse Gotama?”
Then they would ask him: ‘Good man, that most beautiful girl in this country with whom you are in love—do you know her name and clan?…Whether she is tall or short or of middle height?…Whether she is dark or brown or golden-skinned?
Then they would ask him: ‘Good man, that most beautiful girl in this country with whom you are in love—do you know whether she is from the noble class or the brahmin class or the merchant class or the worker class?’ and he would reply: ‘No.’
Then this agitation would be agitation due to clinging.
Then this thought arose in the Ājīvaka Paṇḍuputta’s mind: ‘Oh that this Samīti the cartwright’s son might plane this bend, this twist, this fault, out of the felloe so that it would be without bends, twists, or faults, and come to consist purely of heartwood.’
Then those bhikkhus neither approved nor disapproved of the wanderers’ words.
Then those bhikkhus, desiring to detach him from that pernicious view, pressed and questioned and cross-questioned him thus: “Friend Sāti, do not say so.
Then those brahmins thought: “This recluse Gotama describes purification for all the four castes.
Then those three venerable ones paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side, and the Blessed One said to them: “I hope you are all keeping well, Anuruddha, I hope you are comfortable, I hope you are not having any trouble getting almsfood.” 
Then those three venerable ones paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side.
Then those venerable ones went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, they sat down at one side.
Then two bhikkhus arrived hungry and weak, and I told them: ‘Bhikkhus, I have eaten…had what I needed, but there is this almsfood of mine left over to be thrown away.
Then two strong men would seize him by both arms and drag him towards a burning charcoal pit.
Then what do you think about me?”
Then whatever kind of ornament he wished to make from it, whether a golden chain or earrings or a necklace or a golden garland, it would serve his purpose.
Then when the venerable Sāriputta and the venerable Mahā Cunda had advised the venerable Channa thus, they rose from their seats and went away.
Then whichever bhikkhu you think is the most reasonable of those who side together on the one part should be approached and addressed thus: ‘While we were training in concord, friend, with mutual appreciation, without disputing, there arose mutual verbal friction, insolence in views, mental annoyance, bitterness, and dejection.
Then whichever bhikkhu you think is the most reasonable of those who side together on the opposite part should be approached and addressed thus: ‘The venerable ones agree about both the meaning and the phrasing.
Then whichever bhikkhu you think is the most reasonable of those who side together on the opposite part should be approached and addressed thus: ‘The venerable ones agree about the meaning but differ about the phrasing.
Then whichever bhikkhu you think is the most reasonable of those who side together on the opposite part should be approached and addressed thus: ‘The venerable ones differ about the meaning and the phrasing.
Then whichever bhikkhu you think is the most reasonable of those who side together on the opposite part should be approached and addressed thus: ‘The venerable ones differ about the meaning but agree about the phrasing.
Then with that regular donation and another regular donation, the brahmin Ghoṭamukha had an assembly hall built for the Sangha at Pāṭaliputta.
Then you told him: ‘Now, good man, this road goes to Rājagaha.
Then you told him: ‘Now, good man, this road goes to Rājagaha.
Then, after giving the householder Anāthapiṇḍika this advice, the venerable Sāriputta and the venerable Ānanda rose from their seats and departed.
Then, after he has gone forth thus, his companions in the holy life advise and instruct him thus: ‘This can be consumed by you, this cannot be consumed by you; this can be eaten by you, this cannot be eaten by you; this can be tasted by you, this cannot be tasted by you; this can be drunk by you, this cannot be drunk by you.
Then, after he has gone forth thus, his companions in the holy life advise and instruct him thus: ‘You should move to and fro thus; you should look ahead and look away thus; you should flex and extend the limbs thus; you should wear the patched cloak, bowl, and robes thus.’
Then, after he has gone forth thus, when it is morning he dresses, and taking his bowl and outer robe, he goes into a village or town for alms with his body unguarded, with his speech unguarded, with mindfulness unestablished, and with sense faculties unrestrained.
Then, after he has gone forth thus, when it is morning he dresses, and taking his bowl and outer robe, he goes into a village or town for alms with his body unguarded, with his speech unguarded, with mindfulness unestablished, and with sense faculties unrestrained.
Then, after wandering by stages in the Kosalan country, the Blessed One eventually arrived at Caṇḍalakappa.
Then, as Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son was walking and wandering for exercise, he came to the Hall with the Peaked Roof in the Great Wood.
Then, as the Blessed One was wandering by stages in the Kāsi country, he eventually arrived at a Kāsi town called Kīṭāgiri.
Then, at the end of nine or ten months, the mother gives birth with much anxiety, as a heavy burden.
Then, being moistened by rain from a rain-bearing cloud, the seed in due course sprouted and the māluva creeper’s tender soft downy tendril wound itself around that sāla tree.
Then, both because he does what is suitable and because no trace was left behind when the foul poisonous humour was expelled, the wound would heal, and because it had healed and was covered with skin, he would not incur death or deadly suffering.
Then, both because he does what is unsuitable and because a trace was left behind when the foul poisonous humour was expelled, the wound would swell, and with its swelling he would incur death or deadly suffering.
Then, delighting and rejoicing in the Blessed One’s words, the brahmin Nāḷijangha rose from his seat, went to Queen Mallikā, and reported to her his entire conversation with the Blessed One.
Then, displeased with the Blessed One’s words, disapproving of them, the householder rose from his seat and left.
Then, displeased with the recluse Gotama’s words, disapproving of them, I rose from my seat and left.”
Then, during that Rains, the venerable Puṇṇa established five hundred men lay followers and five hundred women lay followers in the practice, and he himself realised the three true knowledges.
Then, Evil One, the wardens of hell came up to me and said: ‘Good sir, when stake meets stake in your heart, then you will know: “I have been roasting in hell for a thousand years.”’
Then, following on that memory, came the realisation: ‘That is indeed the path to enlightenment.’
Then, for a week, with his own hands, the brahmin Brahmāyu served and satisfied the Sangha of bhikkhus headed by the Buddha with various kinds of good food.
Then, having assented to the householder, the brahmin student Subha, Todeyya’s son, went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
Then, having been instructed, urged, roused, and gladdened by the Blessed One with a talk on the Dhamma, the matted-hair ascetic Keṇiya said to the Blessed One: “Let Master Gotama together with the Sangha of bhikkhus consent to accept tomorrow’s meal from me.”
Then, having been thus advised and instructed by you, he would arrive safely in Rājagaha.
Then, having been thus advised and instructed by you, he would take a wrong road and would go to the west.
Then, having declared to the novice Aciravata that this was impossible and could not happen, Prince Jayasena rose from his seat and departed.
Then, having delighted and rejoiced in the Blessed One’s words, the venerable Puṇṇa rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, departed keeping him on his right.
Then, having done so, we shall eat food not unwarily and without going right in amongst the bait that Māra has laid down and the material things of the world.
Then, having done so, we shall eat food not unwarily and without going right in amongst the bait that Māra has laid down and the material things of the world.
Then, having done so, we shall eat food not unwarily and without going right in amongst the bait that the deer-trapper has laid down; by doing so we shall not become intoxicated; when we are not intoxicated, we shall not fall into negligence; when we are not negligent, the deer-trapper shall not do with us as he likes on account of that bait.’
Then, having done so, we shall eat food not unwarily and without going right in amongst the bait that the deer-trapper has laid down; by doing so we shall not become intoxicated; when we are not intoxicated, we shall not fall into negligence; when we are not negligent, the deer-trapper shall not do with us as he likes on account of that bait.’
Then, having met together, the guideline of the Dhamma should be drawn out.
Then, having met together, the guideline of the Dhamma should be drawn out.
Then, having stayed in the Southern Hills as long as he chose, the venerable S̄riputta set out to wander towards Rājagaha.
Then, having uttered these stanzas while standing, the Blessed One went to the village of Bālakaloṇakāra.
Then, if he made an aspiration and acted thus, he would be able to procure oil; if he made no aspiration and acted thus, he would still be able to procure oil; if he both made an aspiration and made no aspiration and acted thus, he would still be able to procure oil; if he neither made an aspiration nor made no aspiration and acted thus, he would still be able to procure oil.
Then, if he made an aspiration and acted thus, he would be unable to procure any oil; if he made no aspiration and acted thus, he would still be unable to procure any oil; if he both made an aspiration and made no aspiration and acted thus, he would still be unable to procure any oil; if he neither made an aspiration nor made no aspiration and acted thus, he would still be unable to procure any oil.
Then, if he made an aspiration… if he made no aspiration…if he both made an aspiration and made no aspiration…if he neither made an aspiration nor made no aspiration and acted thus, he would still be able to procure fire.
Then, if he made an aspiration…if he made no aspiration…if he both made an aspiration and made no aspiration…if he neither made an aspiration nor made no aspiration and acted thus, he would still be able to procure butter.
Then, if he made an aspiration…if he made no aspiration…if he both made an aspiration and made no aspiration…if he neither made an aspiration nor made no aspiration and acted thus, he would still be able to procure milk.
Then, if he made an aspiration…if he made no aspiration…if he both made an aspiration and made no aspiration…if he neither made an aspiration nor made no aspiration and acted thus, he would still be unable to procure any butter.
Then, if he made an aspiration…if he made no aspiration…if he both made an aspiration and made no aspiration…if he neither made an aspiration nor made no aspiration and acted thus, he would still be unable to procure any fire.
Then, if he made an aspiration…if he made no aspiration…if he both made an aspiration and made no aspiration…if he neither made an aspiration nor made no aspiration and acted thus, he would still be unable to procure any milk.
Then, in the course of his wandering, the Blessed One eventually arrived at Mithilā.
Then, in the evening, the Blessed One rose from meditation and went to the assembly hall.
Then, in the mind of a certain bhikkhu this thought arose: “So, it seems, material form is not self, feeling is not self, perception is not self, formations are not self, consciousness is not self.
Then, in the morning, the venerable Nandaka dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Sāvatthī for alms.
Then, it being morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, he went with the Sangha of bhikkhus to the brahmin Brahmāyu’s residence and sat down on the seat made ready.
Then, it being morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, he went with the Sangha of bhikkhus to the hermitage of the matted-hair ascetic Keṇiya and sat down on the seat made ready.
Then, it being morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, he went with the Sangha of bhikkhus to the park of Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son and sat down on the seat made ready.
Then, it being morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went to Prince Bodhi’s residence.
Then, it being morning, the venerable Raṭṭhapāla dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, he went to his own father’s house and sat down on the seat made ready.
Then, just as quickly as a strong man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended arm, he vanished from among the gods of the Thirty-three and appeared in the Eastern Park in the Palace of Migāra’s Mother.
Then, just as quickly as a strong man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended arm, Sakka, ruler of gods, vanished among the gods of the Thirty-three and appeared in the presence of King Nimi.
Then, just as quickly as a strong man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended arm, Sakka, ruler of gods, vanished in the presence of King Nimi and appeared among the gods of the Thirty-three.
Then, just as quickly as a strong man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended arm, the Brahmā Sahampati vanished in the Brahma-world and appeared before me.
Then, just as quickly as a strong man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended arm, the venerable Mahā Moggallāna vanished from the Palace of Migāra’s Mother in the Eastern Park and appeared among the gods of the Thirty-three.
Then, knowing that the Blessed One had consented, Prince Abhaya rose from his seat, and after paying homage to him, keeping him on his right, he departed.
Then, knowing that the Blessed One had consented, Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son addressed the Licchavis: “Hear me, Licchavis.
Then, knowing that the Blessed One had consented, Sañjikāputta rose from his seat, went to Prince Bodhi, and told him what had happened, adding: “The recluse Gotama has consented.”
Then, knowing that the Blessed One had consented, the brahmin Brahmāyu rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he departed.
Then, knowing that the Blessed One had consented, the matted-hair ascetic Keṇiya rose from his seat and went to his own hermitage where he addressed his friends and companions, his kinsmen and relatives thus: “Hear me, sirs, my friends and companions, my kinsmen and relatives.
Then, knowing that the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, had accepted, he rose from his seat and after paying homage to him, keeping him on his right, he departed.
Then, knowing that the venerable Raṭṭhapāla had consented, his father went back to his own house where he had gold coins and bullion made into a large heap and covered it with mats.
Then, knowing this, the Blessed One addressed the venerable Ānanda: “Ānanda, the brahmin Pārāsariya teaches his disciples the development of the faculties in one way, but in the Noble One’s Discipline the supreme development of the faculties is otherwise.” 
Then, knowing this, the Blessed One told him: “Misguided man, you will be recognised by your own pernicious view.
Then, knowing this, the Blessed One told him: “Misguided man, you will be recognised by your own pernicious view.
Then, knowing with his own mind the thought in the brahmin student Kāpaṭhika’s mind, the Blessed One turned his eye towards him.
Then, leaving Sāvatthī through the inner palace door, I mounted the first relay chariot, and by means of the first relay chariot I arrived at the second relay chariot; then I dismounted from the first chariot and mounted the second chariot, and by means of the second chariot I arrived at the third…fourth…fifth…sixth…seventh chariot, and by means of the seventh chariot I arrived at the inner palace door in Sāketa.’
Then, neither approving nor disapproving of the venerable Samiddhi’s words, the wanderer Potaliputta rose from his seat and departed.
Then, not long after their full admission, dwelling alone, withdrawn, diligent, ardent, and resolute, the venerable Sela and his assembly, by realising for themselves with direct knowledge, here and now entered upon and abided in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness.
Then, not receiving his parents’ permission to go forth, the clansman Raṭṭhapāla lay down there on the bare floor, saying: “Right here I shall either die or receive the going forth.” 
Then, on a later occasion, the venerable Bakkula took a key and went from dwelling to dwelling, saying: “Come forth, venerable sirs; come forth, venerable sirs.
Then, raising the lid and uncovering it, they looked in, and as soon as they saw they were inspired with such loathing, repugnance, and disgust that even those who were hungry would not want to eat, not to speak of those who were full.
Then, referring to those clansmen, he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus, those clansmen who have gone forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness under me—do they delight in the holy life?”
Then, saying: “Give away all the food that has been prepared there,” King Koravya had a number of state carriages prepared, and mounting one of them, accompanied by the other carriages, he drove out from Thullakoṭṭhita with the full pomp of royalty to see the venerable Raṭṭhapāla.
Then, seated in the midst of the Sangha of bhikkhus, the venerable Bakkula attained final Nibb̄na.
Then, since his mind was bound to her with love, he went to the market, bought a young male monkey, brought it back, and told her: ‘I have bought this young male monkey in the market and brought it back to you as a playmate for your child.’
Then, since the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta was unable to bear this honour done to the Blessed One, hot blood then and there gushed from his mouth.
Then, sitting on his heels, he should raise his hands palms together and say: ‘Venerable sir, I have committed such and such an offence; I confess it.’
Then, soon after he had left, the brahmin Gopaka Moggallāna said to the venerable Ānanda: “Master Ānanda has not yet answered what we asked him.”
Then, soon after the Blessed One had gone, the bhikkhus considered: “Now, friends, the Blessed One has risen from his seat and gone into his dwelling after giving a summary in brief without expounding the detailed meaning.
Then, soon after the Blessed One had gone, the bhikkhus considered: “Now, friends, the Blessed One has risen from his seat and gone into his dwelling after giving a summary in brief without expounding the detailed meaning.
Then, soon after the Blessed One had gone, the bhikkhus considered: “Now, friends, the Blessed One has risen from his seat and gone into his dwelling after giving a summary in brief without expounding the detailed meaning.
Then, soon after the Blessed One had gone, the venerable Sāriputta addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Friends, bhikkhus.”—“Friend,” the bhikkhus replied to the venerable Sāriputta.
Then, soon after the venerable Mahā Moggallāna had gone, the attendants of Sakka, ruler of gods, asked him: “Good sir, was that your teacher, the Blessed One?”—“No, good sirs, that was not my teacher, the Blessed One.
Then, soon after they had gone, the venerable Channa used the knife.
Then, surveying the silent Sangha of bhikkhus, he addressed them thus:
Then, surveying the silent Sangha of bhikkhus, he addressed them thus:
Then, surveying the silent Sangha of bhikkhus, he addressed them thus:
Then, taking a small stone the size of his hand, the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: “What do you think, bhikkhus?
Then, taking a small stone the size of his hand, the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: “What do you think, bhikkhus?
Then, the next morning, the venerable Nandaka dressed...
Then, when he had come to the inner palace door, his friends and acquaintances, his kinsmen and relatives, would ask him: ‘Sire, did you come from Sāvatthī to the inner palace door in Sāketa by means of this relay chariot?’
Then, when he had finished his breakfast, King Pasenadi of Kosala went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and delivered the message of the sisters Somā and Sakulā.
Then, when he had got across and had arrived at the far shore, he might think thus: ‘This raft has been very helpful to me, since supported by it and making an effort with my hands and feet, I got safely across to the far shore.
Then, when it was evening, the Blessed One rose from meditation and addressed the venerable Ānanda: “Ānanda, let us go to the Eastern Bathing Place to bathe.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” the venerable Ānanda replied.
Then, when it was evening, the Blessed One rose from meditation and went to Nigrodha’s Park, where he sat down on a seat made ready for him and told the bhikkhus what had taken place.
Then, when it was evening, the Blessed One rose from meditation and went to the Park of the Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood.
Then, when it was evening, the Blessed One rose from meditation and went to the venerable Rāhula at Ambalaṭṭhikā.
Then, when it was evening, the Blessed One rose from meditation, went to the brahmin’s fire chamber, and sat down on the spread of grass made ready.
Then, when it was evening, the Blessed One rose from retreat and went to Ghāṭā the Sakyan’s dwelling.
Then, when it was evening, the venerable Mahā Cunda rose from meditation and went to the Blessed One.
Then, when it was evening, the venerable Mahā Koṭṭhita rose from meditation, went to the venerable Sāriputta, and exchanged greetings with him.
Then, when it was evening, the venerable Mahā Moggallāna rose from meditation, went to the venerable Mahā Kassapa, and said to him: “Friend Kassapa, let us go to the venerable Sāriputta to listen to the Dhamma.”—“Yes, friend,” the venerable Mahā Kassapa replied.
Then, when it was evening, the venerable Mālunkyāputta rose from meditation and went to the Blessed One.
Then, when it was evening, the venerable Puṇṇa rose from meditation and went to the Blessed One.
Then, when it was evening, the venerable Rāhula rose from meditation and went to the Blessed One.
Then, when it was evening, the venerable Sāriputta rose from meditation and went to the Blessed One.
Then, when it was evening, the venerable Sāriputta rose from meditation, went to the venerable Mahā Cunda, and said to him: “Friend Cunda, let us go to the venerable Channa and ask about his illness.”—“Yes, friend,” the venerable Mahā Cunda replied.
Then, when it was evening, the venerable Sāriputta rose from meditation, went to the venerable Puṇṇa Mantāṇiputta, and exchanged greetings with him.
Then, when it was evening, the venerable Udāyin rose from meditation, went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and told him:
Then, when it was evening, the venerable Ānanda rose from meditation and addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Come, friends, let us go to the Devakaṭa Pool to see the cave.”—“Yes, friend,” those bhikkhus replied.
Then, when it was evening, the venerable Ānanda rose from meditation, went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said to the Blessed One:
Then, when it was morning, a number of bhikkhus dressed, and taking their bowls and outer robes, went into Sāvatthī for alms.
Then, when it was morning, he dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Thullakoṭṭhita for alms.
Then, when it was morning, I dressed, and taking my bowl and outer robe, I went into Rājagaha for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, entered Kosambī for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Kammāsadhamma for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Kapilavatthu for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Kapilavatthu for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Rājagaha for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Sāvatthī for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Sāvatthī for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Sāvatthī for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Sāvatthī for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Vesālī for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Āpaṇa for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Āpaṇa for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went to Rājagaha for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the venerable Angulimāla dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Sāvatthī for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the venerable Angulimāla dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Sāvatthī for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the venerable Assaji dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Vesālī for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the venerable Bhūmija dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went to the house of Prince Jayasena and sat down on a seat made ready.
Then, when it was morning, the venerable Sāriputta dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Vesālī for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the venerable S̄riputta dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Rājagaha for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the venerable Ānanda dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Rājagaha for alms.
Then, when it was morning, the venerable Ānanda dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Sāvatthī for alms.
Then, when it was near dawn, the venerable Samiddhi went to the hot springs to bathe his limbs.
Then, when the Blessed One had instructed, urged, roused, and gladdened the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu with talk on the Dhamma for much of the night, he said to the venerable Ānanda:
Then, when the Blessed One had instructed, urged, roused, and gladdened the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Nandiya, and the venerable Kimbila with a talk on the Dhamma, he rose from his seat and departed.
Then, when the Blessed One had stayed at Rājagaha as long as he chose, he set out to wander by stages to Sāvatthī.
Then, when the Blessed One had wandered for alms in Sāvatthī and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he addressed the venerable Ānanda: “Ānanda, let us go to the Eastern Park, to the Palace of Migāra’s Mother, for the day’s abiding.”—“Yes, venerable sir,” the venerable Ānanda” replied.
Then, when the child is born, she nourishes it with her own blood; for the mother’s breast-milk is called blood in the Noble One’s Discipline.
Then, when the Māra Dūsī had taken possession of the brahmin householders, they abused, reviled, scolded, and harassed the virtuous bhikkhus of good character thus: ‘These bald-pated recluses, these swarthy menial offspring of the Kinsman’s feet, claim: “We are meditators, we are meditators!” and with shoulders drooping, heads down and all limp, they meditate, premeditate, out-meditate, and mismeditate.
Then, when the Māra Dūsī had taken possession of the brahmin householders, they honoured, respected, revered, and venerated the virtuous bhikkhus of good character.
Then, when the Nigaṇṭha Dīgha Tapassī had wandered for alms in Nāḷandā and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he went to Pāvārika’s Mango Grove to see the Blessed One.
Then, when the night had ended, it being morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, he went to Prince Abhaya’s house and sat down on the seat made ready.
Then, when the night had ended, it being morning, the venerable Anuruddha dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, he went to the carpenter Pañcakanga’s house and sat down on a seat made ready.
Then, when the night had ended, Prince Bodhi had good food of various kinds prepared in his own residence, and he had the Kokanada Palace spread with white cloth down to the last step of the staircase.
Then, when the night had ended, the brahmin Brahmāyu had good food of various kinds prepared in his residence, and he had the time announced to the Blessed One: “It is time, Master Gotama, the meal is ready.” 
Then, when the night had ended, the Licchavis brought five hundred ceremonial dishes of milk rice as gifts of food.
Then, when the night had ended, the matted-hair ascetic Keṇiya had good food of various kinds prepared in his own hermitage and had the time announced to the Blessed One: “It is time, Master Gotama, the meal is ready.”
Then, when the night was over, the venerable Kumāra Kassapa went to the Blessed One.
Then, when the night was over, the venerable Lomasakangiya set his resting place in order, and taking his bowl and outer robe, set out to wander by stages to Sāvatthī.
Then, when the night was over, the venerable Samiddhi went to the Blessed One.
Then, when the night was well advanced, a certain deity of beautiful appearance who illuminated the whole of the Blind Men’s Grove approached the venerable Kumāra Kassapa and stood at one side.
Then, when the night was well advanced, a certain deity of beautiful appearance who illuminated the whole of the Hot Springs, approached the venerable Samiddhi.
Then, when the night was well advanced, Anāthapiṇḍika, now a young god of beautiful appearance, went to the Blessed One, illuminating the whole of Jeta’s Grove.
Then, when the night was well advanced, Candana, a young deity of beautiful appearance who illuminated the whole of Nigrodha’s Park, approached the venerable Lomasakangiya.
Then, when the venerable Anuruddha had eaten and had put his bowl aside, the carpenter Pañcakanga took a low seat, sat down at one side, and said to the venerable Anuruddha:
Then, when the venerable Bhūmija had returned from his almsround after his meal, he went to the Blessed One.
Then, when they saw that he had consented, they got up from their seats, and after paying homage to him, keeping him on their right, they went to the assembly hall.
Then, when this training precept was being made known by the Blessed One, when the Sangha of bhikkhus was undertaking the training, the venerable Bhaddāli declared his refusal.
Then, while the Blessed One was alone in meditation, a thought arose in his mind thus: “The states that ripen in deliverance have ripened in Rāhula.
Then, while the brahmin students Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja were walking and wandering for exercise, this discussion arose between them: “How is one a brahmin?”
Then, while the meal was being served, the sisters Somā and Sakulā came to me and said: ‘Sire, pay homage in our names with your head at the Blessed One’s feet, and ask whether he is free from illness…and abiding in comfort.’”
Then, while the meal was being served, the two sisters went to the king and said: “Sire, pay homage in our name with your head at the Blessed One’s feet, and ask whether he is free from illness…and abiding in comfort, saying: ‘Venerable sir, the sisters Somā and Sakulā pay homage with their heads at the Blessed One’s feet, and they ask whether he is free from illness…and abiding in comfort.’”
Then, while the venerable Angulimāla was alone in retreat experiencing the bliss of deliverance, he uttered this exclamation: 
Then, while the venerable Mālunkyāputta was alone in meditation, the following thought arose in his mind:
Then, while the venerable Pukkusāti was searching for a bowl and robes, a stray cow killed him.
Then, while the venerable Udāyin was alone in meditation, the following thought arose in his mind: “How many painful states has the Blessed One rid us of!
Then, while walking up and down the courtyard of the seven brahmin seers, the seer Devala the Dark spoke thus: ‘Where have those worthy brahmin seers gone?
Then, with blood running from his cut head, with his bowl broken, and with his outer robe torn, the venerable Angulimāla went to the Blessed One.
Then, with his own hands, King Kikī of Kāsi served and satisfied the Sangha of bhikkhus headed by the Buddha with the various kinds of good food.
Then, with his own hands, Prince Abhaya served and satisfied the Blessed One with various kinds of good food.
Then, with his own hands, Prince Bodhi served and satisfied the Sangha of bhikkhus headed by the Buddha with the various kinds of good food.
Then, with his own hands, Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son served and satisfied the Sangha of bhikkhus headed by the Buddha with the various kinds of good food.
Then, with his own hands, the carpenter Pañcakanga served and satisfied the venerable Anuruddha with the various kinds of good food.
Then, with his own hands, the matted-hair ascetic Keṇiya served and satisfied the Sangha of bhikkhus headed by the Buddha with various kinds of good food.
Then, with his own hands, the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s father served and satisfied him with the various kinds of good food.
There are beings with little dust in their eyes who are wasting through not hearing the Dhamma.
There are clansmen with little dust in their eyes who are wasting away through not hearing the Dhamma.
There are dark and light forms, and those who see dark and light forms…there are the stars and the sun and moon, and those who see the stars and the sun and moon.
There are eye-consciousness, ear-consciousness, nose-consciousness, tongue-consciousness, body-consciousness, and mind-consciousness.
There are eye-contact, ear-contact, nose-contact, tongue-contact, body-contact, and mind-contact.
There are five things, Bhāradvāja, that may turn out in two different ways here and now.
There are four kinds of nutriment for the maintenance of beings that already have come to be and for the support of those about to come to be.
There are four kinds of verbal conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
There are four kinds of verbal conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.
There are gods and denizens of hell and certain human beings and some beings in the lower worlds; this is called spontaneous generation.
There are mansions aeon-lasting, Sapphire-shining, fiery-gleaming
There are no flavours cognizable by the tongue there of a kind that they could taste and delight in.
There are no odours cognizable by the nose there of a kind that they could smell and delight in.
There are no sounds cognizable by the ear there of a kind that they could listen to and delight in.
There are no tangibles cognizable by the body there of a kind that they could touch and delight in.
There are other states, Udāyin, higher and more sublime and it is for the sake of realising them that bhikkhus lead the holy life under me.” 
There are plenty of elephant troops there, plenty of cavalry, chariot troops and infantry; there is plenty of ivory there, and plenty of gold coins and bullion both unworked and worked, and plenty of women for wives.
There are six kinds of equanimity based on the household life and six kinds of equanimity based on renunciation.
There are six kinds of grief based on the household life and six kinds of grief based on renunciation.
There are six kinds of joy based on the household life and six kinds of joy based on renunciation.
There are some recluses and brahmins who are traditionalists, who on the basis of oral tradition claim the fundamentals of the holy life after having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge here and now; such are the brahmins of the Three Vedas.
There are some recluses and brahmins who, entirely on the basis of mere faith, claim the fundamentals of the holy life after having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge here and now; such are the reasoners and investigators.
There are some recluses and brahmins who, having directly known the Dhamma for themselves among things not heard before, claim the fundamentals of the holy life after having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge here and now.
There are some recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this: ‘Nothing is acceptable to me.’
There are some that tame with beatings, Some with goads and some with whips;
There are taints that should be abandoned by avoiding.
There are taints that should be abandoned by developing.
There are taints that should be abandoned by enduring.
There are taints that should be abandoned by removing.
There are taints that should be abandoned by restraining.
There are taints that should be abandoned by using.
There are the base of eye-contact, the base of ear-contact, the base of nose-contact, the base of tongue-contact, the base of body-contact, and the base of mind-contact.
There are the earth element, the water element, the fire element, the air element, the space element, and the consciousness element.
There are the eye-base, the ear-base, the nose-base, the tongue-base, the body-base, and the mind-base.
There are the eye-base, the ear-base, the nose-base, the tongue-base, the body-base, and the mind-base.
There are the form-base, the sound-base, the odour-base, the flavour-base, the tangible-base, and the mind-object-base.
There are the form-base, the sound-base, the odour-base, the flavour-base, the tangible-base, and the mind-object-base.
There are the foundation of wisdom, the foundation of truth, the foundation of relinquishment, and the foundation of peace.
There are these beings born by breaking out from the caul; this is called womb-born generation.
There are these beings born by breaking out of the shell of an egg; this is called egg-born generation.
There are these beings born in a rotten fish, in a rotten corpse, in rotten porridge, in a cesspit, or in a sewer; this is called moisture-born generation.
There are these four castes, venerable sir: the nobles, the brahmins, the merchants, and the workers.
There are these four kinds of clinging: clinging to sensual pleasures, clinging to views, clinging to rules and observances, and clinging to a doctrine of self.
There are these fourteen hundred thousand principal kinds of generation, and sixty hundred kinds, and six hundred kinds; there are five hundred kinds of action, and five kinds of action, and three kinds of action, and action and half-action; there are sixty-two ways, sixty-two sub-aeons, six classes, eight planes of man, forty-nine hundred kinds of livelihood, forty-nine hundred kinds of wanderers, forty-nine hundred abodes of serpents, twenty hundred faculties, thirty hundred hells, thirty-six elements of dust, seven percipient breeds, seven non-percipient breeds, seven sheathless breeds, seven kinds of gods, seven kinds of men, seven kinds of demons, seven lakes, seven knots, seven kinds of chasms, seven hundred kinds of chasms, seven kinds of dreams, seven hundred kinds of dreams; and there are eighty-four hundred thousand great aeons wherein, by running and wandering through the round of rebirths, fools and the wise both will make an end of suffering.
There are these roots of trees, these empty huts.
There are these roots of trees, these empty huts.
There are these roots of trees, these empty huts.
There are these roots of trees, these empty huts.
There are these six bases: the eye-base, the ear-base, the nose-base, the tongue-base, the body-base, the mind-base.
There are these six classes of consciousness: eye-consciousness, ear-consciousness, nose-consciousness, tongue-consciousness, body-consciousness, mind-consciousness.
There are these six classes of contact: eye-contact, ear-contact, nose-contact, tongue-contact, body-contact, mind-contact.
There are these six classes of craving: craving for forms, craving for sounds, craving for odours, craving for flavours, craving for tangibles, craving for mind-objects.
There are these six classes of feeling: feeling born of eye-contact, feeling born of ear-contact, feeling born of nose-contact, feeling born of tongue-contact, feeling born of body-contact, feeling born of mind-contact.
There are these six elements: the earth element, the water element, the fire element, the air element, the space element, and the consciousness element.
There are these three kinds of being: sense-sphere being, fine-material being, and immaterial being.
There are these three kinds of formations: the bodily formation, the verbal formation, the mental formation.
There are these three taints: the taint of sensual desire, the taint of being, and the taint of ignorance.
There are those who ask a forest-dwelling bhikkhu a question about the higher Dhamma and the higher Discipline.
There are those who ask a forest-dwelling bhikkhu a question on the liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms.
There are those who ask a forest-dwelling bhikkhu a question on the superhuman state.
There are three clansmen here seeking their own good.
There are three clansmen here seeking their own good.
There are three foundations of mindfulness that the Noble One cultivates, cultivating which the Noble One is a teacher fit to instruct a group.
There are three kinds of mental conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.
There are three kinds of mental conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.
There are, Puṇṇa, sounds cognizable by the ear…odours cognizable by the nose…flavours cognizable by the tongue...tangibles cognizable by the body…mind-objects cognizable by the mind that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire and provocative of lust.
There are, Ānanda, these six elements: the earth element, the water element, the fire element, the air element, the space element, and the consciousness element.
There are, Ānanda, these six elements: the pleasure element, the pain element, the joy element, the grief element, the equanimity element, and the ignorance element.
There are, Ānanda, these six elements: the sensual desire element, the renunciation element, the ill will element, the non-ill will element, the cruelty element, and the non-cruelty element.
There are, Ānanda, these three elements: the sense-sphere element, the fine-material element, and the immaterial element.
There are, Ānanda, these two elements: the conditioned element and the unconditioned element.
There can be no considering that as ‘I’ or ‘mine’ or ‘I am.’
There can be no considering that as ‘I’ or ‘mine’ or ‘I am.’
There can be no considering that as ‘I’ or ‘mine’ or ‘I am.’
There can be no considering that as ‘I’ or ‘mine’ or ‘I am.’ 
There comes a time in the last month of the hot season when they seek wind by means of a fan or bellows and even the strands of straw in the drip-fringe of the thatch do not stir.
There comes a time when the waters in the great ocean are not enough to wet even the joint of a finger.
There comes a time when the waters in the great ocean sink down a hundred leagues, two hundred leagues, three hundred leagues, four hundred leagues, five hundred leagues, six hundred leagues, seven hundred leagues.
There comes a time when the waters in the great ocean stand half a fathom deep, only waist deep, only knee deep, only ankle deep.
There comes a time when the waters in the great ocean stand seven fathoms deep, six fathoms deep…two fathoms deep, only a fathom deep.
There comes a time when the waters in the great ocean stand seven palms deep, six palms deep…two palms deep, only a palm deep.
There comes a time when they seek to make a fire even with a cock’s feather or a hide-paring.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus:
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.” —“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.” —“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable, sir,” they replied.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Friends, bhikkhus.”—“Friend,” they replied.
There he addressed the doorkeeper thus: “Good doorkeeper, from today on I close my door to the Nigaṇṭhas and the Nigaṇṭhīs, and I open my door to the Blessed One’s bhikkhus, bhikkhunīs, men lay followers, and women lay followers.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There he is swept along the stream and against the stream and both along and against the stream.
There he lies down on the bare ground strewn with grass.
There he lived in this Kāsi town, Kīṭāgiri.
There he lived in Thullakoṭṭhita in King Koravya’s Migācīra Garden.
There he sat down on a seat made ready and asked the venerable Ānanda:
There he saw a spread of grass prepared and asked the brahmin: “For whom has this spread of grass been prepared in Master Bhāradvāja’s fire chamber?
There he saw some men digging out ovens, some chopping wood, some washing dishes, some setting up a water-pot, some preparing seats, while the matted-hair ascetic Keṇiya himself was preparing the pavilion.
There he went to the potter Bhaggava and said to him:
There I have seen some recluses and brahmins who are lean, wretched, unsightly, jaundiced, with veins standing out on their limbs, such that people would not want to look at them again.
There I saw an agreeable piece of ground, a delightful grove with a clear-flowing river with pleasant, smooth banks and nearby a village for alms resort.
There I will conduct myself by the Dhamma among to brahmins and householders, among town-dwellers and countryfolk; there I will observe the Uposatha days on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth of the fortnight.’
There in Cạ̣alakappa the Blessed One lived in the Mango Grove belonging to the brahmins of the Todeyya clan.
There is a cause and condition for the purification of beings; beings are purified owing to a cause and condition.
There is a market town called Vebhalinga where a potter named Ghaṭīkāra lives.
There is a Middle Way for the abandoning of greed and hate, giving vision, giving knowledge, which leads to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna.
There is a Middle Way for the abandoning of vanity and negligence, giving vision, giving knowledge, which leads to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna.
There is a wanderers’ life that accords with the Dhamma; so it seems to me here, and may Master Udena remember me thus.
There is a way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pain.
There is a way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pain.
There is a way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pleasure.
There is a way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pleasure.
There is a way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pain.
There is a way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pain.
There is a way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure.
There is a way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure.
There is also this Makkhali Gosāla…this Ajita Kesakambalin… this Pakudha Kaccāyana…this Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta…this Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta, the head of an order, the head of a group, the teacher of a group, the well-known and famous founder of a sect regarded by many as a saint: he too has come to spend the Rains at Rājagaha.
There is also this recluse Gotama, the head of an order, the head of a group, the teacher of a group, the well-known and famous founder of a sect regarded by many as a saint: he too has come to spend the Rains at Rājagaha.
There is dark action with dark result; there is bright action with bright result; there is dark-and-bright action with dark-and-bright result; and there is action that is neither dark nor bright with neither-dark-nor-bright result, action that leads to the destruction of action.
There is equanimity regarding forms, sounds, odours, flavours, and tangibles.
There is equanimity regarding the base of infinite space, the base of infinite consciousness, the base of nothingness, and the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
There is no cause or condition for the purification of beings; beings are purified without cause or condition.
There is no cause or condition for the purification of beings; beings are purified without cause or condition.
There is no lauding of one’s own Dhamma and no disparaging of the Dhamma of others; there is the teaching of the Dhamma in its full range, and so many emancipators.
There is no other comfortable abiding higher or more sublime than that one.”
There is no power, no energy, no manly strength, no manly endurance.
There is no power, no energy, no manly strength, no manly endurance.
There is none of this: “By this virtue or observance or asceticism or holy life I shall make unripened action ripen or annihilate ripened action as it comes.”
There is nothing for you to fear from him.”
There is power, energy, manly strength, manly endurance.
There is present only this amount of disturbance, namely, that connected with the six bases that are dependent on this body and conditioned by life.’
There is present only this amount of disturbance, namely, that connected with the six bases that are dependent on this body and conditioned by life.’
There is present only this amount of disturbance, namely, the singleness dependent on the perception of earth.’
There is present only this amount of disturbance, namely, the singleness dependent on the perception of forest.’
There is present only this amount of disturbance, namely, the singleness dependent on the perception of the base of infinite consciousness.’
There is present only this amount of disturbance, namely, the singleness dependent on the perception of the base of infinite space.’
There is present only this amount of disturbance, namely, the singleness dependent on the perception of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.’
There is present only this amount of disturbance, namely, the singleness dependent on the perception of the base of nothingness.’
There is present only this non-voidness, namely, that connected with the six bases that are dependent on this body and conditioned by life.’
There is present only this non-voidness, namely, that connected with the six bases that are dependent on this body and conditioned by life.’
There is present only this non-voidness, namely, the singleness dependent on the perception of earth.’
There is present only this non-voidness, namely, the singleness dependent on the perception of forest.’
There is present only this non-voidness, namely, the singleness dependent on the perception of the base of infinite consciousness.’
There is present only this non-voidness, namely, the singleness dependent on the perception of the base of infinite space.’
There is present only this non-voidness, namely, the singleness dependent on the perception of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.’
There is present only this non-voidness, namely, the singleness dependent on the perception of the base of nothingness.’
There is still daylight enough to go there.”
There is the body called Streaming Radiance, from which you passed away and reappeared here.
There is the offering that is purified both by the giver and by the receiver.
There is the offering that is purified by the giver, not by the receiver.
There is the offering that is purified by the receiver, not by the giver.
There is the offering that is purified neither by the giver nor by the receiver.
There is the whole extent of King Pasenadi of Kosala’s realm, where he exercises lordship and sovereignty; now can King Pasenadi of Kosala topple or banish from that place any recluse or brahmin, irrespective of whether that recluse or brahmin has merit or not and whether he leads the holy life or not?”
There is the whole extent that is not King Pasenadi of Kosala’s realm, where he does not exercise lordship and sovereignty; now can King Pasenadi of Kosala topple or banish from that place any recluse or brahmin, irrespective of whether that recluse or brahmin has merit or not and whether he leads the holy life or not?”
There is this Pūraṇa Kassapa, the head of an order, the head of a group, the teacher of a group, the well-known and famous founder of a sect regarded by many as a saint: he has come to spend the Rains at Rājagaha.
There is work involving a great deal of activity, great functions, great engagements, and great undertakings, which, when it fails, is of small fruit.
There is work involving a great deal of activity, great functions, great engagements, and great undertakings, which, when it succeeds, is of great fruit.
There is work involving a small amount of activity, small functions, small engagements, and small undertakings, which, when it fails, is of small fruit.
There is work involving a small amount of activity, small functions, small engagements, and small undertakings, which, when it succeeds, is of great fruit.
There mutual devouring prevails, and the slaughter of the weak.
There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus.”—“Venerable sir,” they replied.
There the Blessed One lived in Makh̄deva’s Mango Grove.
There the Blessed One recited the summary and exposition of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night’ to the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three:
There the Blessed One stayed in the Gods’ Grove, the Sāla-tree Grove to the north of Opasāda.
There the venerable Channa had friendly families, intimate families, approachable families.” 
There the venerable Sāriputta addressed the bhikkhus thus.
There the venerable Sāriputta addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Friends, bhikkhus.”—“Friend,” they replied.
There the venerable Sāriputta addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Friends, bhikkhus.”—“Friend,” they replied.
There they feel painful, racking, piercing feelings.
There they should all meet together in concord.
There they were eaters of greens or millet or wild rice or hide-parings or moss or rice-bran or the discarded scum of boiled rice or sesamum flour or grass or cowdung; they lived on forest roots and fruits, they fed on fallen fruits.
There was also an occasion when the Blessed One was living here in the country of the Bhaggas at Suṁsumāragira in the Bhesakaḷā Grove, the Deer Park.
There will be those who will understand the Dhamma.’
There will be those who will understand the Dhamma.”
There, after paying homage to the Blessed One, he sat down at one side and asked the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, did the Nigaṇṭha Dīgha Tapassī come here?”
There, referring to Devadatta, the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:
There, venerable sir, I heard and learned this from the Blessed One’s own lips: ‘Now, Ānanda, I often abide in voidness.’
Thereby they again regain their strength, fortify themselves, and become fat.”
Therefore a bhikkhu possessing possesses the supreme foundation of peace.
Therefore a bhikkhu possessing possesses the supreme foundation of relinquishment.
Therefore a bhikkhu possessing possesses the supreme foundation of truth.
Therefore a wise person who sees
Therefore I do not say that one is better because one is from an aristocratic family.
Therefore I do not say that one is better because one is of great beauty…of great wealth.
Therefore I do not say that one is worse because one is from an aristocratic family.
Therefore I do not say that one is worse because one is of great beauty…of great wealth.
Therefore this is a state with conflict.
Therefore this is a state with conflict.
Therefore this is a state with conflict.
Therefore this is a state with conflict.
Therefore this is a state with conflict.
Therefore this is a state without conflict.
Therefore this is a state without conflict.
Therefore this is a state without conflict.
Therefore this is a state without conflict.
Therefore this is a state without conflict.
Therefore this is a state without conflict.
Therefore we must understand that those defilements to be fully abandoned by the path of arahantship have at this point only been abandoned in part, by way of their coarser manifestations.
Therefore, bhikkhus, be my heirs in Dhamma, not my heirs in material things.
Therefore, bhikkhus, be my heirs in Dhamma, not my heirs in material things.
Therefore, bhikkhus, through the complete destruction, fading away, cessation, giving up, and relinquishing of cravings, the Tathāgata has awakened to supreme full enlightenment, I say.
Therefore, bhikkhus, through the complete destruction, fading away, cessation, giving up, and relinquishing of cravings, the Tathāgata has awakened to supreme full enlightenment, I say.”
Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train thus: ‘We shall be easy to admonish and make ourselves easy to admonish because we honour, respect, and revere the Dhamma.’
Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train thus: ‘We shall be wise men, we shall be inquirers.’” 
Therefore, Cunda:
Therefore, dear prince, I say to you: Continue this good practice instituted by me and do not be the last man.’
Therefore, I say, with the destruction, fading away, cessation, giving up, and relinquishing of all conceivings, all excogitations, all I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit, the Tathāgata is liberated through not clinging.”
Therefore, if anyone speaks dispraise of those bhikkhunīs in your presence, you should abandon any desires and any thoughts based on the household life.
Therefore, Rāhula, you should train thus: ‘I will not utter a falsehood even as a joke.’
Therefore, Rāhula, you should train thus: ‘We will purify our bodily action, our verbal action, and our mental action by repeatedly reflecting upon them.’”
Therefore, Sāriputta, you should train thus: ‘We will purify our almsfood by repeatedly reviewing thus.’”
Therefore, sirs, let all of us go to see the recluse Gotama.”
Therefore, though they claim to propound the full understanding of all kinds of clinging, they describe only the full understanding of clinging to sensual pleasures without describing the full understanding of clinging to views, clinging to rules and observances, and clinging to a doctrine of self.
Therefore, Ānanda, behave towards me with friendliness, not with hostility.
Therefore, Ānanda, I say to you: continue this good practice instituted by me and do not be the last man.” 
Therefore, Ānanda, you should train thus: ‘We will enter upon and abide in pure, supreme, unsurpassed voidness.’”
Therein, by depending on this, abandon that.
Therein, Master Gotama, the brahmins prescribe this as the level of service towards a brahmin: a brahmin may serve a brahmin, a noble may serve a brahmin, a merchant may serve a brahmin, and a worker may serve a brahmin.
Therein, the volition for abandoning the kind of action that is dark with dark result, and the volition for abandoning the kind of action that is bright with bright result, and the volition for abandoning the kind of action that is dark and bright with dark-and-bright result: this is called action that is neither dark nor bright with neither-dark-nor-bright result, action that leads to the destruction of action.
Therein, when bhikkhus declare final knowledge rightly, their declaration is true.
Thereupon he thought: ‘This tree is laden with fruit but none of its fruit has fallen to the ground.
Thereupon he thought: ‘This tree is laden with fruit but none of its fruit has fallen to the ground.
Thereupon he went to the venerable Revata and said to him: “Friend Revata, those true men are going to the venerable Sāriputta to listen to the Dhamma.
Thereupon I said: ‘Brahmā, I shall vanish from you.’
Thereupon one of his companions in the holy life nudged him with his knee to indicate: ‘Be quiet, venerable sir, make no noise; the Blessed One, the Teacher, is teaching us the Dhamma.’
Thereupon one of his companions in the holy life nudged him with his knee: “Be quiet, venerable sir, make no noise; the Blessed One, the Teacher, is teaching us the Dhamma.”
Thereupon some Licchavis said: “Who is the recluse Gotama that he could refute Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son’s assertions?
Thereupon the Blessed One gave him his blessing with these stanzas:
Thereupon the Blessed One said:
Thereupon the Blessed One told him: “At this point, brahmin, the simile of the elephant’s footprint has not yet been completed in detail.
Thereupon the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta said to him:
Thereupon the venerable Bhaddāli asked: “Venerable sir, what is the cause, what is the reason, why they take action against some bhikkhu here by repeatedly admonishing him?
Thereupon the venerable Pukkusāti thought: “Indeed, the Teacher has come to me!
Thereupon there came to me spontaneously these stanzas never heard before:
Thereupon, the brahmin Brahmāyu asked him: “Well, my dear Uttara, is the report that has been spread about Master Gotama true or not?
Thereupon, the venerable Ānanda said: “It is the time, Blessed One, it is the time, Sublime One, for the Blessed One to teach the five lower fetters.
These acquisitions are subject to birth; and one who is tied to these things, infatuated with them, and utterly committed to them, being himself subject to birth, seeks what it also subject to birth.
These acquisitions are subject to death; and one who is tied to these things, infatuated with them, and utterly committed to them, being himself subject to death, seeks what is also subject to death.
These acquisitions are subject to defilement; and one who is tied to these things, infatuated with them, and utterly committed to them, being himself subject to defilement, seeks what is also subject to defilement.
These acquisitions are subject to sickness; and one who is tied to these things, infatuated with them, and utterly committed to them, being himself subject to sickness, seeks what is also subject to sickness.
These acquisitions are subject to sorrow; and one who is tied to these things, infatuated with them, and utterly committed to them, being himself subject to sorrow, seeks what is also subject to sorrow.
These acquistions are subject to ageing; and one who is tied to these things, infatuated with them, and utterly committed to them, being himself subject to ageing, seeks what is also subject to ageing.
These are called the taints that should be abandoned by avoiding.
These are called the taints that should be abandoned by developing.
These are called the taints that should be abandoned by enduring.
These are called the taints that should be abandoned by removing.
These are called the taints that should be abandoned by restraining.
These are called the taints that should be abandoned by seeing.
These are called the taints that should be abandoned by using.
These are called unwholesome habits.
These are called unwholesome intentions.
These are called wholesome habits.
These are called wholesome intentions.
These are our reasons, friends, this is our evidence whereby we say about those venerable ones: “Surely these venerable ones are either rid of lust, hate, and delusion, or are practising for their removal.”’ Being thus asked, householders, you should answer those wanderers of other sects in this way.”
These are the eight things, stated in brief without being expounded in detail, that lead to the cutting off of affairs in the Noble One’s Discipline.”
These are the five aggregates affected by clinging that, in short, are suffering.
These are the five cords of sensual pleasure.
These are the five cords of sensual pleasure.
These are the five cords of sensual pleasure.
These are the five cords of sensual pleasure.
These are the five cords of sensual pleasure.
These are the five cords of sensual pleasure.
These are the five cords of sensual pleasure.
These are the five cords of sensual pleasure.
These are the five cords of sensual pleasure.
These are the five destinations.
These are the five factors of striving.
These are the five factors of striving.
These are the five hindrances.
These are the five things that the brahmins prescribe for the performance of merit, for accomplishing the wholesome.
These are the four conditions for the attainment of the neither-painful-nor-pleasant deliverance of mind.”
These are the four kinds of action proclaimed by me after realising them for myself with direct knowledge.”
These are the four kinds of fears to be expected by those who go down to the water.
These are the four kinds of generation.
These are the four kinds of litigation.
These are the four kinds of purification of offering.”
These are the four kinds of reappearance being.
These are the four things declared to us by the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, on seeing which in ourselves we say as we do.’
These are the seven enlightenment factors through the development and cultivation of which a bhikkhu, by realising for himself with direct knowledge, here and now enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.” 
These are the six kinds of equanimity based on renunciation.
These are the six kinds of equanimity based on the household life.
These are the six kinds of grief based on renunciation.
These are the six kinds of grief based on the household life.
These are the six kinds of joy based on renunciation.
These are the six kinds of joy based on the household life.
These are the six roots of dispute.
These are the states that are higher and more sublime than knowledge and vision.
These are the things fit for attention that he attends to.
These are the things fit for attention that he does not attend to.
These are the things that should be abandoned by direct knowledge.
These are the things that should be developed by direct knowledge.
These are the things that should be fully understood by direct knowledge.
These are the things that should be realised by direct knowledge.
These are the things unfit for attention that he attends to.
These are the things unfit for attention that he does not attend to.
These are the three conditions for the persistence of the signless deliverance of mind.”
These are the three similes that occurred to me spontaneously, never heard before.
These are the two conditions for emergence from the signless deliverance of mind.”
These are the two conditions for the arising of right view.” 
These are the two conditions for the attainment of the signless deliverance of mind.” 
These aspirations and this abiding of his, thus developed and cultivated, lead to his reappearance there.
These aspirations and this abiding of his, thus developed and cultivated, lead to his reappearance there.
These can hell be well compared to
These five aggregates affected by clinging are called identity by the Blessed One.” 
These five things may turn out in two different ways here and now.
These five things may turn out in two different ways here and now.
These four kinds of clinging have craving as their source, craving as their origin, they are born and produced from craving.
These four kinds of nutriment have craving as their source, craving as their origin; they are born and produced from craving.
These lines have been a perennial challenge to Buddhist scholarship, and even Ācariya Buddhaghosa seems to founder over them.
These seven bodies are unmade…Herein, there is no killer, no slaughterer, no hearer, no speaker, no cognizer, no intimater.
These things that I have taught you after directly knowing them—that is, the four foundations of mindfulness, the four right kinds of striving, the four bases for spiritual power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven enlightenment factors, the Noble Eightfold Path—do you see, Ānanda, even two bhikkhus who make differing assertions about these things?”
These three kinds of feeling have been stated by the Blessed One.”
These two inspectors, Isidatta and Purāṇa, eat my food and use my carriages; I provide them with a livelihood and bring them fame.
These two things—serenity and insight—occur in him yoked evenly together.
These venerable ones do not reveal to him what has not been revealed, do not clarify what is not clear, or remove his doubts about the numerous things that give rise to doubt.
These venerable ones like quiet; they are disciplined in quiet; they commend quiet.
These venerable ones like quiet; they are disciplined in quiet; they commend quiet.
These venerable ones reveal to him what has not been revealed, clarify what is not clear, and remove his doubts about the numerous things that give rise to doubt.
These, bhikkhus, are the four ways of undertaking things.”
These, friend, are the five aggregates affected by clinging, rightly proclaimed by the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened.
These, friend, are the four kinds of expression rightly proclaimed by the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened.
These, friend, are the six elements rightly proclaimed by the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened.
These, friend, are the six internal and external bases rightly proclaimed by the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened.
These, on hearing the venerable Sāriputta’s discourse on the Dhamma, drink it in and eat it, as it were, by word and thought.
These, on hearing the venerable Sāriputta’s discourse on the Dhamma, drink it in and eat it, as it were, by word and thought.
They abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon: they are to be commended for this second reason.
They abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon: they are to be commended for this second reason.
They abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon: they are to be commended for this second reason.
They abide with their minds well established in the four foundations of mindfulness.
They abided pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness...with compassion...with altruistic joy…with equanimity…without ill will.
They also honour it as oral tradition.”
They are all to be found on your body, These marks that reveal a Great Man.
They are asking us.
They are beyond all fear and hate;
They are fools and have no sense
They are freed from birth, ageing, and death; from sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; they are freed from suffering, I say.
They are loss through ageing, loss through sickness, loss of wealth, and loss of relatives.
They are luxurious and careless, leaders in backsliding, neglectful of seclusion: they are to be blamed for this third reason.
They are luxurious and careless, leaders in backsliding, neglectful of seclusion: they are to be blamed for this third reason.
They are luxurious and careless, leaders in backsliding, neglectful of seclusion: they are to be blamed for this third reason.
They are my pathway and my domain, yet I do not identify with them.’ 
They are not asking you, sirs.
They are not freed from birth, ageing, and death; from sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; they are not freed from suffering, I say.
They are not luxurious and careless; they are keen to avoid backsliding and are leaders in seclusion: they are to be commended for this third reason.
They are not luxurious and careless; they are keen to avoid backsliding and are leaders in seclusion: they are to be commended for this third reason.
They are not luxurious and careless; they are keen to avoid backsliding and are leaders in seclusion: they are to be commended for this third reason.
They are the earth element, the water element, the fire element, and the air element.
They are the earth element, the water element, the fire element, the air element, the space element, and the consciousness element.
They are the earth-body, the water-body, the fire-body, the air-body, pleasure, pain, and the soul as the seventh.
They are the eye and forms, the ear and sounds, the nose and odours, the tongue and flavours, the body and tangibles, the mind and mind-objects.
They are the intention of renunciation, the intention of non-ill will, and the intention of non-cruelty.
They are the intention of sensual desire, the intention of ill will, and the intention of cruelty.
They are the material form aggregate affected by clinging, the feeling aggregate affected by clinging, the perception aggregate affected by clinging, the formations aggregate affected by clinging, and the consciousness aggregate affected by clinging.
They are things such that when he attends to them, the unarisen taint of sensual desire arises in him and the arisen taint of sensual desire increases, the unarisen taint of being arises in him and the arisen taint of being increases, the unarisen taint of ignorance arises in him and the arisen taint of ignorance increases.
They are things such that when he attends to them, the unarisen taint of sensual desire arises in him……and the arisen taint of ignorance increases.
They are things such that when he attends to them, the unarisen taint of sensual desire does not arise in him and the arisen taint of sensual desire is abandoned, the unarisen taint of being does not arise in him and the arisen taint of being is abandoned, the unarisen taint of ignorance does not arise in him and the arisen taint of ignorance is abandoned.
They are things such that when he attends to them, the unarisen taint of sensual desire does not arise in him......and the arisen taint of ignorance is abandoned.
They are touched by bodily painful feeling.
They are touched by mental painful feeling.
They are unwholesome bodily actions, unwholesome verbal actions, and evil livelihood.
They are wholesome bodily actions, wholesome verbal actions, and purification of livelihood.
They are wise and helpful to their companions in the holy life.
They are: faith, approval, oral tradition, reasoned cogitation, and reflective acceptance of a view.
They are: fear of waves, fear of crocodiles, fear of whirlpools, and fear of sharks.
They are: fear of waves, fear of crocodiles, fear of whirlpools, and fear of sharks.
They are: one liberated-in-both ways, one liberated-by-wisdom, a body-witness, one attained-to-view, one liberated-by-faith, a Dhamma-follower, and a faith-follower.
They are: physical food as nutriment, gross or subtle; contact as the second; mental volition as the third; and consciousness as the fourth.
They are: physical food as nutriment, gross or subtle; contact as the second; mental volition as the third; and consciousness as the fourth.
They are: the material form aggregate affected by clinging, the feeling aggregate affected by clinging, the perception aggregate affected by clinging, the formations aggregate affected by clinging, and the consciousness aggregate affected by clinging.
They are: the material form aggregate affected by clinging, the feeling aggregate affected by clinging, the perception aggregate affected by clinging, the formations aggregate affected by clinging, and the consciousness aggregate affected by clinging.
They ask me about the noble truth of the origin of suffering…about the noble truth of the cessation of suffering…about the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering.
They ate food unwarily by going right in amongst it.
They bear away the body wrapped in shrouds
They cannot purify an evil-doer, A man who has done cruel and brutal deeds.
They could neither convince each other nor be convinced by others; they could neither persuade each other nor be persuaded by others.
They covered it completely with coverings and prepared seats, and they put out a large water jug and hung up an oil-lamp.
They describe the full understanding of clinging to sensual pleasures without describing the full understanding of clinging to views, clinging to rules and observances, and clinging to a doctrine of self.
They did so, and they saw the third herd’s dwelling place, where they went to hide.
They did so, but they did not see the fourth deer herd’s dwelling place, where they went to hide.
They did so.
They directly knew: “Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.”
They do not abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon: they are to be blamed for this second reason.
They do not abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon: they are to be blamed for this second reason.
They do not abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon: they are to be blamed for this second reason.
They do not know health, they do not see Nibbāna, yet they utter this stanza thus:
They do not learn the Dhamma for the sake of criticising others and for winning in debates, and they experience the good for the sake of which they learned the Dhamma.
They do not move or change or obstruct each other.
They do not understand one instance…therefore they describe only the full understanding of clinging to sensual pleasures, clinging to views, and clinging to rules and observances without describing the full understanding of clinging to a doctrine of self.
They do not understand two instances…therefore they describe only the full understanding of clinging to sensual pleasures and clinging to views without describing the full understanding of clinging to rules and observances and clinging to a doctrine of self.
They drive a red-hot iron stake through one hand, they drive a red-hot iron stake through the other hand, they drive a red-hot iron stake through one foot, they drive a red-hot iron stake through the other foot, they drive a red-hot iron stake in the middle through his breast.
They drive a red-hot iron stake through one hand, they drive a red-hot iron stake through the other hand, they drive a red-hot iron stake through one foot, they drive a red-hot iron stake through the other foot, they drive a red-hot iron stake in the middle through his breast.
They dwell in bliss for they are safe
They eat by cropping fresh or dried grass with their teeth.
They eat the bait laid down without our knowing how they come and go.
They eat the bait laid down without our knowing how they come and go.
They go naked, rejecting conventions, licking their hands, not coming when asked, not stopping when asked; they do not accept food brought or food specially made or an invitation to a meal; they receive nothing from a pot, from a bowl, across a threshold, across a stick, across a pestle, from two eating together, from a pregnant woman, from a woman giving suck, from a woman in the midst of men, from where food is advertised to be distributed, from where a dog is waiting, from where flies are buzzing; they accept no fish or meat, they drink no liquor, wine, or fermented brew.
They go to the Blessed One, and the Blessed One instructs, urges, rouses, and gladdens them with a talk on the Dhamma.
They go to the recluse Gotama, and the recluse Gotama instructs, urges, rouses, and gladdens them with a talk on the Dhamma.
They have done their work with diligence; they are no more capable of being negligent.
They have escaped all suffering.”
They have forgotten thoughtful speech, They talk obsessed by words alone.
They hear: ‘The recluse Gotama has come to visit such and such a village or town.’
They heard: “The brahmin Cankī, it is said, is going to see the recluse Gotama.”
They keep to one house, to one morsel; they keep to two houses, to two morsels…they keep to seven houses, to seven morsels.
They knew, when there is another escape beyond, that there is another escape beyond, and when there is no other escape beyond, that there is no other escape beyond.
They live on one saucerful a day, on two saucerfuls a day…on seven saucerfuls a day.
They make him climb up and down those trees.
They prescribe the level of service towards a brahmin, the level of service towards a noble, the level of service towards a merchant, and the level of service towards a worker.
They prescribe the wealth of a brahmin, the wealth of a noble, the wealth of a merchant, and the wealth of a worker.
They say thus: ‘This is the future fear those good recluses and brahmins saw in sensual pleasures when they spoke of abandoning sensual pleasures and described the full understanding of sensual pleasures.
They say thus: ‘We were very nearly lost, we very nearly perished, for formerly we claimed that we were recluses though we were not really recluses; we claimed that we were brahmins though we were not really brahmins; we claimed that we were arahants though we were not really arahants.
They say thus: ‘We were very nearly lost, we very nearly perished, for formerly we claimed that we were recluses though we were not really recluses; we claimed that we were brahmins though we were not really brahmins; we claimed that we were arahants though we were not really arahants.
They say thus: ‘What future fear do these good recluses and brahmins see in sensual pleasures when they speak of abandoning sensual pleasures and describe the full understanding of sensual pleasures?
They say: ‘Let us live on beans,’…‘Let us live on sesamum,’…‘Let us live on rice,’ and they eat rice, they eat rice powder, they drink rice water, and they make many kinds of rice concoctions.
They say: ‘Let us live on kola-fruits,’ and they eat kola-fruits, they eat kola-fruit powder, they drink kola-fruit water, and they make many kinds of kola-fruit concoctions.
They smell dung from a distance and run to it, thinking: ‘We can eat, we can eat!’ Just as brahmins run to the smell of a sacrifice, thinking: ‘We can eat here, we can eat here!’ so too these animals that feed on dung smell dung from a distance and run to it, thinking: ‘We can eat here, we can eat here!’ And what animals feed on dung?
They take food once a day, once every two days…once every seven days; thus even up to once every fortnight, they dwell pursuing the practice of taking food at stated intervals.”
They take to gulping down sensual pleasures and divert themselves with women wanderers who wear their hair bound in a topknot.
They then rose from their seats, and after paying homage to him, they departed, keeping him on their right.
They understand a mind affected by lust as affected by lust and a mind unaffected by lust as unaffected by lust; they understand a mind affected by hate as affected by hate and a mind unaffected by hate as unaffected by hate; they understand a mind affected by delusion as affected by delusion and a mind unaffected by delusion as unaffected by delusion; they understand a contracted mind as contracted and a distracted mind as distracted; they understand an exalted mind as exalted and an unexalted mind as unexalted; they understand a surpassed mind as surpassed and an unsurpassed mind as unsurpassed; they understand a concentrated mind as concentrated and an unconcentrated mind as unconcentrated; they understand a liberated mind as liberated and an unliberated mind as unliberated.
They understand how beings pass on according to their actions thus: ‘These worthy beings who were ill conducted in body, speech, and mind, revilers of noble ones, wrong in their views, giving effect to wrong view in their actions, on the dissolution of the body, after death, have reappeared in a state of deprivation, in a bad destination, in perdition, even in hell; but these worthy beings who were well conducted in body, speech, and mind, not revilers of noble ones, right in their views, giving effect to right view in their actions, on the dissolution of the body, after death, have reappeared in a good destination, even in the heavenly world.’
They went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, stood at one side.
They were seen entering into this hill; once gone in, they were no longer seen.
Thinking about this, the first brahmin might become angry and displeased.
Thinking it would be troublesome, O Brahmā, I did not speak the Dhamma subtle and sublime.’
Thinking that no trace was left behind, he would say: ‘Good man, the arrow has been pulled out from you; the poisonous humour has been expelled with no trace left behind, and it is incapable of harming you.
Thinking to discredit the Tathāgata, he actually praises him; for it is praise of the Tathāgata to say of him: ‘When he teaches the Dhamma to anyone, it leads him when he practises it to the complete destruction of suffering.’
Thinking, ‘I am a speaker of truth,’ he gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains gladness connected with the Dhamma.
Thinking, ‘I am one who engages in generosity,’ he gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains gladness connected with the Dhamma.
This beautiful beryl gem of purest water, eight-faceted, well cut, lying on red brocade, which glows, radiates, and shines, or a glowworm in the thick darkness of the night—of these two, which gives off the splendour that is more excellent and sublime?”—“The glowworm in the thick darkness of the night, venerable sir.”
This bed has been prepared for that Master Gotama.”
This bhikkhu does not conceive anything, he does not conceive in regard to anything, he does not conceive in any way.” 
This bhikkhu is called one who has taken the inner bark of the holy life and stopped short with that.
This bhikkhu is called one who has taken the outer bark of the holy life and stopped short with that.
This bhikkhu is called one who has taken the sapwood of the holy life and stopped short with that.
This bhikkhu is called one who has taken the twigs and leaves of the holy life and stopped short with that.
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Māra, to have become invisible to the Evil One by depriving Māra’s eye of its opportunity, and to have crossed beyond attachment to the world.
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Māra, to have become invisible to the Evil One by depriving Māra’s eye of its opportunity, and to have crossed beyond attachment to the world.” 
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Māra, to have become invisible to the Evil One by depriving Māra’s eye of its opportunity.
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Māra, to have become invisible to the Evil One by depriving Māra’s eye of its opportunity.
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Māra, to have become invisible to the Evil One by depriving Māra’s eye of its opportunity.
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Māra, to have become invisible to the Evil One by depriving Māra’s eye of its opportunity.
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Māra…
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Māra…
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Māra…
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Māra…
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Māra…
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Māra…
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Māra…
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Māra…
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Māra…
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Māra…
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Māra…
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Māra…
This bhikkhu is then called a master of the courses of thought.
This confirms the identification of ratta with “night”; the change from -e- to -a- can be understood as an attempt to convert a difficult reading into a more familiar one.
This derivation is hardly credible, since nowhere in the Nik̄yas is Nibb̄na described as consciousness, nor is it possible to derive an active noun from the gerundive.
This Dhamma cannot easily be taught by one affected by delusion.’
This Dhamma cannot easily be taught by one affected by greed.’
This Dhamma cannot easily be taught by one affected by hate.’
This Dhamma discourse on the Great Forty has been set rolling and cannot be stopped by any recluse or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or anyone in the world.
This Dhamma is such that a wise man can soon enter upon and abide in it, himself realising through direct knowledge his own teacher’s doctrine.’
This Dhamma is such that a wise man can soon enter upon and abide in it, realising for himself through direct knowledge his own teacher’s doctrine.’
This did not happen in the case of the bhikkhu Channa; the bhikkhu Channa used the knife blamelessly.”
This does not lead to my own affliction, or to others’ affliction, or to the affliction of both; it aids wisdom, does not cause difficulties, and leads to Nibbāna.
This does not lead to my own affliction, or to others’ affliction, or to the affliction of both; it aids wisdom, does not cause difficulties, and leads to Nibbāna.
This glowworm in the thick darkness of the night or an oil-lamp in the thick darkness of the night—of these two, which gives off the splendour that is more excellent and sublime?”—“The oil-lamp, venerable sir.”
This great bonfire in the thick darkness of the night or the morning star towards dawn in a clear cloudless sky—of these two, which gives off the splendour that is more excellent and sublime?”—“The morning star towards dawn in a clear cloudless sky, venerable sir.”
This is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to cohesion, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity.
This is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to cohesion, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity.
This is a rapture apart from sensual pleasures, apart from unwholesome states.
This is a state higher and more sublime than knowledge and vision.
This is called bright action with bright result.
This is called dark action with dark result.
This is called dark-and-bright action with dark-and-bright result.
This is called in the Noble One’s Discipline the supreme development of the faculties regarding flavours cognizable by the tongue.
This is called in the Noble One’s Discipline the supreme development of the faculties regarding forms cognizable by the eye.
This is called in the Noble One’s Discipline the supreme development of the faculties regarding ideas cognizable by the mind.
This is called in the Noble One’s Discipline the supreme development of the faculties regarding odours cognizable by the nose.
This is called in the Noble One’s Discipline the supreme development of the faculties regarding sounds cognizable by the ear.
This is called in the Noble One’s Discipline the supreme development of the faculties regarding tangibles cognizable by the body.
This is called loss of relatives.
This is called loss of wealth.
This is called loss through ageing.
This is called loss through sickness.
This is called right concentration.
This is called right effort.
This is called right mindfulness.
This is called suffering.
This is called the bliss of renunciation, the bliss of seclusion, the bliss of peace, the bliss of enlightenment.
This is called the cessation of identity by the Blessed One.”
This is called the cessation of suffering.
This is called the deliverance of mind through nothingness.
This is called the deliverance of mind through voidness.
This is called the first jhāna.”
This is called the immeasurable deliverance of mind.
This is called the immeasurable deliverance of mind.
This is called the kind of person who torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself and who torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others.
This is called the kind of person who torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself and who torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others.
This is called the kind of person who torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself.
This is called the kind of person who torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself.
This is called the kind of person who torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others.
This is called the kind of person who torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others.
This is called the noble truth of suffering.
This is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.
This is called the noble truth of the origin of suffering.
This is called the origin of identity by the Blessed One.”
This is called the origin of suffering.
This is called the root of the unwholesome.
This is called the root of the wholesome.
This is called the signless deliverance of mind.
This is called the unwholesome.
This is called the way leading to the cessation of suffering.
This is called the way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pain.
This is called the way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pain.
This is called the way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pleasure.
This is called the way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pleasure.
This is called the way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pain.
This is called the way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pain.
This is called the way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure.
This is called the way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure.
This is called the wholesome.
This is his first breaking out like that of the hen’s chicks from their shells.
This is his second breaking out like that of the hen’s chicks from their shells.
This is his third breaking out like that of the hen’s chicks from their shells.
This is how a noble disciple is possessed of virtue.
This is how the pupil’s undoing comes about.
This is how the teacher’s undoing comes about.
This is how there comes to be extolling and disparaging and failure to teach only the Dhamma.
This is how there comes to be insistence on local language and overriding normal usage.
This is how there comes to be non-insistence on local language and non-overriding of normal usage.
This is how there comes to be the abandoning of these views; this is how there comes to be the relinquishing of these views.
This is how there comes to be the abandoning of these views; this is how there comes to be the relinquishing of these views.
This is how there comes to be the abandoning of these views; this is how there comes to be the relinquishing of these views.
This is my last birth; now there is no renewal of being for me.”’ This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.
This is our instruction to you.”
This is our instruction to you.”
This is our instruction to you.”
This is our instruction to you.”
This is our time for making robes, venerable sir.” 
This is right view affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions.
This is that other kind of pleasure loftier and more sublime than the previous pleasure.
This is that other kind of pleasure loftier and more sublime than the previous pleasure.
This is that other kind of pleasure loftier and more sublime than the previous pleasure.
This is that other kind of pleasure loftier and more sublime than the previous pleasure.
This is that other kind of pleasure loftier and more sublime than the previous pleasure.
This is that other kind of pleasure loftier and more sublime than the previous pleasure.
This is that other kind of pleasure loftier and more sublime than the previous pleasure.
This is that other kind of pleasure loftier and more sublime than the previous pleasure.
This is that other kind of pleasure loftier and more sublime than the previous pleasure.
This is the cause and reason why, of these two persons with no blemish, one is called the inferior man and one is called the superior man.
This is the character of a person who possesses right view: although he may be active in various matters for his companions in the holy life, yet he has a keen regard for training in the higher virtue, training in the higher mind, and training in the higher wisdom.
This is the character of a person who possesses right view: although he may commit some kind of offence for which a means of rehabilitation has been laid down, still he at once confesses, reveals, and discloses it to the Teacher or to wise companions in the holy life, and having done that, he enters upon restraint for the future.
This is the character of a true man.
This is the character of an untrue man.
This is the complete perfection of the fool’s grade.
This is the complete perfection of the wise man’s grade.”
This is the danger in the case of feelings.
This is the Deathless, namely, the liberation of the mind through not clinging.’ 
This is the difference between one who is dead, who has completed his time, and a bhikkhu who has entered upon the cessation of perception and feeling.”
This is the eighth base for transcendence.
This is the end of suffering.’” 
This is the escape in the case of feelings.
This is the escape in the case of material form.
This is the escape in the case of sensual pleasures.
This is the fifth base for transcendence.
This is the fifth knowledge attained by him that is noble, supramundane, not shared by ordinary people.
This is the fifth set of six.
This is the first base for transcendence.
This is the first kind of pain and grief that a fool feels here and now.
This is the first kind of pleasure and joy that a wise man feels here and now.
This is the first kind of success that a Wheel-turning Monarch possesses.
This is the first knowledge attained by him that is noble, supramundane, not shared by ordinary people.
This is the first quality because of which my disciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate me, and live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.
This is the first set of six.
This is the fourth base for transcendence.
This is the fourth kind of success that a Wheel-turning Monarch possesses.
This is the fourth knowledge attained by him that is noble, supramundane, not shared by attained by him that is noble, supramundane, not shared by ordinary people.
This is the fourth quality because of which my disciples honour me…
This is the fourth set of six.
This is the good practice instituted by me now, which leads to complete disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna.
This is the ignoble search.
This is the meaning here: ‘Wound’ is a term for the six internal bases.
This is the meaning.
This is the meaning.
This is the meaning.
This is the meaning.
This is the meaning.
This is the meaning.
This is the meaning.
This is the meaning.”
This is the meaning: ‘Bait’ is a term for the five cords of sensual pleasure.
This is the meaning: ‘The great low-lying marsh’ is a term for sensual pleasures.
This is the meaning: ‘The inner mass of flesh’ is a term for the six internal bases.
This is the Middle Way giving vision, giving knowledge, which leads to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna.
This is the Middle Way giving vision, giving knowledge, which leads to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna.”
This is the noble search.
This is the path to the company of Brahmā.
This is the path to the company of Brahmā.
This is the path, the way to the abandoning of the five lower fetters.
This is the path, the way to the abandoning of the five lower fetters.”
This is the practical way to realise an exclusively pleasant world.”
This is the second base for transcendence.
This is the second kind of pain and grief that a fool feels here and now.
This is the second kind of pleasure and joy that a wise man feels here and now.
This is the second kind of success that a Wheel-turning Monarch possesses.
This is the second knowledge attained by him that is noble, supramundane, not shared by ordinary people.
This is the second quality because of which my disciples honour me…
This is the second set of six.
This is the seventh base for transcendence.
This is the seventh knowledge attained by him that is noble, supramundane, not shared by ordinary people.
This is the sixth base for transcendence.
This is the sixth knowledge attained by him that is noble, supramundane, not shared by ordinary people.
This is the sixth set of six.
This is the strength of a person who possesses right view: when the Dhamma and Discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata is being taught, he gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains gladness connected with the Dhamma.
This is the strength of a person who possesses right view: when the Dhamma and Discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata is being taught, he heeds it, gives it attention, engages it with all his mind, hears the Dhamma as with eager ears.
This is the summary of the exposition of non-conflict.
This is the summary of the exposition of the six elements.
This is the summary of the exposition of the sixfold base.
This is the summary of the ‘five and three.’
This is the third base for transcendence.
This is the third kind of pain and grief that a fool feels here and now.
This is the third kind of pleasure and joy that a wise man feels here and now.
This is the third kind of success that a Wheel-turning Monarch possesses.
This is the third knowledge attained by him that is noble, supramundane, not shared by ordinary people.
This is the third quality because of which my disciples honour me…
This is the third set of six.
This is the time for one son to talk with the other.”
This is the way in which these states are different in meaning and different in name.
This is the way in which these states are one in meaning and different only in name.” 
This is the way, student, that leads to being beautiful, namely, one is not of an angry and irritable character…and does not display anger, hate, and bitterness.
This is the way, student, that leads to being influential, namely, one is not envious…towards the gains, honour, respect, reverence, salutations, and veneration received by others.
This is the way, student, that leads to being uninfluential, namely, one is envious…towards the gains, honour, respect, reverence, salutations, and veneration received by others.
This is the way, student, that leads to health, namely, one is not given to injuring beings with the hand, with a clod, with a stick, or with a knife.
This is the way, student, that leads to high birth, namely, one is not obstinate and arrogant...andhonours, respects, reveres, and venerates one who should be honoured, respected, revered, and venerated.
This is the way, student, that leads to long life, namely, abandoning the killing of living beings, one abstains from killing living beings; with rod and weapon laid aside, gentle and kindly, one abides compassionate to all living beings.
This is the way, student, that leads to low birth, namely, one is obstinate and arrogant…and does not honour, respect, revere, and venerate one who should be honoured, respected, revered, and venerated.
This is the way, student, that leads to poverty, namely, one does not give food…and lamps to recluses or brahmins.
This is the way, student, that leads to short life, namely, one kills living beings and is murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to living beings.
This is the way, student, that leads to sickliness, namely, one is given to injuring beings with the hand, with a clod, with a stick, or with a knife.
This is the way, student, that leads to stupidity, namely, one does not visit a recluse or brahmin and ask such questions.
This is the way, student, that leads to ugliness, namely, one is of an angry and irritable character…and displays anger, hate, and bitterness.
This is the way, student, that leads to wealth, namely, one gives food…and lamps to recluses or brahmins.
This is the way, student, that leads to wisdom, namely, one visits a recluse or brahmin and asks such questions.
This is we approve of and accept, and we are satisfied with it.’
This is why, venerable sir, I infer according to Dhamma about the Blessed One: ‘The Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practising the good way.’
This is wrong view.
This kind of person is called a body-witness.
This kind of person is called a Dhamma-follower.
This kind of person is called a faith-follower.
This kind of person is called one attained-to-view.
This kind of person is called one liberated-by-faith.
This kind of person is called one liberated-by-wisdom.
This kind of person is called one liberated-in-both-ways.
This leads to my own affliction, to others’ affliction, and to the affliction of both; it obstructs wisdom, causes difficulties, and leads away from Nibbāna.‘ When I considered thus…it subsided in me.
This leads to my own affliction, to others’ affliction, and to the affliction of both; it obstructs wisdom, causes difficulties, and leads away from Nibbāna.’
This misguided man Samiddhi would have answered the wanderer Potaliputta rightly if, when asked thus, he would have explained: ‘Friend Potaliputta, having done an intentional action by way of body, speech, or mind to be felt as pleasant, one feels pleasure.
This neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling has been stated by the Blessed One as a peaceful and sublime kind of pleasure.”
This oil-lamp in the thick darkness of the night or a great bonfire in the thick darkness of the night—of these two, which gives off the splendour that is more excellent and sublime?”—“The great bonfire, venerable sir.”
This one who lives the holy life is said to be undone by the undoing of one who lives the holy life.
This passage should be connected with the simile of the extinguished fire.
This pupil is said to be undone by the pupil’s undoing.
This recluse died while sitting.
This recluse is much too exacting!’ And they do not abandon that and they show discourtesy towards me as well as towards those bhikkhus desirous of training.
This recluse who died while sitting has come back to life!’ That was how the venerable Sañjīva came to have the designation ‘Sañjīva.’ 
This speculative view, bhikkhus, is called the thicket of views, the wilderness of views, the contortion of views, the vacillation of views, the fetter of views.
This stanza was uttered by the earlier Accomplished Ones, Fully Enlightened Ones, thus:
This statement seems to imply that Channa was an arahant at the time he committed suicide, though the commentary explains otherwise.
This teacher is said to be undone by the teacher’s undoing.
This teaching of the Enlightened One, We too will go forth under him, This man of lofty wisdom.”
This too I remember as a wonderful and marvello us quality of the Blessed One.
This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.
This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.
This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.
This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.
This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.
This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.
This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.
This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.
This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.
This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.
This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.
This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.
This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.
This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.
This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect and conduces to…unity.
This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to cohesion, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity.
This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to cohesion, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity.
This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to…unity.
This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to…unity.
This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to…unity.
This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to…unity.
This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to…unity.
This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to…unity.
This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to…unity.
This too is a rapture apart from sensual pleasures, apart from unwholesome states.
This too is a state higher and more sublime than knowledge and vision.
This too is a state higher and more sublime than knowledge and vision.
This too is a state higher and more sublime than knowledge and vision.
This too is a state higher and more sublime than knowledge and vision.
This too is a state higher and more sublime than knowledge and vision.
This too is a state higher and more sublime than knowledge and vision.
This too is a state higher and more sublime than knowledge and vision.
This too is a state higher and more sublime than knowledge and vision.
This too is the character of a true man.
This too is the character of a true man.
This too is the character of a true man.
This too is the character of a true man.
This too is the character of a true man.
This too is the character of a true man.
This too is the character of an untrue man.
This too is the character of an untrue man.
This too is the character of an untrue man.
This too is the character of an untrue man.
This too is the character of an untrue man.
This too is the character of an untrue man.
This too is the path to the company of Brahmā.”
This too is the path to the company of Brahmā.”
This too, brahmin, is called a footprint of the Tathāgata… but a noble disciple does not yet come to the conclusion: ‘The Blessed One is fully enlightened…’
This too, brahmin, is called a footprint of the Tathāgata…but a noble disciple does not yet come to the conclusion: ‘The Blessed One is fully enlightened…’
This too, brahmin, is called a footprint of the Tathāgata…but a noble disciple does not yet come to the conclusion: ‘The Blessed One is fully enlightened…’
This too, brahmin, is called a footprint of the Tathāgata…but a noble disciple does not yet come to the conclusion: ‘The Blessed One is fully enlightened…’
This too, brahmin, is called a footprint of the Tathāgata…but a noble disciple does not yet come to the conclusion: ‘The Blessed One is fully enlightened…’ 
This too, Udāyin, is a higher and more sublime state for the sake of realising which bhikkhus lead the holy life under me.
This too, Udāyin, is a higher and more sublime state for the sake of realising which bhikkhus lead the holy life under me.
This too, Udāyin, is a higher and more sublime state for the sake of realising which bhikkhus lead the holy life under me.
This too, Udāyin, is a higher and more sublime state for the sake of realising which bhikkhus lead the holy life under me.
This too, venerable sir, is why I infer according to Dhamma about the Blessed One: ‘The Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practising the good way.’
This too, venerable sir, is why I infer according to Dhamma about the Blessed One: ‘The Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practising the good way.’
This too, venerable sir, is why I infer according to Dhamma about the Blessed One: ‘The Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practising the good way.’
This too, venerable sir, is why I infer according to Dhamma about the Blessed One: ‘The Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practising the good way.’
This too, venerable sir, is why I infer according to Dhamma about the Blessed One: ‘The Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practising the good way.’
This too, venerable sir, is why I infer according to Dhamma about the Blessed One: ‘The Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practising the good way.’
This venerable one likes quiet and commends quiet.
This was our discussion that was interrupted when you arrived.”
This was our discussion, venerable sir, that was interrupted when the Blessed One arrived.”
This was our discussion, venerable sir, that was interrupted when the Blessed One arrived.”
This was the first simile that occurred to me spontaneously, never heard before.
This was the second simile that occurred to me spontaneously, never heard before.
This was the third simile that occurred to me spontaneously, never heard before.
This will serve for the striving of a clansman intent on striving.’
This, bhikkhus, is called the first foundation of mindfulness that the Noble One cultivates, cultivating which the Noble One is a teacher fit to instruct a group.
This, bhikkhus, is called the second foundation of mindfulness that the Noble One cultivates, cultivating which the Noble One is a teacher fit to instruct a group.
This, bhikkhus, is called the third foundation of mindfulness that the Noble One cultivates, cultivating which the Noble One is a teacher fit to instruct a group.
This, bhikkhus, is declared to be the first way directed to the base of nothingness.
This, bhikkhus, is declared to be the first way directed to the imperturbable.
This, bhikkhus, is declared to be the second way directed to the base of nothingness.
This, bhikkhus, is declared to be the second way directed to the imperturbable.
This, bhikkhus, is declared to be the third way directed to the base of nothingness.
This, bhikkhus, is declared to be the third way directed to the imperturbable.
This, bhikkhus, is declared to be the way directed to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.”
This, bhikkhus, is equanimity that is diversified, based on diversity.
This, bhikkhus, is equanimity that is unified, based on unity.
This, bhikkhus, is the path, the way that leads to reappearance there.
This, bhikkhus, is the path, the way that leads to reappearance there.
This, brahmin, is called a footprint of the Tathāgata, something scraped by the Tathāgata, something marked by the Tathāgata, but a noble disciple does not yet come to the conclusion: ‘The Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha is practising the good way.’ 
This, however, is not an invitation to moral nihilism, but a warning that even attachment to the noble teachings is an obstacle to progress.
This, moreover, hints at the danger in the worldling’s thought processes, since craving is pointed to by the Buddha as the origin of suffering.
Those animals that are born, age, and die in a rotten fish or in a rotten corpse or in rotten porridge or in a cesspit or in a sewer.
Those are few in the world who say: ‘It too would be the same, it too would be the same,’ and who abandon that view and do not take up some other view.
Those bhikkhus should all meet together in concord.
Those bhikkhus should all meet together in concord.
Those bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
Those dyed in lust, wrapped in darkness
Those good recluses and brahmins do not understand these three instances of clinging as they actually are.
Those in the assembly wondered and marvelled, and they said: “It is wonderful, sirs, it is marvellous, what great power and great might the recluse Gotama has, for the well-known and famous brahmin Brahmāyu to make such a display of humility!”
Those not mentioned here do not fit into any fixed set.
Those others do not recognise
Those recluses and brahmins of the second kind, by reckoning how the recluses and brahmins of the first kind had failed, and by planning and acting as they did with the precaution of going to live in the forest wilds, also failed to get free from Māra’s power and control.
Those recluses and brahmins of the second kind, by reckoning how the recluses and brahmins of the first kind had failed, and then planning and acting as they did with the precaution of going to live in the forest wilds, also failed to get free from Māra’s power and control.
Those recluses and brahmins of yours, Evil One, who claimed to be fully enlightened, were not fully enlightened.
Those recluses and brahmins, I say, are just like the deer of the first herd.
Those recluses and brahmins, I say, are just like the deer of the fourth herd.
Those recluses and brahmins, I say, are just like the deer of the second herd.
Those recluses and brahmins, I say, are just like the deer of the third herd.
Those teachings, being rightly grasped by them, conduce to their welfare and happiness for a long time.
Those teachings, being wrongly grasped by them, conduce to their harm and suffering for a long time.
Those things are found in me, and I am seen engaging in those things.’
Those things are not found in me, and I am not seen engaging in those things.’
Those things that are the basis for taints do not become manifest here in the Sangha until the Sangha has reached the acme of worldly gain…the acme of fame…great learning…long-standing renown; but when the Sangha has reached long-standing renown, then those things that are the basis for taints become manifest here in the Sangha, and then the Teacher makes known the training rule for disciples in order to ward off those things that are the basis for taints.
Those venerable ones were satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One’s words.
Those who know thus know rightly; those who think otherwise are mistaken.’
Those who know thus know rightly; those who think otherwise are mistaken.’
Those who know thus know rightly; those who think otherwise are mistaken.’
Those who know thus know rightly; those who think otherwise are mistaken.’
Those who were Blessed Ones, accomplished and fully enlightened in the past, at most only led the Sangha of bhikkhus to practise the right way as is done by Master Gotama now.
Those who were Blessed Ones, accomplished and fully enlightened in the past, at most only led the Sangha of bhikkhus to practise the right way as is done by me now.
Though called by a word of feminine gender, 
Though earlier MA explained the correct sense of upavajjakulāni, here the commentator seems oblivious to the pun and comments as if Channa had actually been at fault for associating too closely with lay people: “The Elder Sāriputta, showing the fault of intimacy with families in the preliminary stage of practice, asks: ‘When that bhikkhu had such supporters, could he have attained final Nibbāna?’
Though I say: ‘Gentlemen, do not break in and interrupt me when I am sitting in council; wait till the end of my speech,’ still they break in and interrupt me.
Though mind is multiple, varied, and of different aspects, there is mind affected by lust, by hate, and by delusion.
Though mind is multiple, varied, and of different aspects, there is mind unaffected by lust, by hate, or by delusion.
Though perception is multiple, varied, and of different aspects, there is perception of renunciation, perception of non-ill will, and perception of non-cruelty.
Though perception is multiple, varied, and of different aspects, there is perception of sensual desire, perception of ill will, and perception of cruelty.
Though the Sangha is being split
Though the wanderer Potaliputta’s question should have been analysed before being answered, this misguided man Samiddhi answered it one-sidedly.”
Though they lack self-awareness, Their birth is their distinctive mark;
Threefold True Knowledge
Through dispassion is liberated.
Through dispassion is liberated.
Through dispassion is liberated.
Through dispassion is liberated.
Through dispassion is liberated.
Through feeding on a single kola-fruit a day, my body reached a state of extreme emaciation.
Through feeding on a single rice grain a day, my body reached a state of extreme emaciation.
Through the non-existence of anything to cling to.
Thus a being’s reappearance is due to a being: one reappears through the actions one has performed.
Thus a being’s reappearance is due to a being: one reappears through the actions one has performed.
Thus a being’s reappearance is due to a being; one reappears through the actions one has performed.
Thus any corrupt conduct that he formerly had is abandoned and pure virtue is substituted.
Thus any corrupt conduct that he formerly had is abandoned and pure virtue is substituted.
Thus any corrupt conduct that he formerly had is abandoned and pure virtue is substituted.
Thus any pure virtue that he formerly had is abandoned and corrupt conduct is substituted.
Thus any pure virtue that he formerly had is abandoned and corrupt conduct is substituted.
Thus any pure virtue that he formerly had is abandoned and corrupt conduct is substituted.
Thus do disciples behave towards the Teacher with friendliness, not with hostility.
Thus do disciples behave towards the Teacher with hostility, not with friendliness.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus have I heard.
Thus he left the walk and went into his dwelling, where he sat down on a seat made ready.
Thus he obstinately adheres to what he himself has known, seen, and discovered, insisting: ‘Only this is true, anything else is wrong.’
Thus he obstinately adheres to what he himself has known, seen, and discovered, insisting: ‘Only this is true, anything else is wrong.’
Thus he obstinately adheres to what he himself has known, seen, and discovered, insisting: ‘Only this is true, anything else is wrong.’
Thus he obstinately adheres to what he himself has known, seen, and discovered, insisting: ‘Only this is true, anything else is wrong.’
Thus he obtains equanimity.
Thus he obtains equanimity.
Thus he obtains equanimity.
Thus he regards it as void of what is not there, but as to what remains there he understands that which is present thus: ‘This is present.’
Thus he regards it as void of what is not there, but as to what remains there he understands that which is present thus: ‘This is present.’
Thus he regards it as void of what is not there, but as to what remains there he understands that which is present thus: ‘This is present.’
Thus he regards it as void of what is not there, but as to what remains there he understands that which is present thus: ‘This is present.’
Thus he regards it as void of what is not there, but as to what remains there he understands that which is present thus: ‘This is present.’
Thus he regards it as void of what is not there, but as to what remains there he understands that which is present thus: ‘This is present.’
Thus he regards it as void of what is not there, but as to what remains there he understands that which is present thus: ‘This is present.’
Thus he regards it as void of what is not there, but as to what remains there he understands that which is present thus: ‘This is present.’
Thus he turned back and sat down at the root of a tree, folding his legs crosswise, setting his body erect, and establishing mindfulness in front of him.
Thus I say beings are the heirs of their actions.
Thus I say beings are the heirs of their actions.
Thus I say beings are the heirs to their actions.
Thus I speak of the abandoning even of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
Thus in such a variety of ways he dwells pursuing the practice of tormenting and mortifying the body.
Thus in such a variety of ways he dwells pursuing the practice of tormenting and mortifying the body.
Thus in such a variety of ways I dwelt pursuing the practice of tormenting and mortifying the body.
Thus it is impossible that Prince Jayasena, living in the midst of sensual pleasures,…could know, see, or realise that which must be known through renunciation, seen through renunciation, attained through renunciation, realised through renunciation.
Thus it is in this case, Sunakkhatta, that the Tathāgata thinks: ‘I should teach them the Dhamma.’
Thus it was that these two great beings rejoiced in each other’s good words.
Thus it was that these two great beings rejoiced in each other’s good words.
Thus sensual pleasure through sensual pleasures, but beyond sensual pleasure there is a pleasure at the peak of the sensual, and that is declared to be the highest among them.” 
Thus the Bhikkhunı̄ Sangha could not have existed at the time the sutta was spoken if Mahāpajāpatı̄ was still a lay woman.
Thus the Blessed One made the Nigaṇṭha Dīgha Tapassī maintain his statement up to the third time.
Thus the body is not self, tangibles are not self, body-consciousness is not self, body-contact is not self, feeling is not self, craving is not self.
Thus the body is not self.
Thus the descent of an embryo comes about through the union of these three things.’ 
Thus the ear is not self, sounds are not self, ear-consciousness is not self, ear-contact is not self, feeling is not self, craving is not self.
Thus the ear is not self.
Thus the eye is not self, forms are not self, eye-consciousness is not self, eye-contact is not self, feeling is not self, craving is not self.
Thus the eye is not self, forms are not self, eye-consciousness is not self, eye-contact is not self, feeling is not self.
Thus the eye is not self, forms are not self, eye-consciousness is not self, eye-contact is not self.
Thus the eye is not self, forms are not self, eye-consciousness is not self.
Thus the eye is not self, forms are not self.
Thus the eye is not self.
Thus the fool brings fear, the wise man brings no fear; the fool brings trouble, the wise man brings no trouble; the fool brings calamity, the wise man brings no calamity.
Thus the mind is not self, mind-objects are not self, mind-consciousness is not self, mind-contact is not self, feeling is not self, craving is not self.
Thus the mind is not self.
Thus the Nigaṇṭha Dīgha Tapassī made the Blessed One maintain his statement up to the third time, after which he rose from his seat and went to the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta.
Thus the nose is not self, odours are not self, nose-consciousness is not self, nose-contact is not self, feeling is not self, craving is not self.
Thus the nose is not self.
Thus the offering is purified both by the giver and by the receiver.
Thus the offering is purified by the giver, not by the receiver.
Thus the offering is purified by the receiver, not by the giver.
Thus the offering is purified neither by the giver nor by the receiver.
Thus the recluse Gotama is honoured, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples, and his disciples live in dependence on him, honouring and respecting him.’”
Thus the sutta expounds altogether twenty-one exercises in contemplation.
Thus the tongue is not self, flavours are not self, tongue-consciousness is not self, tongue-contact is not self, feeling is not self, craving is not self.
Thus the tongue is not self.
Thus their exertion is fruitless, their striving is fruitless.
Thus there are six kinds of exploration with joy, six kinds of exploration with grief, and six kinds of exploration with equanimity.
Thus there comes to be the undoing of one who leads the holy life.
Thus there is diversity in the desire and lust regarding these five aggregates affected by clinging.”
Thus there is the abandoning of that evil root of dispute; thus there is the non-eruption of that evil root of dispute in the future.
Thus there is the abandoning of that evil root of dispute; thus there is the non-eruption of that evil root of dispute in the future.
Thus these being five become three, and being three become five.
Thus these three states run and circle around right action, that is, right view, right effort, and right mindfulness.
Thus these three states run and circle around right intention, that is, right view, right effort, and right mindfulness.
Thus these three states run and circle around right livelihood, that is, right view, right effort, and right mindfulness.
Thus these three states run and circle around right speech, that is, right view, right effort, and right mindfulness.
Thus these three states run and circle around right view, that is, right view, right effort, and right mindfulness.
Thus this Noble Eightfold Path comes to fulfilment in him by development.
Thus this place will have been used by two Accomplished Ones, Fully Enlightened Ones.”
Thus those five things that the brahmins prescribe for the performance of merit, for accomplishing the wholesome, I call equipment of the mind, that is, for developing a mind that is without hostility and without ill will.”
Thus those five things that the brahmins prescribe for the performance of merit, for accomplishing the wholesome, I often see among those gone forth, seldom among householders.”
Thus too, bhikkhus, the exertion is fruitful, the striving is fruitful.
Thus too, bhikkhus, the exertion is fruitful, the striving is fruitful.
Thus too, bhikkhus, the exertion is fruitful, the striving is fruitful.
Thus too, bhikkhus, the exertion is fruitful, the striving is fruitful.
Thus too, bhikkhus, the exertion is fruitful, the striving is fruitful.
Thus too, bhikkhus, the exertion is fruitful, the striving is fruitful.
Thus too, bhikkhus, the exertion is fruitful, the striving is fruitful.
Thus too, bhikkhus, the exertion is fruitful, the striving is fruitful.
Thus we might identify the gandhabba here as the stream of consciousness, conceived more animistically as coming over from the previous existence and bringing along its total accumulation of kammic tendencies and personality traits.
Thus we shall know about Master Gotama through you.”
Thus we take it in this case: ‘With being as condition, birth.’”
Thus we take it in this case: ‘With birth as condition, ageing and death.’”
Thus we take it in this case: ‘With clinging as condition, being.’”
Thus we take it in this case: ‘With consciousness as condition, mentality-materiality.’”
Thus we take it in this case: ‘With contact as condition, feeling.’”
Thus we take it in this case: ‘With craving as condition, clinging.’”
Thus we take it in this case: ‘With feeling as condition, craving.’”
Thus we take it in this case: ‘With formations as condition, consciousness.’”
Thus we take it in this case: ‘With ignorance as condition, formations.’”
Thus we take it in this case: ‘With mentality-materiality as condition, the sixfold base.’”
Thus we take it in this case: ‘With the cessation of birth, cessation of ageing and death.’”
Thus we take it in this case: ‘With the cessation of ignorance, cessation of formations.’”
Thus we take it in this case: ‘With the sixfold base as condition, contact.’”
Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he understands how beings pass on according to their actions.
Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he understands how beings pass on according to their actions.
Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he understands how beings pass on according to their actions.
Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, I saw beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and I understood how beings pass on according to their actions.
Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, they see beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and they understand how beings pass on according to their actions.
Thus with their aspects and particulars he recollects his manifold past lives.
Thus with their aspects and particulars I recollected my manifold past lives.
Thus with their aspects and particulars they recollect their manifold past lives.
Thus you should train.
Thus you should train.
Thus you should train.
Thus you should train.
Thus you should train.
Thus you should train.
Thus you should train.
Thus you should train.
Thus you should train.
Thus you should train.
Thus you should train.”
Thus, because Māra was unable to reply, and because with the Brahmā’s invitation, this discourse is entitled “On the Invitation of a Brahmā.”
Thus, bhikkhus, the exertion is fruitful, the striving is fruitful.
Thus, bhikkhus, the path of the disciple in higher training possesses eight factors, the arahant possesses ten factors.
Thus, Brahmā, in regard to direct knowledge I do not stand merely at the same level as you, how then could I know less?
Thus, Brahmā, in regard to direct knowledge I do not stand merely at the same level as you, how then could I know less?
Thus, Brahmā, in regard to direct knowledge I do not stand merely at the same level as you, how then could I know less?
Thus, Brahmā, in regard to direct knowledge, I do not stand merely at the same level as you, how then could I know less?
Thus, foreseeing for himself clashes, disputes, quarrels, and vexation, he abandons that view and does not take up some other view.
Thus, foreseeing for himself clashes, disputes, quarrels, and vexation, he abandons that view and does not take up some other view.
Thus, foreseeing for himself clashes, disputes, quarrels, and vexation, he abandons that view and does not take up some other view.
Thus, Udāyin, it is not because of these five qualities that my disciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate me, and live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.
Thus, what is here called ‘agitation due to non-clinging’ is in meaning agitation due to clinging by way of views.” Ñm had followed this reading, and on the basis of MA’s explanation, had rendered the phrase “anguish due to not finding anything to cling to.”
Thus, while needing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood, he came to a great tree standing possessed of heartwood, and cutting off only its heartwood, he took it away knowing it was heartwood.
Thus, while needing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood, he came to a great tree standing possessed of heartwood, and cutting off only its heartwood, he took it away knowing it was heartwood.
Thus, while needing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood, he came to a great tree standing possessed of heartwood, and passing over its heartwood, its sapwood, its inner bark, and its outer bark, he cut off its twigs and leaves and took them away thinking they were heartwood.
Thus, while needing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood, he came to a great tree standing possessed of heartwood, and passing over its heartwood, its sapwood, its inner bark, and its outer bark, he cut off its twigs and leaves and took them away thinking they were heartwood.
Thus, while needing heartwood…he cut off its inner bark and took it away thinking it was hear twood.
Thus, while needing heartwood…he cut off its inner bark and took it away thinking it was heartwood.
Thus, while needing heartwood…he cut off its outer bark and took it away thinking it was heartwood.
Thus, while needing heartwood…he cut off its outer bark and took it away thinking it was heartwood.
Thus, while needing heartwood…he cut off its sapwood and took it away thinking it was heartwood.
Thus, while needing heartwood…he cut off its sapwood and took it away thinking it was heartwood.
Thus, Ānanda, this is his genuine, undistorted, pure descent into voidness, supreme and unsurpassed.
Thus, Ānanda, this is his genuine, undistorted, pure descent into voidness.
Thus, Ānanda, this too is his genuine, undistorted, pure descent into voidness.
Thus, Ānanda, this too is his genuine, undistorted, pure descent into voidness.
Thus, Ānanda, this too is his genuine, undistorted, pure descent into voidness.
Thus, Ānanda, this too is his genuine, undistorted, pure descent into voidness.
Thus, Ānanda, this too is his genuine, undistorted, pure descent into voidness.
Thus, Ānanda, this too is his genuine, undistorted, pure descent into voidness.
Tissa and Upatissa not bound to being;
To abide perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive, one pervades a attractive person with the idea of the foulness of the body, or one attends to an attractive object as impermanent.
To adhere to them with firm conviction closes off the prospect of a heavenly rebirth and the attainment of liberation.
To beings subject to ageing…subject to sickness…subject to death…subject to sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair, there comes the wish: ‘Oh, that we were not subject to sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair!
To beings subject to birth there comes the wish: ‘Oh, that we were not subject to birth!
To gods, to spirits, and to men, An arahant with taints destroyed:
To place it on a pyre and burn it there.
To reappear in many a mode, Unclutching he, sublime, awake:
To rebirth in the evil realms, Yet their result has reached me now, And so I eat free from debt.
to Sakuludāyin
To set in motion the Wheel of Dhamma.
Today how could I maintain
Today I shall attain final Nibbāna.”
Today the effort must be made;
Today the effort must be made;
Today the effort must be made;
Today there will be some conversation between me and the recluse Gotama.
Today there will be some conversation between me and the recluse Gotama.”
Together with the arising of his vision, his desire and liking for that dirty soiled garment would be abandoned; then he might burn with indignation and enmity towards that man and might think that he ought to be killed thus: ‘Indeed, I have long been tricked, cheated, and defrauded by this man with this dirty soiled garment when he told me: “Good man, here is a white cloth for you, beautiful, spotless, and clean.”’
Together with the arising of your vision, your desire and lust for the five aggregates affected by clinging might be abandoned.
Tomorrow Death may come, who knows?
Tomorrow Death may come, who knows?
Tomorrow Death may come, who knows?
Touched by that painful feeling, he does not sorrow, grieve, and lament, he does not weep beating his breast and become distraught.
Touched by that painful feeling, he sorrows, grieves, and laments, he weeps beating his breast and becomes distraught.
Touched by that pleasant feeling, he does not lust after pleasure or continue to lust after pleasure.
Touched by that pleasant feeling, he lusts after pleasure and continues to lust after pleasure.
Towards the moon when it starts to wax, So in the world do they venerate you
Towns are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.
Trade again is that work involving a small amount of activity…which, when it succeeds, is of great fruit.
Trade is that work involving a small amount of activity…which, when it fails, is of small fruit.
Travelling by stages, he came to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
True knowledge and deliverance.
Truly to the question asked him: 
Truthfully and in due sequence:
Try to understand it.”
Two of them, that is, the nobles and the brahmins, are held to be superior since men pay homage to them, rise up for them, and accord them reverential salutation and polite services.”
Two sages named Jāli, and Aṭṭhaka, Then Kosala the enlightened, then Subāhu, Upanemi, and Nemi, and Santacitta
Uncurbed their mouths, they bawl at will;
Under whom have you gone forth, friend?
Under you, O Blessed One.’”
Undertaking Things
Undertaking Things
Unification of mind equipped with these seven factors is called noble right concentration with its supports and its requisites.
Unwholesome habits originate from this.
Unwholesome intentions originate from this.
Upanīta attained the state of peace, Purified, excellent, truly named.
Upasīdarin, and Sīdarin, free from craving.
Upon your body, Gotama.
Usabha cut the net, the root of suffering.
Ven.
Venerable sir, a transgression overcame me, in that like a fool, confused and blundering, when a training precept was being made known by the Blessed One, when the Sangha of bhikkhus was undertaking the training, I declared my refusal to comply.
Venerable sir, do those who speak thus say what has been said by the Blessed One, and not misrepresent him with what is contrary to fact?
Venerable sir, does such a bhikkhu attain Nibbāna?”
Venerable sir, happiness and joy are born from those who are dear, arise from those who are dear.”
Venerable sir, I can drive an elephant to be tamed, and in the time it takes to make a trip back and forth in Campā, that elephant will show every kind of deception, duplicity, crookedness, and fraud.
Venerable sir, I did not get your consent when I told you: ‘Venerable sir, I do not agree that the householder Upāli should refute the recluse Gotama’s doctrine.
Venerable sir, I go to the Blessed One for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
Venerable sir, I have confidence in the Blessed One thus: ‘The Blessed One is capable of teaching me the Dhamma in such a way that I can abandon this ox-duty and that this Seniya the naked dog-duty ascetic can abandon that dog-duty.’”
Venerable sir, I have heard that the recluse Gotama says thus: ‘Gifts should be given only to me; gifts should not be given to others.
Venerable sir, I shall go and refute the recluse Gotama’s doctrine on the basis of this statement.”
Venerable sir, I was upset and sad, thinking: ‘Faithful householders give us good food of various kinds during the day outside the proper time, yet the Blessed One tells us to abandon it, the Sublime One tells us to relinquish it.’
Venerable sir, I was upset and sad, thinking: ‘The Blessed One tells us to abandon the more sumptuous of our two meals, the Sublime One tells us to relinquish it.’
Venerable sir, I wish to shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness.
Venerable sir, if my beloved kinsmen and relatives were to be converted by this conversion, it would lead to the welfare and happiness of my beloved kinsmen and relatives for a long time.
Venerable sir, if you need alms, wait here; they will bring it to you here.’”—“Yes, venerable sir,” the doorkeeper replied.
Venerable sir, if you need alms, wait here; they will bring it to you here.”
Venerable sir, if you need alms, wait here; they will bring it to you here.”
Venerable sir, it would be good if the Blessed One went there out of compassion.”
Venerable sir, just as when a young calf does not see its mother there may take place in it some change or alteration, so too, venerable sir, there are new bhikkhus here, just gone forth, recently come to this Dhamma and Discipline.
Venerable sir, just as when young seedlings get no water there may take place in them some change or alteration, so too, venerable sir, there are new bhikkhus here, just gone forth, recently come to this Dhamma and Discipline.
Venerable sir, let the Blessed One accept it from me out of compassion.”
Venerable sir, let the Blessed One be the first to use it.
Venerable sir, let the Blessed One delight in the Sangha of the bhikkhus; venerable sir, let the Blessed One welcome the Sangha of bhikkhus; venerable sir, let the Blessed One help the Sangha of bhikkhus now as he used to help it in the past.”
Venerable sir, let the venerable Ānanda accept the cloak.”
Venerable sir, may the Blessed One forgive my transgression seen as such for the sake of restraint in the future.”
Venerable sir, may the Blessed One forgive my transgression seen as such for the sake of restraint in the future.”
Venerable sir, may the Blessed One forgive my transgression seen as such for the sake of restraint in the future.”
Venerable sir, may the Blessed One forgive my transgression seen as such for the sake of restraint in the future.”
Venerable sir, the Blessed One has inspired in me love for recluses, confidence in recluses, reverence for recluses.
Venerable sir, the Blessed One is my visible witness to that; for the Blessed One abides in equanimity.”
Venerable sir, the Blessed One is my visible witness to that; for the Blessed One abides in loving-kindness.”
Venerable sir, the immeasurable deliverance of mind and the exalted deliverance of mind — are these states different in meaning and different in name, or are they one in meaning and different only in name?”
Venerable sir, there are new bhikkhus here, just gone forth, recently come to this Dhamma and Discipline.
Venerable sir, these sectarians will even seek a teacher’s fee for their teacher; why shouldn’t I make an offering to the venerable Ānanda?”
Venerable sir, this is a superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones, a comfortable abiding, which we have attained while abiding diligent, ardent, and resolute.”
Venerable sir, this is another superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones, a comfortable abiding, which we have attained by surmounting the preceding abiding, by making that abiding subside.
Venerable sir, this is another superhuman state…which we have attained by surmounting the preceding abiding, by making that abiding subside.”
Venerable sir, this is another superhuman state…which we have attained by surmounting the preceding abiding, by making that abiding subside.”
Venerable sir, this Puṇṇa, son of the Koliyans, is an ox-duty ascetic.
Venerable sir, we are so satisfied and pleased with what has been so well expressed by the venerable Ānanda that if the elephant-treasure were allowed to him, we would give it to him; if the horse-treasure were allowed to him, we would give it to him; if the boon of a village were allowed to him, we would give it to him.
Venerable sir, we ourselves could not tame him with force and weapons, yet the Blessed One has tamed him without force or weapons.
Venerable sir, what is the name of this discourse on the Dhamma?”
Venerable sir, what is the name of this discourse on the Dhamma?”
Venerable sir, when I do not come to this assembly, then it sits talking many kinds of pointless talk.
Verbal conduct is of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.
Villages are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.
Villages, towns, and districts have been laid waste by him!
Villages, towns, and districts have been laid waste by him.
Villages, towns, and districts have been laid waste by him.
Villages, towns, and districts were laid waste by him.
Walk alone and do no evil, At ease like a tusker in the woods.”
Wanderers of other sects who ask thus may be answered in this way: ‘Friends, four things have been declared to us by the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened; on seeing these in ourselves we say thus: “Only here is there a recluse, only here a second recluse, only here a third recluse, only here a fourth recluse.
Wanderers of other sects who speak thus should be told: ‘Friends, the Blessed One describes pleasure not only with reference to pleasant feeling; rather, friends, the Tathāgata describes as pleasure any kind of pleasure wherever and in whatever way it is found.’” 
Wandering by stages he eventually arrived at Rājagaha, and there he lived in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels’ Sanctuary.
Wandering by stages, he eventually arrived at Benares, and there he went to live in the Deer Park at Isipatana.
Wandering by stages, he eventually arrived at Sāvatthī, and there he lived at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
Wandering by stages, he eventually arrived at Sāvatthī, and there he lived at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
Wandering by stages, he eventually arrived at Sāvatthī and went to Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park, to see the Blessed One.
Wandering by stages, he eventually arrived at Sāvatthī, and there he lived in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
Wandering by stages, he eventually arrived at Thullakoṭṭhita.
Wandering by stages, he eventually arrived in the Sunāparanta country, and there he lived.
Was I not in the past?
Was it an unwholesome bodily action with painful consequences, with painful results?’
Was it with reference to this that you said: ‘The recluse Gotama is a destroyer of growth’?”
Was it with reference to this that you said: ‘The recluse Gotama is a destroyer of growth’?”
We approve of and accept this, and so we are satisfied.’
We are busy and have much to do.”
We are busy and have much to do.”
We are busy and have much to do.”
We are busy and have much to do.”
We are busy and have much to do.”
We are busy and have much to do.”
We are busy and have much to do.”
We are busy and have much to do.” “Now is the time, Aggivessana, to do as you think fit.”
We are busy and have much to do.” “You may go, student, at your own convenience.”
We are different in body, venerable sir, but one in mind.”
We are different in body, venerable sir, but one in mind.”
We are homeless, householder.
We are lost along with our own teachers’ doctrines!
We are not speaking with you, here we are speaking with Master Gotama.”
We are the ones who will be responsible for this quarrelling, brawling, wrangling, and dispute.”
We ask Master Gotama about the discovery of truth.”
We ask Master Gotama about the final arrival at truth.” “The final arrival at truth, Bhāradvāja, lies in the repetition, development, and cultivation of those same things.
We ask Master Gotama about the preservation of truth.”
We ask Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for a reflective acceptance of the teachings.”
We ask Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for application of the will.” “Zeal is most helpful for application of the will, Bhāradvāja.
We ask Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for examination of meaning.”
We ask Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for giving ear.”
We ask Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for hearing the Dhamma.”
We ask Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for memorising the teachings.”
We ask Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for paying respect.”
We ask Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for scrutiny.”
We ask Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for striving.”
We ask Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for the final arrival at truth.” “Striving is most helpful for the final arrival at truth, Bhāradvāja.
We ask Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for visiting.”
We ask Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for zeal.”
We asked Master Gotama about the discovery of truth, and Master Gotama answered about the discovery of truth; we approve of and accept that answer, and so we are satisfied.
We asked Master Gotama about the final arrival at truth, and Master Gotama answered about the final arrival at truth; we approve of and accept that answer, and so we are satisfied.
We asked Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for the final arrival at truth, and Master Gotama answered about the thing most helpful for the final arrival at truth; we approve of and accept that answer, and so we are satisfied.
We ate the bait and now depart
We consumed food within the proper time and outside the proper time; we ate within the proper time and outside the proper time; we tasted food within the proper time and outside the proper time; we drank within the proper time and outside the proper time.
We consumed what was allowable and what was not allowable; we ate what was allowable and what was not allowable; we tasted what was allowable and what was not allowable; we drank what was allowable and what was not allowable.
We do not permit you to go forth from the home life into homelessness.
We do not recognise anything of value in the praise and blame of others spoken by foolish ignorant persons, who speak without having investigated and evaluated; but we recognise as valuable the praise and blame of others spoken by wise, intelligent, and sagacious persons who speak after having investigated and evaluated.
We go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
We go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
We go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
We have a refuge; we have the Dhamma as our refuge.’
We have a refuge; we have the Dhamma as our refuge.”
We have asked the Blessed One about purification in the four castes, and the Blessed One has answered about purification in the four castes; we approve of and accept that answer, and so we are satisfied.
We have asked the Blessed One about the Brahmās, and the Blessed One has answered about the Brahmās; we approve of and accept that answer, and so we are satisfied.
We have asked the Blessed One about the gods, and the Blessed One has answered about the gods; we approve of and accept that answer, and so we are satisfied.
We have attained full mastery
We have confidence in the Teacher, we have confidence in the Dhamma, we have fulfilled the precepts, and our companions in the Dhamma are dear and agreeable to us whether they are laymen or those gone forth.
We have never before seen or heard of any other recluse or brahmin who had such great power and such great might as has this recluse Gotama, who went forth from a Sakyan clan.
We know nothing higher than that!” 
We know that.
We match our teachers in recitation.
We might resolve the discrepancy by supposing that the original discourse was later modified after the founding of the Bhikkhunı̄ Sangha to bring the latter into the scheme of offerings to the Sangha.
We owe it to Kāsi and Kosala that we use Kāsi sandalwood and wear garlands, scents, and unguents.”
We shall abide pervading that person with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, and starting with him, we shall abide pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.’
We shall abide pervading that person with a mind imbued with loving-kindness; and starting with him, we shall abide pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind similar to a catskin bag, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.’
We shall abide pervading them with a mind imbued with loving-kindness; and starting with them, we shall abide pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.’
We shall eat in the evening, in the morning, and in the day outside the proper time.”
We shall eat in the evening, in the morning, and in the day outside the proper time’?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”
We should not pay homage to him or rise up for him or receive his bowl and outer robe.
We speak as we do out of respect for the Teacher’?”—“No, venerable sir.”—“Knowing and seeing in this way, would you speak thus: ‘The Recluse says this, and we speak thus at the bidding of the Recluse’?” —“No, venerable sir.”—“Knowing and seeing in this way, would you acknowledge another teacher?”—“No, venerable sir.”—“Knowing and seeing in this way, would you return to the observances, tumultuous debates, and auspicious signs of ordinary recluses and brahmins, taking them as the core?”—“No, venerable sir.”—“Do you speak only of what you have known, seen, and understood for yourselves?” —“Yes, venerable sir.”
We think of the Blessed One in this way: ‘The Tathāgata has abandoned the taints that defile, bring renewal of being, give trouble, ripen in suffering, and lead to future birth, ageing, and death.
We too have heard earlier wanderers who were teachers and teachers of teachers saying this, and it agrees, Master Gotama.”
We want the venerable Channa to live.
We want the venerable Channa to live.”
We want to see Master Gotama.”
We want to see the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened.”
We went to your house, but we received neither alms nor a polite refusal there; instead we received only abuse.”
We were bold and impudent in thinking we could attack Master Gotama in debate.
We will act in full awareness when going forward and returning; we will act in full awareness when looking ahead and looking away; we will act in full awareness when flexing and extending our limbs; we will act in full awareness when wearing our robes and carrying our outer robe and bowl; we will act in full awareness when eating, drinking, consuming food, and tasting; we will act in full awareness when defecating and urinating; we will act in full awareness when walking, standing, sitting, falling asleep, waking up, talking, and keeping silent.’
We will answer that for you, sirs.”
We will answer them.”
Welcome to Master Ānanda!
Welcome to Master Ānanda!
Welcome to the Blessed One!
Welcome to the Blessed One!
Welcome, good sir Moggallāna!
Welcome, good sir!
Welcome, great king!
Were we not in the past?
Were you on that occasion one liberated-in-both-ways or one liberated-by-wisdom or a body-witness or one attained-to-view or one liberated-by-faith or a Dhamma-follower or a faith-follower?”
What abiding do you often abide in now, Sāriputta?”
What am I?
What am I?
What are the eight?
What are the eight?
What are the five?
What are the five?
What are the five?
What are the five?
What are the five?
What are the five?
What are the five?
What are the five?
What are the five?
What are the five?
What are the five?
What are the four?
What are the four?
What are the four?
What are the four?
What are the four?
What are the four?
What are the four?
What are the four?
What are the four?
What are the four?
What are the four?
What are the four?
What are the four?
What are the four?
What are the seven?
What are the seven?
What are the six?
What are the six?
What are the six?
What are the ten?
What are the ten?
What are the ten?
What can I do about that, brahmin?
What can the Bāhukā River do?”
What can the Sundarikā bring to pass?
What danger does Master Gotama see that he does not take up any of these speculative views?”
What do I know and see that I should lead the holy life under this teacher?’
What do I know and see that I should lead the holy life under this teacher?’
What do you think, Aggivessana, is material form permanent or impermanent?”—“Impermanent, Master Gotama.”—“Is what is impermanent suffering or happiness?”—“Suffering, Master Gotama.”—“Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change fit to be regarded thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self’?”—“No, Master Gotama.”
What do you think, Aggivessana?
What do you think, Aggivessana?
What do you think, Aggivessana?
What do you think, Aggivessana?
What do you think, Aggivessana?
What do you think, Aggivessana?
What do you think, Aggivessana?
What do you think, Aggivessana?
What do you think, Aggivessana?
What do you think, Bhāradvāja, that being so, does not the faith of the brahmins turn out to be groundless?”
What do you think, bhikkhus?
What do you think, bhikkhus?
What do you think, bhikkhus?
What do you think, bhikkhus?
What do you think, bhikkhus?
What do you think, bhikkhus?
What do you think, bhikkhus?
What do you think, bhikkhus?
What do you think, bhikkhus?
What do you think, bhikkhus?
What do you think, bhikkhus?
What do you think, bhikkhus?
What do you think, bhikkhus?
What do you think, bhikkhus?
What do you think, bhikkhus?
What do you think, bhikkhus?
What do you think, bhikkhus?
What do you think, brahmin?
What do you think, friend Kaccāna?
What do you think, friends?
What do you think, friends?
What do you think, great king?
What do you think, great king?
What do you think, great king?
What do you think, great king?
What do you think, great king?
What do you think, great king?
What do you think, householder, would such a recluse or brahmin be able to do that?” 
What do you think, householder, would that man be able to do that?”
What do you think, householder?
What do you think, householder?
What do you think, householder?
What do you think, householder?
What do you think, householder?
What do you think, householder?
What do you think, householder?
What do you think, householders?
What do you think, householders?
What do you think, householders?
What do you think, householders?
What do you think, householders?
What do you think, Jīvaka?
What do you think, Māgandiya, would that doctor reap weariness and disappointment?”—“Yes, Master Gotama.”—“So too, Māgandiya, if I were to teach you the Dhamma thus: ‘This is that health, this is that Nibbāna,’ you might not know health or see Nibbāna, and that would be wearisome and troublesome for me.” 
What do you think, Māgandiya?
What do you think, Māgandiya?
What do you think, Māgandiya?
What do you think, prince?
What do you think, prince?
What do you think, prince?
What do you think, prince?
What do you think, student?
What do you think, Sunakkhatta, would that man drink that cup of beverage, knowing: ‘If I drink this I will incur death or deadly suffering’?” —“No, venerable sir.” —“So too, that bhikkhu is one who practises restraint in the six bases of contact.
What do you think, Sunakkhatta, would that man give that deadly poisonous snake his hand or his thumb, knowing: ‘If I am bitten by him I will incur death or deadly suffering’?”—“No, venerable sir.”—“So too, when a bhikkhu practises restraint in the six bases of contact, and having understood that attachment is the root of suffering, is without attachment, liberated by the destruction of attachment, it is not possible that he would direct his body or arouse his mind towards any object of attachment.”
What do you think, Sunakkhatta?
What do you think, Sunakkhatta?
What do you think, Udāyin, that being so, would not that man’s talk amount to nonsense?”
What do you think, Udāyin?
What does it cognize?
What does it feel?
What does it perceive?
What does Master Gotama say about that?”
What does Master Gotama say about this?”
What does Master Gotama say about this?”
What does Master Gotama say about this?”
What does Master Gotama say about this?”
What does Master Gotama say about this?”
What does Master Gotama say about this?”
What does Master Kaccāna say about that?”
What does one cognize with that consciousness?
What does one wisely understand?
What does the trivial mental rod count for in comparison with the gross bodily rod?
What does the trivial mental rod count for in comparison with the gross bodily rod?
What does the trivial mental rod count for in comparison with the gross bodily rod?
What does the venerable Bhūmija’s teacher say here, what does he declare?”
What eleven?
What eleven?
What eleven?
What eleven?
What exists, what has come to be, that I am abandoning.’
What exists, what has come to be, that I am abandoning.’
What exists, what has come to be, that I am abandoning.’
What five?
What five?
What five?
What five?
What five?
What five?
What five?
What five?
What four?
What four?
What four?
What four?
What four?
What four?
What four?
What four?
What four?
What four?
What four?
What four?
What four?”...
What good does a disciple see that he should seek the Teacher’s company even if he is told to go away?”
What has he known or seen or heard that he has gone forth from the home life into homelessness?
What has he known or seen or heard that he has gone forth from the home life into homelessness?
What has he known or seen or heard that he has gone forth from the home life into homelessness?
What has he known or seen or heard that he has gone forth from the home life into homelessness?
What has he known or seen or heard that he has gone forth from the home life into homelessness?”
What have you seen and directly known in the ear…in the nose…in the tongue…in the body…in the mind, in mind-consciousness, and in things cognizable through mind-consciousness, that you regard them thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self’?”
What if I exert myself in what is painful?’
What if I lie down?’ and he would lie down.
What if I sit?’ and he would sit; then he might consider: ‘Why am I sitting?
What if I stand?’ and he would stand; then he might consider: ‘Why am I standing?
What if I stirred up a sense of urgency in him?”
What if I subdue that fear and dread while keeping the same posture that I am in when it comes upon me?’ 
What if I walk slowly?’ and he would walk slowly; then he might consider: ‘Why am I walking slowly?
What if I were to abandon my desire and lust for that woman?’
What is better for those well-to-do brahmins of Kosala such as the brahmin Cankī, the brahmin Tārukkha, the brahmin Pokkharasāti, the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi, or your father, the brahmin Todeyya—that the statements they make accord with worldly convention or flaunt worldly convention?”—“That they accord with worldly convention, Master Gotama.”
What is blameable?
What is blameless?
What is called identity by the Blessed One?”
What is called the cessation of identity by the Blessed One?”
What is called the origin of identity by the Blessed One?”
What is called the way leading to the cessation of identity by the Blessed One?”
What is contrary to the teachings, adhammā, would include the moral laxity that the bhikkhu Ariṭṭha advocated.
What is his destination, what is his future course?”
What is his destination?
What is his destination?
What is his destination?
What is his future course?”
What is his future course?”
What is his future course?”
What is impermanent is not worth delighting in, not worth welcoming, not worth holding to.’
What is it that is not yours?
What is it that is not yours?
What is moisture-born generation?
What is neither painful-nor-pleasant feeling?”
What is not given, long or short, Small or big or fair or foul:
What is painful and what is pleasant in regard to painful feeling?
What is painful feeling?
What is pleasant and what is painful in regard to neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling?”
What is spontaneous generation?
What is that perfect splendour?”
What is the basis of concentration?
What is the cause and condition for the manifestation of the feeling aggregate… the perception aggregate…the formations aggregate…the consciousness aggregate?”
What is the cause and condition, Master Gotama, why human beings are seen to be inferior and superior?”
What is the cause and reason why, of these two persons with no blemish, one is called the inferior man and one is called the superior man?”
What is the cause, what is the reason, why there are now more training rules and fewer bhikkhus become established in final knowledge?”
What is the cause, what is the reason, why they do not take such action against some bhikkhu here by repeatedly admonishing him?”
What is the character of a person who possesses right view?
What is the character of a person who possesses right view?
What is the development of concentration?”
What is the distinction here, friends, what is the variance, what is the difference between you and us?’
What is the equipment of concentration?
What is the gratification, what is the danger, and what is the escape in the case of feelings?’
What is the gratification, what is the danger, and what is the escape in the case of feeling…in the case of perception…in the case of formations…in the case of consciousness?”
What is the gratification, what is the danger, and what is the escape in the case of material form?
What is the internal air element?
What is the internal air element?
What is the internal air element?
What is the internal earth element?
What is the internal earth element?
What is the internal fire element?
What is the internal fire element?
What is the internal fire element?
What is the internal space element?
What is the internal space element?
What is the internal water element?
What is the internal water element?
What is the internal water element?
What is the knife, what the delving, what the bar, what the toad, what the fork, what the sieve, what the tortoise, what the butcher’s knife and block, what the piece of meat, what the Nāga serpent?” 
What is the meaning of this?’
What is the meaning of this?’
What is the meaning of this?’
What is the meaning of this?’
What is the meaning of this?’” “Venerable sir, we are satisfied and pleased with the master Nandaka in that he invites us even with this much.”
What is the mental formation?”
What is the name of this discourse on the Dhamma?”
What is the purpose of a mirror?”
What is the strength of a person who possesses right view?
What is the strength of a person who possesses right view?
What is the verbal formation?
What is this, and how is this?’
What is unwholesome?
What is womb-born generation?
What kind of action will lead to my harm and suffering for a long time?
What kind of action will lead to my welfare and happiness for a long time?’
What kind of approval, what kind of oral tradition, what kind of reasoned cogitation, what kind of reflective acceptance of a view?’
What kind of bhikkhu, friend Revata, could illuminate this Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood?”
What kind of bhikkhu, friend Sāriputta, could illuminate this Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood?”
What kind of bhikkhu, friend Ānanda, could illuminate the Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood?”
What kind of meditation did the Blessed One not praise?
What kind of result do the brahmins describe for this?”
What mind?
What mind?
What must be known is directly known, What must be developed has been developed, What must be abandoned has been abandoned, Therefore, brahmin, I am a Buddha.
What must be known I’ve directly known, What must be developed I have developed, What must be abandoned I have abandoned, Therefore, brahmin, I am a Buddha.
What one feels, that one perceives.
What one feels, that one perceives.
What one perceives, that one thinks about.
What one perceives, that one thinks about.
What one thinks about, that one mentally proliferates.
What one thinks about, that one mentally proliferates.
What perception?
What perception?
What purpose does the Tathāgata see that when a disciple has died, he declares his reappearance thus: ‘So-and-so has reappeared in such-and-such a place; so-and-so has reappeared in such-and-such a place’?” 
What recluse or brahmin may we go to today to pay our respects?”
What result does the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta describe for him?”
What self, then, will actions done by the not-self affect?’
What self, then, will actions done by the not-self affect?” 
What seven?
What shall I be in the future?
What shall we be in the future?
What should be abandoned in regard to neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling?”
What should be abandoned in regard to painful feeling?
What should be cultivated?
What should be said about giving a gift to a Tathāgata, accomplished and fully enlightened?
What should be said about giving a gift to one who has entered upon the way to the realisation of the fruit of once-return…to a once-returner…to one who has entered upon the way to the realisation of the fruit of non-return…to a non-returner…to one who has entered upon the way to the realisation of the fruit of arahantship…to an arahant…to a paccekabuddha?
What should have been said first you said last.
What should have been said first, you said last.
What should have been said last you said first.
What should have been said last, you said first.
What should not be cultivated?
What six?
What six?
What six?
What ten?
What the Bāhukā?
What the Payāga?
What the venerable Ānanda has said appears reasonable, what he has said appears to be supported by reason.
What then is the distinction here, friends, what is the variance, what is the difference between the recluse Gotama’s teaching of the Dhamma and ours, between his instructions and ours?” 
What they say turns out to be ridiculous; it turns out to be mere words, empty and hollow.”
What three?
What three?
What truly leads to his own good, Should investigate the Dhamma
What two?
What underlying tendency underlies neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling?”
What underlying tendency underlies painful feeling?
What was I in the past?
What were we in the past?
What will be his destination?
What will be his destination?
What will be his destination?
What will be his destination?
What will be his future course?”
What will be his future course?”
What will be his future course?”
What will be his future course?”
What would you do?”
What would you do?” 
What would you say to him, Māgandiya?”—“Nothing, Master Gotama.”
What would you say to him, Māgandiya?”—“Nothing, Master Gotama.”
What you had so carefully thought up has been turned inside out.
What you had so carefully thought up has been turned inside out.
What you said afterwards does not agree with what you said before, nor does what you said before agree with what you said afterwards.
What you said afterwards does not agree with what you said before, nor does what you said before agree with what you said afterwards.
What you said afterwards does not agree with what you said before, nor does what you said before agree with what you said afterwards.
What you said afterwards does not agree with what you said before, nor does what you said before agree with what you said afterwards.
What you said afterwards does not agree with what you said before, nor does what you said before agree with what you said afterwards.
What you said afterwards does not agree with what you said before, nor does what you said before agree with what you said afterwards.
What you said afterwards does not agree with what you said before, nor does what you said before agree with what you said afterwards.
What you said afterwards does not agree with what you said before, nor does what you said before agree with what you said afterwards.
What you said before does not agree with what you said afterwards, nor does what you said afterwards agree with what you said before.
What you think is good, great king, and what you have heard from the arahants is good.
What you think is good, great king, and what you have heard from the arahants is good.
What you think is good, great king, and what you have heard from the arahants is good.
What you think is good, great king, and what you have heard from the arahants is good.
What, then, should be said about giving a gift to a stream-enterer?
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is air, airy, and clung-to, that is, up-going winds, down-going winds, winds in the belly, winds in the bowels, winds that course through the limbs, in-breath and out-breath, or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is air, airy, and clung-to: this is called the internal air element.
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is air, airy, and clung-to, that is, up-going winds, down-going winds, winds in the belly, winds in the bowels, winds that course through the limbs, in-breath and out-breath, or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is air, airy, and clung-to: this is called the internal air element.
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is air, airy, and clung-to; that is, up-going winds, down-going winds, winds in the belly, winds in the bowels, winds that course through the limbs, in-breath and out-breath, or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is air, airy, and clung-to: this is called the internal air element.
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is fire, fiery, and clung-to, that is, that by which one is warmed, ages, and is consumed, and that by which what is eaten, drunk, consumed, and tasted gets completely digested, or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is fire, fiery, and clung-to: this is called the internal fire element.
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is fire, fiery, and clung-to, that is, that by which one is warmed, ages, and is consumed, and that by which what is eaten, drunk, consumed, and tasted gets completely digested, or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is fire, fiery, and clung-to: this is called the internal fire element.
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is fire, fiery, and clung-to; that is, that by which one is warmed, ages, and is consumed, and that by which what is eaten, drunk, consumed, and tasted gets completely digested, or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is fire, fiery, and clung-to: this is called the internal fire element.
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is solid, solidified, and clung-to, that is, head-hairs, body-hairs, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone-marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, contents of the stomach, feces, or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is solid, solidified, and clung-to: this is called the internal earth element.
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is solid, solidified, and clung-to; that is, head-hairs, body-hairs, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone-marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, contents of the stomach, feces, or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is solid, solidified, and clung-to: this is called the internal earth element.
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is space, spatial, and clung-to, that is, the holes of the ears, the nostrils, the door of the mouth, and that whereby what is eaten, drunk, consumed, and tasted gets swallowed, and where it collects, and whereby it is excreted from below, or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is space, spatial, and clung-to: this is called the internal space element.
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is space, spatial, and clung-to, that is, the holes of the ears, the nostrils, the door of the mouth, and that whereby what is eaten, drunk, consumed, and tasted gets swallowed, and where it collects, and whereby it is excreted from below, or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is space, spatial, and clung-to: this is called the internal space element.
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is water, watery, and clung-to, that is, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, spittle, snot, oil-of-the-joints, urine, or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is water, watery, and clung-to: this is called the internal water element.
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is water, watery, and clung-to, that is, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, spittle, snot, oil-of-the-joints, urine, or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is water, watery, and clung-to: this is called the internal water element.
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is water, watery, and clung-to; that is, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, spittle, snot, oil-of-the-joints, urine, or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is water, watery, and clung-to: this is called the internal water element.
Whatever is felt bodily or mentally as neither soothing nor hurting is neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.”
Whatever is felt bodily or mentally as painful and hurting is painful feeling.
Whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood, his purpose will be served.’
Whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood, his purpose will be served.’
Whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood, his purpose will not be served.’
Whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood, his purpose will not be served.’
Whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood, his purpose will not be served.’
Whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood, his purpose will not be served.’
Whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood, his purpose will not be served.’
Whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood, his purpose will not be served.’
Whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood, his purpose will not be served.’
Whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood, his purpose will not be served.’
Whatever recluses and brahmins in the future will enter upon and abide in pure, supreme, unsurpassed voidness, all will enter upon and abide in this same pure, supreme, unsurpassed voidness.
Whatever recluses and brahmins in the future will purify their almsfood will all do so by repeatedly reviewing thus.
Whatever recluses and brahmins in the future will purify their bodily action, their verbal action, and their mental action, all will do so by repeatedly reflecting thus.
Whatever recluses and brahmins in the present are purifying their almsfood are all doing so by repeatedly reviewing thus.
Whatever recluses and brahmins in the present are purifying their bodily action, their verbal action, and their mental action, all are doing so by repeatedly reflecting thus.
Whatever recluses and brahmins in the present enter upon and abide in pure, supreme, unsurpassed voidness, all enter upon and abide in this same pure, supreme, unsurpassed voidness.
Whatever we asked Master Gotama about, that he has answered us; we approve of and accept that answer, and so we are satisfied.
Whatever we asked the Blessed One, that the Blessed One has answered; we approve of and accept those answers, and so we are satisfied.
Whatever you aspire to know.”
When a bhikkhu has heard that nothing is worth adhering to, he directly knows everything; having directly known everything, he fully understands everything; having fully understood everything, whatever feeling he feels, whether pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant, he abides contemplating impermanence in those feelings, contemplating fading away, contemplating cessation, contemplating relinquishment.
When a bhikkhu has heard that nothing is worth adhering to, he directly knows everything; having directly known everything, he fully understands everything; having fully understood everything, whatever feeling he feels, whether pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant, he abides contemplating impermanence in those feelings, contemplating fading away, contemplating cessation, contemplating relinquishment.
When a bhikkhu is an arahant with taints destroyed…he is incapable of transgression in these five cases.” 
When a bhikkhu is thus liberated, he still honours, respects, reveres, and venerates the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is enlightened and he teaches the Dhamma for the sake of enlightenment.
When a bhikkhu possesses these ten qualities, he is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.”
When a bhikkhu who possesses these five factors of striving finds a Tathāgata to discipline him, he might dwell six years...five years...four years...three years…two years…one year…Let alone one year, prince,…he might dwell seven months…six months…five months…four months...three months...two months...one month...half a month…Let alone half a month, prince,…he might dwell seven days and nights…six days and nights…five days and nights… four days and nights…three days and nights…two days and nights…one day and night.
When a bhikkhu who possesses these five factors of striving finds a Tathāgata to discipline him, then being instructed in the evening, he might arrive at distinction in the morning; being instructed in the morning, he might arrive at distinction in the evening.”
When a cowherd possesses these eleven factors, he is capable of keeping and rearing a herd of cattle.
When a cowherd possesses these eleven factors, he is incapable of keeping and rearing a herd of cattle.
When a fine thoroughbred colt possesses these ten factors, he is worthy of the king, in the king’s service, and considered one of the factors of a king.
When a fire is lit and heat is produced by someone in the first group, that fire would have a flame, a colour, and a radiance, and it would be possible to use it for the purposes of fire.
When a fire is lit and heat is produced by someone in the first group, would that fire have a flame, a colour, and a radiance, and would it be possible to use it for the purposes of fire, while when a fire is lit and heat is produced by someone of the second group, that fire would have no flame, no colour, and no radiance, and it would not be possible to use it for the purposes of fire?”
When a man possesses these four qualities, I describe him as accomplished in what is wholesome, perfected in what is wholesome, an ascetic invincible attained to the supreme attainment.”
When a man possesses these four qualities, I describe him, not as accomplished…but as one who stands in the same category as the young tender infant lying prone.
When a man possesses these ten qualities, I describe him as accomplished in what is wholesome, perfected in what is wholesome, an ascetic invincible attained to the supreme attainment.”
When a noble disciple is thus possessed of seven factors, he possesses the fruit of stream-entry.” 
When a passionless person to a passionless person gives
When a person generates an acquisition of individuality that is free from affliction, unwholesome states diminish and wholesome states increase in him, enabling him to reach the consummation.
When a person generates an acquisition of individuality that is subject to affliction, unwholesome states increase and wholesome states diminish in him, preventing him from reaching the consummation.
When a person is completely intent on Nibbāna, only talk concerning that interests him, and his thinking and pondering are in line with that, and he associates with that kind of person, and he finds satisfaction in that.
When a person is intent on the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, only talk concerning that interests him, and his thinking and pondering are in line with that, and he associates with that kind of person, and he finds satisfaction in that.
When a person is intent on the base of nothingness, only talk concerning that interests him, and his thinking and pondering are in line with that, and he associates with that kind of person, and he finds satisfaction in that.
When a person is intent on the imperturbable, only talk concerning that interests him, and his thinking and pondering are in line with that, and he associates with that kind of person, and he finds satisfaction in that.
When a person is intent on worldly material things, only talk concerning that interests him, and his thinking and pondering are in line with that, and he associates with that kind of person, and he finds satisfaction in that.
When a person is intent on worldly material things…and he does not find satisfaction in that.
When a thought of ill will has arisen…When a thought of cruelty has arisen…When evil unwholesome states have arisen, a bhikkhu does not tolerate them; he abandons them, removes them, does away with them, and annihilates them.
When a thought of ill will has arisen…When a thought of cruelty has arisen…When evil unwholesome states have arisen, a bhikkhu tolerates them; he does not abandon them, remove them, do away with them, and annihilate them.
When a virtuous person to a virtuous person gives
When an immoral person to a virtuous person gives
When an immoral person to an immoral person gives
When any bhikkhu who was covetous has abandoned covetousness, who had a mind of ill will has abandoned ill will, who was angry has abandoned anger, who was resentful has abandoned resentment, who was contemptuous has abandoned contempt, who was insolent has abandoned insolence, who was envious has abandoned envy, who was avaricious has abandoned avarice, who was fraudulent has abandoned fraud, who was deceitful has abandoned deceit, who had evil wishes has abandoned evil wishes, who had wrong view has abandoned wrong view, then he practises the way proper to the recluse, I say, because of his abandoning these stains for the recluse, these faults for the recluse, these dregs for the recluse, which are grounds for rebirth in a state of deprivation and whose results are to be experienced in an unhappy destination.
When anyone asserts the doctrine that there is, it is empty, false prattle.
When asked, venerable sir, the venerable Ānanda replied: ‘Here, friend Sāriputta, a bhikkhu has learned much……That kind of bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood.’”
When asked: ‘Then is it for the sake of purification of mind…purification of view…purification by overcoming doubt…purification by knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not the path…purification by knowledge and vision of the way…purification by knowledge and vision that the holy life is lived under the Blessed One?’ you replied: ‘No, friend.’
When asked: ‘Then is purification ofmind…purification of view…purification by overcoming d oubt …pur ifica t ion by knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not the path… purification by knowledge and vision of the way…purification by knowledge and vision final Nibbāna without clinging?’ you replied: ‘No, friend.’
When at long last he reaches the door, then it is shut.
When beings are deteriorating and the true Dhamma is disappearing, then there are more training rules and fewer bhikkhus become established in final knowledge.
When clansmen have gone forth from the home life into homelessness out of faith in me, they have me for their leader, their helper, and their guide.
When consciousness arises dependent on the eye and forms, it is reckoned as eye-consciousness; when consciousness arises dependent on the ear and sounds, it is reckoned as ear-consciousness; when consciousness arises dependent on the nose and odours, it is reckoned as nose-consciousness; when consciousness arises dependent on the tongue and flavours, it is reckoned as tongue-consciousness; when consciousness arises dependent on the body and tangibles, it is reckoned as body-consciousness; when consciousness arises dependent on the mind and mind-objects, it is reckoned as mind-consciousness.
When consciousness arises dependent on the eye and forms, it is reckoned as eye-consciousness…when consciousness arises dependent on the mind and mind-objects, it is reckoned as mind-consciousness.
When even these can act together
When even this external air element, great as it is, is seen to be impermanent, subject to destruction, disappearance, and change, what of this body, which is clung to by craving and lasts but a while?
When even this external earth element, great as it is, is seen to be impermanent, subject to destruction, disappearance, and changeˌ what of this body, which is clung to by craving and lasts but a while?
When even this external fire element, great as it is, is seen to be impermanent, subject to destruction, disappearance, and change, what of this body, which is clung to by craving and lasts but a while?
When even this external water element, great as it is, is seen to be impermanent, subject to destruction, disappearance, and change, what of this body, which is clung to by craving and lasts but a while?
When feeling a worldly pleasant feeling, he understands: ‘I feel a worldly pleasant feeling’; when feeling an unworldly pleasant feeling, he understands: ‘I feel an unworldly pleasant feeling’; when feeling a worldly painful feeling, he understands: ‘I feel a worldly painful feeling’; when feeling an unworldly painful feeling, he understands: ‘I feel an unworldly painful feeling’; when feeling a worldly neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, he understands: ‘I feel a worldly neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling’; when feeling an unworldly neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, he understands: ‘I feel an unworldly neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.’
When he arrived, he paid homage to him and sat down at one side.
When he arrived, he washed his feet and then entered the hall and sat down by the central pillar facing the east.
When he attains to the rapture and pleasure that are secluded from sensual pleasures and secluded from unwholesome states, or to something more peaceful than that, covetousness does not invade his mind and remain, ill will… sloth and torpor…restlessness and remorse…doubt…discontent…weariness does not invade his mind and remain.
When he attends wisely in this way, three fetters are abandoned in him: personality view, doubt, and adherence to rules and observances.
When he came to the Mango Grove, he thought: “It is not proper that I should go to the recluse Gotama without first being announced.”
When he develops this Noble Eightfold Path, the four foundations of mindfulness also come to fulfilment in him by development; the four right kinds of striving also come to fulfilment in him by development; the four bases for spiritual power also come to fulfilment in him by development; the five faculties also come to fulfilment in him by development; the five powers also come to fulfilment in him by development; the seven enlightenment factors also come to fulfilment in him by development.
When he dies, earth returns and goes back to the body of earth, water returns and goes back to the body of water, fire returns and goes back to the body of fire, air returns and goes back to the body of air; the faculties pass over to space.
When he does not cling, he is not agitated.
When he does not cling, he is not agitated.
When he does not cling, he is not agitated.
When he does not cling, he is not agitated.
When he does so, unwholesome states diminish in him and wholesome states increase.
When he examines the danger in those thoughts…When he tries to forget those thoughts and does not give attention to them…When he gives attention to stilling the thought-formation of those thoughts…When, with his teeth clenched and his tongue pressed against the roof of his mouth, he beats down, constrains, and crushes mind with mind, any such evil unwholesome thoughts are abandoned in him…and his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness, and concentrated.
When he feels a feeling terminating with life, he understands: ‘I feel a feeling terminating with life.’
When he feels a feeling terminating with the body, he understands: ‘I feel a feeling terminating with the body.’
When he finished speaking, the Blessed One told him:
When he gives attention to some other sign connected with what is wholesome, then any evil unwholesome thoughts connected with desire, with hate, and with delusion are abandoned in him and subside.
When he gives attention to stilling the thought-formation of those thoughts, then any evil unwholesome thoughts connected with desire, with hate, and with delusion are abandoned in him and subside.
When he guards the doors of his sense faculties, that pertains to his conduct.
When he had done so, the Blessed One asked him: “For what discussion are you sitting together here now, Udāyin?
When he had done so, the venerable Ānanda asked him: “For what discussion are you sitting together here now, Sandaka?
When he had done so, they said to him: “Friend Bhaddāli, this robe is being made up for the Blessed One.
When he had finished, the Blessed One said to him:
When he had finished, the Blessed One told the venerable Ānanda:
When he had finished, the Blessed One told the venerable Ānanda: “Ānanda, I do not even recall ever having seen the wanderer Potaliputta, so how could there have been this conversation?
When he had said this, his parents replied: “Dear Raṭṭhapāla, you are our only son, dear and beloved.
When he had sat down, he gave thorough attention to himself, and he saw that Māra the Evil One had gone into his belly and had entered his bowels.
When he had walked for alms in Sāvatthī and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he addressed the venerable Rāhula thus:
When he had wandered for alms in Kammāsadhamma and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he went to a certain grove for the day’s abiding.
When he had wandered for alms in Kapilavatthu and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he went for his daytime abiding to the dwelling of Kāḷakhemaka the Sakyan.
When he had wandered for alms in Kapilavatthu and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he went to the Great Wood for the day’s abiding, and entering the Great Wood, sat down at the root of a bilva sapling for the day’s abiding.
When he had wandered for alms in Kosambī and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he set his resting place in order, took his bowl and outer robe, and while standing uttered these stanzas: 
When he had wandered for alms in Sāvatthī and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he set his resting place in order, and taking his bowl and outer robe, set out on the road leading towards Angulimāla.
When he had wandered for alms in Sāvatthī and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said: “Venerable sir, in the morning I dressed, and taking my bowl and outer robe, went into Sāvatthī for alms.
When he had wandered for alms in Sāvatthī and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he went to the Eastern Park, to the Palace of Migāra’s Mother, for the day’s abiding.
When he had wandered for alms in Sāvatthī and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he went with a companion to the Rājaka Park.
When he had wandered for alms in Vesālī and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and told the Blessed One what Sunakkhatta was saying.
When he had wandered for alms in Āpaṇa and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he went to a certain grove for the day’s abiding.
When he had wandered for alms in Āpaṇa and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he went to a certain grove for the day’s abiding.
When he had wandered for alms in Āpaṇa and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he went to that same grove for the day’s abiding.
When he has done so, he rises from his seat and departs.
When he has eaten and gives the blessing, he does not do so criticising the meal or expecting another meal; he instructs, urges, rouses, and gladdens that audience with talk purely on the Dhamma.
When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and renown.
When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and renown.
When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and renown.
When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and renown.
When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and renown.
When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and renown.
When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and renown.
When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and renown.
When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and renown.
When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and renown.
When he has reappeared in a world that is both afflictive and unafflictive, both afflictive and unafflictive contacts touch him.
When he has reappeared in an afflictive world, afflictive contacts touch him.
When he has reappeared in an unafflictive world, unafflictive contacts touch him.
When he investigates him, he comes to know: ‘Cleansed states cognizable through the eye or through the ear are found in the Tathāgata.’
When he investigates him, he comes to know: ‘No mixed states cognizable through the eye or through the ear are found in the Tathāgata.’
When he investigates him, he comes to know: ‘This venerable one has acquired renown and attained fame, but the dangers are not found in him.’
When he investigates him, he comes to know: ‘This venerable one has attained this wholesome state over a long time; he did not attain it only recently.’
When he investigates him, he comes to know: ‘This venerable one is restrained without fear, not restrained by fear, and he avoids indulging in sensual pleasure because he is without lust through the destruction of lust.’
When he is corrected by the bhikkhus, he does not prevaricate, lead the talk aside, or show disturbance, hate, and bitterness; he proceeds rightly, he complies, he clears himself, he says: ‘Let me so act that the Sangha will be satisfied.’
When he is corrected by the bhikkhus, he does not prevaricate……And the bhikkhus examine that bhikkhu in such a way that the litigation against him is settled quickly.
When he is corrected by the bhikkhus, he prevaricates, leads the talk aside, shows disturbance, hate, and bitterness; he does not proceed rightly, he does not comply, he does not clear himself, he does not say: ‘Let me so act that the Sangha will be satisfied.’
When he is corrected by the bhikkhus, he prevaricates… …And the bhikkhus examine that bhikkhu in such a way that the litigation against him is not settled too quickly.
When he is devoted to wakefulness, that pertains to his conduct.
When he is glad, rapture is born in him; in one who is rapturous, the body becomes tranquil; one whose body is tranquil feels pleasure; in one who feels pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
When he is glad, rapture is born in him; in one who is rapturous, the body becomes tranquil; one whose body is tranquil feels pleasure; in one who feels pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
When he is glad, rapture is born in him; in one who is rapturous, the body becomes tranquil; one whose body is tranquil feels pleasure; in one who feels pleasure, the mind becomes concentrated.
When he is glad…the mind becomes concentrated.
When he is glad…the mind becomes concentrated.
When he is moderate in eating, that pertains to his conduct.
When he is not agitated, he personally attains Nibbāna.
When he is not agitated, he personally attains Nibbāna.
When he is not agitated, he personally attains Nibbāna.
When he is not agitated, he personally attains Nibbāna.
When he is one who obtains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and provide a pleasant abiding here and now, that pertains to his conduct.
When he is practising the way, memories and intentions associated with the acquisitions beset him now and then through lapses of mindfulness.
When he is practising the way, memories and intentions associated with the acquisitions beset him.
When he is practising the way, memories and intentions associated with the acquisitions beset him.
When he is questioned: ‘How is this?’ he replies: ‘I had to enter an empty house, that is why I entered it.
When he knew that it was over, he coughed and knocked, and the bhikkhus opened the door for him.
When he knew that the brahmin Brahmāyu’s mind was ready, receptive, free from hindrances, elated, and confident, he expounded to him the teaching special to the Buddhas: suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.
When he knew that the clansman Raṭṭhapāla was incapable of abandoning the training and returning to the low life, he told him: “You may go, Raṭṭhapāla, at your own convenience.”
When he knew that the householder Upāli’s mind was ready, receptive, free from hindrances, elated, and confident, he expounded to him the teaching special to the Buddhas: suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.
When he knows and sees these eighteen elements, a bhikkhu can be called skilled in the elements.” 
When he knows and sees these six elements, a bhikkhu can be called skilled in the elements.”
When he knows and sees these six elements, a bhikkhu can be called skilled in the elements.” 
When he knows and sees these six elements, a bhikkhu can be called skilled in the elements.” 
When he knows and sees these six internal and external bases, a bhikkhu can be called skilled in the bases.”
When he knows and sees these three elements, a bhikkhu can be called skilled in the elements.” 
When he knows and sees these two elements, a bhikkhu can be called skilled in the elements.” 
When he knows and sees thus, his mind is liberated from the taint of sensual desire, from the taint of being, and from the taint of ignorance.
When he looks on with equanimity, such and such a source of suffering fades away in him while he develops equanimity; thus that suffering is exhausted in him.
When he possesses seven good qualities, that pertains to his conduct.
When he practises in this way and frequently abides thus, his mind acquires confidence in this base.
When he practises in this way and frequently abides thus, his mind acquires confidence in this base.
When he practises in this way and frequently abides thus, his mind acquires confidence in this base.
When he practises in this way and frequently abides thus, his mind acquires confidence in this base.
When he practises in this way and frequently abides thus, his mind acquires confidence in this base.
When he practises in this way and frequently abides thus, his mind acquires confidence in this base.
When he practises in this way and frequently abides thus, his mind acquires confidence in this base.
When he provides the Tathāgata or his disciple with food that is not permissible, this is the fifth instance in which he lays up much demerit.
When he pursues the sight of unsuitable forms with the eye…unsuitable mind-objects with the mind, lust invades his mind.
When he saw him, he thought: “It is wonderful, it is marvellous!
When he saw him, he went to King Koravya and told him: “Sire, the Migācīra Garden has been tidied up.
When he saw the Blessed One coming in the distance, he went out to meet him and paid homage to him; and then, allowing the Blessed One to precede him, he proceeded to the Kokanada Palace.
When he saw the venerable Mahā Moggallāna coming in the distance, he dismissed the music, went to the venerable Mahā Moggallāna, and said to him: “Come, good sir Moggallāna!
When he saw the venerable Raṭṭhapāla coming in the distance, he said: “Our only son, dear and beloved, was made to go forth by these bald-pated recluses.”
When he saw them, he asked his minister: “Good minister, why are the brahmin householders of Opasāda setting forth from Opasāda in groups and bands and heading northwards to the Gods’ Grove, the Sāla-tree Grove?”
When he saw them, he said to the king: ‘The divine messengers have appeared, sire; grey hairs are to be seen growing on your majesty’s head.’—‘Then, good barber, pull out those grey hairs carefully with tweezers and put them in my palm.’—‘Yes, sire,’ he replied, and he pulled out those grey hairs carefully with tweezers and put them in the king’s palm.
When he saw this, he asked the matted-hair ascetic Keṇiya: “What, is Master Keṇiya to hold a marriage or a giving in marriage?
When he saw this, he said: “Come out, Evil One!
When he saw this, he thought: “How beings are afflicted!
When he says: ‘Go and fetch that living being,’ this is the first instance in which he lays up much demerit.
When he says: ‘Go and slaughter that living being,’ this is the third instance in which he lays up much demerit.
When he says: ‘I saw a person here who abstained from killing living beings…and held right view, and I see that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he has reappeared in a state of deprivation…even in hell,’ I grant him this.
When he says: ‘I saw a person here who killed living beings…and held wrong view, and I see that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he has reappeared in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world,’ I grant him this.
When he says: ‘I saw a person here who killed living beings…and held wrong view, and I see that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he has reappeared in a state of deprivation…even in hell,’ I also grant him this.
When he sees such a woman, lust infects his mind.
When he sees this, gladness is born in him.
When he stands without stooping, the palms of both his hands touch and rub against his knees…
When he strives with determination, such and such a source of suffering fades away in him because of that determined striving; thus that suffering is exhausted in him.
When he tries to forget those thoughts and does not give attention to them, then any evil unwholesome thoughts connected with desire, with hate, and with delusion are abandoned in him and subside.
When he turns to look, he does so with his whole body.
When he walks, only the lower part of his body oscillates, and he does not walk with bodily effort.
When he was finished, he came up out of the water and stood in one robe drying his limbs.
When I am speaking with the recluse Gotama, do not break in and interrupt me, but wait until our talk is finished.”
When I asked him a question about the past, he prevaricated, led the talk aside, and showed anger, hate, and bitterness.
When I considered: ‘This leads to my own affliction,’ it subsided in me; when I considered: ‘This leads to others’ affliction,’ it subsided in me; when I considered: ‘This leads to the affliction of both,’ it subsided in me; when I considered: ‘This obstructs wisdom, causes difficulties, and leads away from Nibbāna,’ it subsided in me.
When I do so, there will be no more evil unwholesome mental states such as covetousness, ill will, and presumption in me, and with the abandoning of them my mind will be unlimited, immeasurable, and well developed.’
When I had done so, the recluse Gotama said to me: ‘Householder, your faculties are not those of one in control of his own mind.’......‘Venerable sir, happiness and joy are born from those who are dear, arise from those who are dear.’
When I had won that war and returned from it as a conqueror, I had the Vejayanta Palace built.
When I have heard, I shall know.”
When I pass away, I shall go to the destination of those who have not done what is evil…who have made themselves a shelter from anguish.’
When I pass away, I shall go to the destination of those who have not done what is good…who have done what is wicked.’
When I saw that, I thought: ‘How beings are afflicted!
When I saw this first footprint of the recluse Gotama, I came to the conclusion: ‘The Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha is practising the good way.’
When I saw this fourth footprint of the recluse Gotama, I came to the conclusion: ‘The Blessed One is fully enlightened…’
When I saw this second footprint of the recluse Gotama, I came to the conclusion: ‘The Blessed One is fully enlightened…’
When I saw this third footprint of the recluse Gotama, I came to the conclusion: ‘The Blessed One is fully enlightened…’
When I understood that inattention…sloth and torpor…fear…elation…inertia…excess of energy…deficiency of energy…longing…perception of diversity…excessive meditation upon forms is an imperfection of the mind, I abandoned excessive meditation upon forms, an imperfection of the mind.
When it is cool, her limbs are warm; when it is warm, her limbs are cool.
When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’
When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’
When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’
When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’
When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’
When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’
When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’
When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’
When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’
When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’
When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’
When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’
When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’
When it is liberated, there comes the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’
When it was liberated there came the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’
When it was liberated there came the knowledge: “It is liberated.”
When it was liberated, there came the knowledge: ‘It is liberated.’
When it was morning, the venerable Udāyin dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, he too went into Āpaṇa for alms.
When Master Gotama is asked each of these ten questions, he replies: ‘I do not hold that view.’
When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated in this way, even the final in-breaths and out-breaths are known as they cease, not unknown.” 
When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, it fulfils the four foundations of mindfulness.
When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, it is of great fruit and great benefit.
When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, it is of great fruit and great benefit.” 
When night had ended, the venerable Raṭṭhapāla’s father had good food of various kinds prepared in his own house and had the time announced to the venerable Raṭṭhapāla: “It is time, dear Raṭṭhapāla, the meal is ready.”
When one adheres to suffering, resorts to suffering, holds to suffering, and regards what is suffering thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self,’ could one ever fully understand suffering oneself or abide with suffering utterly destroyed?”
When one attends unwisely, unarisen taints arise and arisen taints increase.
When one attends wisely, unarisen taints do not arise and arisen taints are abandoned.
When one bhikkhu abides resolved upon an area the size of the root of one tree, pervading it as exalted, and another bhikkhu abides resolved upon the area the size of the roots of two or three trees, pervading it as exalted—which of these types of mental development is more exalted?”—“The second, venerable sir.”
When one bhikkhu abides resolved upon an area the size of the roots of two or three trees, pervading it as exalted, and another bhikkhu abides resolved upon an area the size of one village, pervading it as exalted…an area the size of one village and an area the size of two or three villages…an area the size of two or three villages and an area the size of one major kingdom…an area the size of one major kingdom and an area the size of two or three major kingdoms…an area the size of two or three major kingdoms and an area the size of the earth bounded by the ocean, pervading it as exalted—which of these two types of mental development is more exalted?”—“The second, venerable sir.”
When one delights in that, one builds up hope upon the future.
When one delights in that, one builds up hope upon the future.
When one delights in that, one is vanquished in regard to presently arisen states.
When one delights in that, one is vanquished in regard to presently arisen states.
When one delights in that, one revives the past.
When one delights in that, one revives the past.
When one does not delight in that, one does not build up hope upon the future.
When one does not delight in that, one does not build up hope upon the future.
When one does not delight in that, one does not revive the past.
When one does not delight in that, one does not revive the past.
When one does not delight in that, one is invincible in regard to presently arisen states.
When one does not delight in that, one is invincible in regard to presently arisen states.
When one does not say: ‘All those disengaged from the pursuit of self-mortification…have entered upon the right way,’ but says instead: ‘The disengagement is a state without suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and it is the right way,’ then one teaches only the Dhamma.
When one does not say: ‘All those disengaged from the pursuit of the enjoyment of one whose pleasure is linked to sensual desires…have entered upon the right way,’ but says instead: ‘The disengagement is a state without suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and it is the right way,’ then one teaches only the Dhamma.
When one does not say: ‘All those engaged in the pursuit of the enjoyment of one whose pleasure is linked to sensual desires…have entered upon the wrong way,’ but says instead: ‘The pursuit is a state beset by suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and it is the wrong way,’ then one teaches only the Dhamma.
When one does not say: ‘All those who have abandoned the fetter of being…have entered upon the right way,’ but says instead: ‘When the fetter of being is abandoned, being also is abandoned,’ then one teaches only the Dhamma.
When one feels a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, one understands: ‘I feel a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.’
When one feels a painful feeling, one understands: ‘I feel a painful feeling.’
When one feels a pleasant feeling, one understands: ‘I feel a pleasant feeling.’
When one has reappeared, contacts touch one.
When one has reappeared, contacts touch one.
When one has reappeared, contacts touch one.
When one is touched by a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, if one does not understand as it actually is the origination, the disappearance, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in regard to that feeling, then the underlying tendency to ignorance lies within one.
When one is touched by a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, if one understands as it actually is the origination, the disappearance, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in regard to that feeling, then the underlying tendency to ignorance does not lie within one.
When one is touched by a painful feeling, if one does not sorrow, grieve and lament, does not weep beating one’s breast and become distraught, then the underlying tendency to aversion does not lie within one.
When one is touched by a painful feeling, if one sorrows, grieves and laments, weeps beating one’s breast and becomes distraught, then the underlying tendency to aversion lies within one.
When one is touched by a pleasant feeling, if one delights in it, welcomes it, and remains holding to it, then the underlying tendency to lust lies within one.
When one is touched by a pleasant feeling, if one does not delight in it, welcome it, and remain holding to it, then the underlying tendency to lust does not lie within one.
When one knows covert speech to be true, correct, and unbeneficial, one should try not to utter it.
When one knows overt sharp speech to be true, correct, and unbeneficial, one should try not to utter it.
When one person, owing to another, has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha, I say that it is not easy for the former to repay the latter by paying homage to him, rising up for him, according him reverential salutation and polite services, and by providing robes, almsfood, resting places, and medicinal requisites.
When one regards as a gain the gain of forms cognizable by the eye that are wished for, desired, agreeable, gratifying, and associated with worldliness—or when one recalls what was formerly obtained that has passed, ceased, and changed—joy arises.
When one regards as a non-gain the non-gain of forms cognizable by the eye that are wished for, desired, agreeable, gratifying, and associated with worldliness—or when one recalls what was formerly not obtained that has passed, ceased, and changed—grief arises.
When one regards this body thus, one abandons desire for the body, affection for the body, subservience to the body.
When one says: ‘All those disengaged from the pursuit of self-mortification—painful, ignoble, and unbeneficial—are without suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and they have entered upon the right way,’ one thus extols some.
When one says: ‘All those disengaged from the pursuit of the enjoyment of one whose pleasure is linked to sensual desires—low…and unbeneficial—are without suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and they have entered upon the right way,’ one thus extols some.
When one says: ‘All those engaged in the pursuit of the enjoyment of one whose pleasure is linked to sensual desires—low…and unbeneficial—are beset by suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and they have entered upon the wrong way,’ one thus disparages some.
When one says: ‘All those who have abandoned the fetter of being are without suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and they have entered upon the right way,’ one thus extols some.
When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the air element and makes the mind dispassionate toward the air element.
When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the air element and makes the mind dispassionate towards the air element.
When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the air element and makes the mind dispassionate towards the air element.
When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the earth element and makes the mind dispassionate toward the earth element.
When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the earth element and makes the mind dispassionate towards the earth element.
When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the earth element and makes the mind dispassionate towards the earth element.
When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the fire element and makes the mind dispassionate toward the fire element.
When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the fire element and makes the mind dispassionate towards the fire element.
When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the fire element and makes the mind dispassionate towards the fire element.
When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the space element and makes the mind dispassionate towards the space element.
When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the space element and makes the mind dispassionate towards the space element.
When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the water element and makes the mind dispassionate toward the water element.
When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the water element and makes the mind dispassionate towards the water element.
When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the water element and makes the mind dispassionate towards the water element.
When others address you, their speech may be timely or untimely; when others address you, their speech may be true or untrue; when others address you, their speech may be gentle or harsh; when others address you, their speech may be connected with good or with harm; when others address you, their speech may be spoken with a mind of loving-kindness or with inner hate.
When others address you, their speech may be timely or untimely; when others address you, their speech may be true or untrue; when others address you, their speech may be gentle or harsh; when others address you, their speech may be connected with good or with harm; when others address you, their speech may be spoken with a mind of loving-kindness or with inner hate.
When people come to you and ask: ‘What is the name of this part of the chariot?’ has there already been in your mind the thought: ‘If they come to me and ask me thus, I shall answer them thus’?
When Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son had sat down, he said to the Blessed One: “I would like to question Master Gotama on a certain point, if Master Gotama would grant me the favour of an answer to the question.”
When Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son was asked by the Blessed One about development of mind, he was unable to answer.
When seated indoors he is not afraid, he does not shiver and tremble, he is not nervous.
When that is so, he understands thus: ‘While I am giving attention to imperturbability, my mind does not enter into imperturbability or acquire confidence, steadiness, and decision.’
When that is so, he understands thus: ‘While I am giving attention to imperturbability, my mind enters into imperturbability and acquires confidence, steadiness, and decision.’
When that is so, he understands thus: ‘While I am giving attention to voidness internally, my mind does not enter into voidness internally or acquire confidence, steadiness, and decision.’
When that is so, he understands thus: ‘While I am giving attention to voidness internally, my mind enters into voidness internally and acquires confidence, steadiness, and decision.’
When that is so, that bhikkhu understands: ‘The conceit “I am” based on these five aggregates affected by clinging is abandoned in me.’
When that is used up, if it does not get any more fuel, being without fuel, it is reckoned as extinguished.”
When that living being experiences pain and grief on being led along with a neck-halter, this is the second instance in which he lays up much demerit.
When that living being experiences pain and grief on being slaughtered, this is the fourth instance in which he lays up much demerit.
When that man born blind accepted that dirty soiled garment, put it on, and being satisfied with it, uttered words of satisfaction thus: ‘Good indeed, sirs, is a white cloth, beautiful, spotless, and clean!’—did he do so knowing and seeing, or out of faith in the man with good eyesight?”
When that pleasant feeling has arisen in him, it does not invade his mind and remain because body is developed.
When that pleasant feeling has arisen in him, it invades his mind and remains because body is not developed.
When that was said, the venerable Mahā Moggallāna told the Blessed One: “Then, venerable sir, I addressed the venerable Sāriputta thus: ‘Friend Sāriputta…What kind of bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sāla-tree Wood?’
When the arrow shaft had been warmed and heated between the two flames and had been made straight and workable, then at a later time he would not again warm and heat the arrow shaft and make it straight and workable.
When the Blessed One had eaten and had put his bowl aside, Prince Bodhi took a low seat, sat down at one side, and said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, we have thought thus: ‘Pleasure is not to be gained through pleasure; pleasure is to be gained through pain.’” 
When the Blessed One had eaten and had put his bowl aside, Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son took a low seat, sat down at one side, and said to the Blessed One: “Master Gotama, may the merit and the great meritorious fruits of this act of giving be for the happiness of the givers.”
When the Blessed One had eaten and had put his bowl aside, the matted-hair ascetic Keṇiya took a low seat and sat down on one side.
When the Blessed One had eaten and had withdrawn his hand from the bowl, Prince Abhaya took a low seat, sat down at one side, and said to the Blessed One:
When the Blessed One had given his blessing with these stanzas, he rose from his seat and departed.
When the Blessed One has used it first, then the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu will use it afterwards.
When the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, had eaten and had put his bowl aside, King Kikī of Kāsi took a low seat, sat down at one side and said: ‘Venerable sir, let the Blessed One accept from me a residence for the Rains in Benares; there will be such service to the Sangha.’—‘Enough, king, my residence for the Rains has already been provided for.’
When the Blessed One saw this, he thought: “There are many resting places prepared in K̄ḷakhemaka the Sakyan’s dwelling.
When the Buddha speaks about the conditions under which one is blameworthy, upavajja represents upavadya.
When the deliverance of mind by equanimity is developed in this way, no limiting action remains there, none persists there.
When the deliverance of mind by loving-kindness is developed in this way, no limiting action remains there, none persists there.
When the elephant is being trained in the task of imperturbability, he does not move his forelegs or his hindlegs; he does not move his forequarters or his hindquarters; he does not move his head, ears, tusks, tail, or trunk.
When the forest elephant accepts the grass-fodder and water from him, the elephant tamer knows: ‘Now the king’s elephant will live!’
When the forest elephant is addressed by such words, he listens, gives ear, and exerts his mind to understand.
When the four foundations of mindfulness are developed and cultivated, they fulfil the seven enlightenment factors.
When the gods of the Thirty-three had met together and were seated in the Su - dhamma Assembly, this discussion arose among them: “It is a gain, sirs, for the people of Videha…eighth of the fortnight.”
When the householder Dasama had completed his business at Pāṭaliputta, he went to the venerable Ānanda at Beluvagāmaka near Vesālī.
When the maids of Sakka saw the venerable Mahā Moggallāna coming in the distance, they were embarrassed and ashamed and they went each into their own rooms.
When the night had ended, the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: “Bhikkhus, last night when the night was well advanced, there came to me a certain young god of beautiful appearance who illuminated the whole of Jeta’s Grove.
When the night is ended, in the morning he dresses, and taking his bowl and outer robe, goes to the house of that householder or householder’s son and sits down on a seat made ready.
When the people have been instructed, urged, roused, and gladdened by him, they rise from their seats and depart looking only at him and concerned with nothing else.
When the recluse Gotama is posed this two-horned question by you, he will not be able either to throw it up or to gulp it down.
When the recluse Gotama is teaching the Dhamma to an assembly of several hundred followers, on that occasion there is no sound of his disciples’ coughing or clearing their throats.
When the seven enlightenment factors are developed and cultivated, they fulfil true knowledge and deliverance.
When the state carriages were prepared, he informed the king: “Sire, the state carriages are ready for you.
When the state carriages were prepared, he informed the king: “Sire, the state carriages are ready for you.
When the Sublime One had said that, the Teacher said further:
When the Sublime One had said that, the Teacher said further:
When the Sublime One had said that, the Teacher said further:
When the talk is finished, Aggivessana, then I steady my mind internally, quieten it, bring it to singleness, and concentrate it on that same sign of concentration as before, in which I constantly abide.” 
When the venerable Bhagu saw the Blessed One coming in the distance, he prepared a seat and set out water for washing the feet.
When the venerable Mahā Moggallāna knew that Sakka, ruler of the gods, was stirred to a sense of urgency with his hair standing on end, he asked him: “Kosiya, how did the Blessed One state to you in brief deliverance in the destruction of craving?
When the venerable Nandaka had advised the bhikkhunīs thus, he dismissed them, saying: “Go, sisters, it is time.”
When the venerable Raṭṭhapāla had eaten and had put his bowl aside, he stood up and uttered these stanzas:
When there is intense exertion, intense striving, do you then feel painful, racking, piercing feelings due to intense exertion?
When there is no manifestation of contact, it is impossible to point out the manifestation of feeling.
When there is no manifestation of feeling, it is impossible to point out the manifestation of perception.
When there is no manifestation of perception, it is impossible to point out the manifestation of thinking.
When there is no manifestation of thinking, it is impossible to point out the manifestation of besetment by perceptions and notions mental proliferation.
When there is the manifestation of contact, it is possible to point out the manifestation of feeling.
When there is the manifestation of feeling, it is possible to point out the manifestation of perception.
When there is the manifestation of perception, it is possible to point out the manifestation of thinking.
When there is the manifestation of thinking, it is possible to point out the manifestation of besetment by perceptions and notions mental proliferation.
When these qualities are found in anyone among us, we honour, respect, revere, and venerate him, and live in dependence on him honouring and respecting him.
When these qualities are found in anyone among us, we honour, respect, revere, and venerate him, and live in dependence on him honouring and respecting him.” 
When these two things—serenity and insight—are developed further, they will lead to the penetration of many elements.
When these worthy ones honour one who should be honoured, respect one who should be respected, revere one who should be revered, and venerate one who should be venerated, surely they honour one who should be honoured…and venerate one who should be venerated.
When they had done so, the Blessed One asked them: “Bhikkhus, why are you so loud and noisy?
When they had wandered for alms in Sāvatthī and had returned from their almsround, after the meal they went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, they sat down at one side and told him what had taken place.
When they have assembled in one place, a difference in their colour can be discerned but no difference in their radiance.
When they have dispersed, a difference in their colours can be discerned and also a difference in their radiance.
When they have met together, a wise bhikkhu among the bhikkhus who side together on the one part should rise from his seat, and after arranging his robe on one shoulder, he should raise his hands, palms together, and call for an enactment of the Sangha thus: ‘Let the venerable Sangha hear me.
When they hear: ‘The recluse Gotama will visit such and such a village or town,’ they formulate a question thus: ‘We will go to the recluse Gotama and ask him this question.
When they hear: ‘The recluse Gotama will visit such and such a village or town,’ they formulate a question thus: ‘We will go to the recluse Gotama and ask him this question.
When they were seated, the Blessed One asked them: “Householders, is there any teacher agreeable to you in whom you have acquired faith supported by reasons?” 
When they were seated, the Blessed One instructed, urged, roused, and gladdened them with talk on the Dhamma.
When they were seated, the Blessed One said to them:
When they were seated, the Blessed One said to them: “I hope you are all keeping well, Anuruddha, I hope you are all comfortable, I hope you are not having any trouble getting almsfood.”
When they were seated, the venerable Nandaka told the bhikkhunīs:
When they were seated, they said to the Blessed One: “Master Gotama, what is the cause and condition why some beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in states of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell?
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and asked the Blessed One:
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and asked the Blessed One:
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and asked the Blessed One:
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and asked the venerable Bakkula:
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and looked for the thirty-two marks of a Great Man on the Blessed One’s body.
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and looked for the thirty-two marks of a Great Man on the Blessed One’s body.
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and related to the Blessed One his entire conversation with the wanderer Pilotika.
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and reported to the venerable Ānanda his entire conversation with the wanderer Potaliputta.
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said to the Blessed One:
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said to the Blessed One:
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said to the Blessed One:
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said to the Blessed One:
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said to the Blessed One: “Master Gotama, the brahmins say thus: ‘Brahmins are the highest caste, those of any other caste are inferior; brahmins are the fairest caste, those of any other caste are dark; only brahmins are purified, not non-brahmins; brahmins alone are the sons of Brahmā, the offspring of Brahmā, born of his mouth, born of Brahmā, created by Brahmā, heirs of Brahmā.’
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said to the novice Aciravata: “Master Aggivessana, I have heard that a bhikkhu who abides here diligent, ardent, and resolute can achieve unification of mind.”
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said to the venerable Bhūmija: “Master Bhūmija, there are some recluses and brahmins who make such assertions and hold such views as this: ‘If one makes an aspiration and one leads the holy life, one is unable to procure any fruit; if one makes no aspiration and one leads the holy life, one is still unable to procure any fruit; if one both makes an aspiration and makes no aspiration and one leads the holy life, one is still unable to procure any fruit; if one neither makes an aspiration nor makes no aspiration and one leads the holy life, one is still unable to procure any fruit.’
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said to the venerable Puṇṇa Mantāṇiputta:
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said to the venerable Samiddhi:
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said to the venerable Sāriputta:
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said:
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said:
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said: “Master Gotama, Prince Bodhi pays homage with his head at Master Gotama’s feet and asks whether he is free from illness…and abiding in comfort.
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said: “Master Gotama, Queen Mallikā pays homage with her head at Master Gotama’s feet and asks whether he is free from illness…and abiding in comfort.
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said: “Master Gotama, when clansmen have gone forth from the home life into homelessness out of faith in Master Gotama, do they have Master Gotama for their leader, their helper, and their guide?
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and the venerable Sāriputta asked him: “Are you diligent, Dhānañjāni?”
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and the venerable Sāriputta asked him: “Is the Blessed One well and strong, friend?”
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side.
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side.
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side.
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side.
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he stood at one side and in the Blessed One’s presence he uttered this exclamation:
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he stood at one side and said to the Blessed One: “Master Gotama, my doctrine and view is this: ‘Nothing is acceptable to me.’” 
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he stood at one side leaning on his stick and asked the Blessed One: “What does the recluse assert, what does he proclaim?” 
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he stood at one side.
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son stood at one side and said to him:
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, still walking up and down with the venerable Udena, he said this: “Worthy recluse, there is no wanderers’ life that accords with the Dhamma: so it seems to me here, and that may be because I have not seen such venerable ones as yourself or the Dhamma here.”
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, they sat down at one side and the brahmin student Vāseṭṭha addressed the Blessed One in stanzas thus:
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, they sat down at one side and the venerable Sāriputta said to the venerable Channa: “I hope you are getting well, friend Channa, I hope you are comfortable.
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, they sat down at one side.
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, they sat down to one side and they told him what had taken place, adding: “Let the venerable Mahā Kaccāna expound it to us.”
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, they sat down to one side and told him what had taken place, adding: “Let the venerable Mahā Kaccāna expound it to us.”
When this does not exist, that does not come to be; with the cessation of this, that ceases.
When this does not exist, that does not come to be; with the cessation of this, that ceases.” 
When this does not exist, that does not come to be; with the cessation of this, that ceases’—that is even more unclear to me.
When this was said the Blessed One went on in silence.
When this was said, a bhikkhu asked the Blessed One: “But, venerable sir, can a simile be given?”
When this was said, a bhikkhu asked the Blessed One: “But, venerable sir, can a simile be given?”
When this was said, a certain bhikkhu asked the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, can there be agitation about what is non-existent externally?”
When this was said, a certain bhikkhu said to the Blessed One: “Wait, venerable sir!
When this was said, Daṇḍapāni the Sakyan shook his head, wagged his tongue, and raised his eyebrows until his forehead was puckered in three lines.
When this was said, Dīgha Tapassī took a low seat and sat down at one side.
When this was said, General Viḍūḍabha asked the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, can those gods who are still subject to ill will and who come back to this state topple or banish from that place those gods who are no longer subject to ill will and who do not come back to this state?”
When this was said, good sir Moggallāna, the Blessed One told me: ‘Here, ruler of gods,… …of gods and humans.’
When this was said, I told him: ‘Here, ruler of gods, a bhikkhu has heard that nothing is worth adhering to.
When this was said, I told them: ‘The Tathāgata does not live luxuriously, nor has he given up his striving and reverted to luxury.
When this was said, Jīvaka Komārabhacca said to the Blessed One: “It is wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous!
When this was said, King Avantiputta of Madhurā said to the venerable Mahā Kaccāna: “Magnificent, Master Kaccāna!
When this was said, Pessa, the elephant driver’s son, said: “It is wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous how well the four foundations of mindfulness have been made known by the Blessed One: for the purification of beings, for the surmounting of sorrow and lamentation, for the disappearance of pain and grief, for the attainment of the true way, for the realisation of Nibbāna.
When this was said, Prince Abhaya said: “Magnificent, venerable sir!
When this was said, Prince Bodhi said to the Blessed One: “Oh the Buddha!
When this was said, Prince Bodhi said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, when a bhikkhu finds the Tathāgata to discipline him, how long is it until by realising for himself with direct knowledge, he here and now enters upon and abides in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness?”
When this was said, Puṇṇa, son of the Koliyans, the ox-duty ascetic cried out and burst into tears.
When this was said, Puṇṇa, son of the Koliyans, the ox-duty ascetic said to the Blessed One: “Magnificent, venerable sir!
When this was said, Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son replied: “Master Gotama, we were bold and impudent in thinking we could attack Master Gotama in debate.
When this was said, Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son said: “It is wonderful, Master Gotama, it is marvellous how when Master Gotama is spoken to offensively again and again, assailed by discourteous courses of speech, the colour of his skin brightens and the colour of his face clears, as is to be expected of one who is accomplished and fully enlightened.
When this was said, Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son sat silent, dismayed, with shoulders drooping and head down, glum, and without response.
When this was said, Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son told him: “Wait, Dummukha, wait!
When this was said, Saccaka the Nigaṇṭha’s son was silent.
When this was said, Seniya the naked dog-duty ascetic cried out and burst into tears.
When this was said, the bhikkhu Ariṭṭha, formerly of the vulture killers, sat silent, dismayed, with shoulders drooping and head down, glum, and without response.
When this was said, the bhikkhu Sāti, son of a fisherman, sat silent, dismayed, with shoulders drooping and head down, glum, and without response.
When this was said, the bhikkhus led by Assaji and Punabbasuka told those bhikkhus: “Friends, we eat in the evening, in the morning, and in the day outside the proper time.
When this was said, the Blessed One told her: “Give it to the Sangha, Gotamī.
When this was said, the Blessed One told him: “The Sangha of bhikkhus is large, Keṇiya, consisting of twelve hundred and fifty bhikkhus, and you place full confidence in the brahmins.”
When this was said, the Blessed One was silent.
When this was said, the brahmin Brahmāyu rose from his seat, and after arranging his upper robe on one shoulder, he extended his hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One and uttered this exclamation three times: “Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened!
When this was said, the brahmin Brahmāyu rose from his seat, and after arranging his upper robe on one shoulder, he prostrated himself with his head at the Blessed One’s feet, and he covered the Blessed One’s feet with kisses and caressed them with his hands, pronouncing his name: “I am the brahmin Brahmāyu, Master Gotama; I am the brahmin Brahmāyu, Master Gotama.”
When this was said, the brahmin Cankī said to the Blessed One: “Let not Master Gotama rebuke the brahmin student Kāpaṭhika.
When this was said, the brahmin Cankī told those brahmins: “Now, sirs, hear from me why it is proper for me to go to see Master Gotama, and why it is not proper for Master Gotama to come to see me.
When this was said, the brahmin Esukārī said to the Blessed One: “Magnificent, Master Gotama!
When this was said, the brahmin Esukārī said to the Blessed One: “Master Gotama, the brahmins prescribe four types of wealth.
When this was said, the brahmin Gaṇaka Moggallāna asked the Blessed One: “When Master Gotama’s disciples are thus advised and instructed by him, do they all attain Nibbāna, the ultimate goal, or do some not attain it?”
When this was said, the brahmin Gaṇaka Moggallāna said to the Blessed One: “There are persons who are faithless and have gone forth from the home life into homelessness not out of faith but seeking a livelihood, who are fraudulent, deceitful, treacherous, haughty, hollow, personally vain, rough-tongued, loose-spoken, unguarded in their sense faculties, immoderate in eating, undevoted to wakefulness, unconcerned with recluseship, not greatly respectful of training, luxurious, careless, leaders in backsliding, neglectful of seclusion, lazy, wanting in energy, unmindful, not fully aware, unconcentrated, with straying minds, devoid of wisdom, drivellers.
When this was said, the brahmin Ghoṭamukha said to the venerable Udena: “Magnificent, Master Udena!
When this was said, the brahmin householders of Nagaravinda said to the Blessed One: “Magnificent, Master Gotama!
When this was said, the brahmin householders of Sālā said to the Blessed One: “Magnificent, Master Gotama!
When this was said, the brahmin householders of Sālā said to the Blessed One: “Magnificent, Master Gotama!
When this was said, the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi got down from his all-white chariot drawn by white mares, and after arranging his upper robe on one shoulder, he extended his hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One and uttered this exclamation: “It is a gain for King Pasenadi of Kosala, it is a great gain for King Pasenadi of Kosala that the Tathāgata, accomplished and fully enlightened, lives in his realm.”
When this was said, the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi got down from his all-white chariot drawn by white mares, and arranging his upper robe on one shoulder, he extended his hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed One and uttered this exclamation three times: “Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened!
When this was said, the brahmin Jāṇussoṇi said to the Blessed One: “Magnificent, Master Gotama!
When this was said, the brahmin Pingalakoccha said to the Blessed One: “Magnificent, Master Gotama!
When this was said, the brahmin student Assalāyana replied: “Sirs, the recluse Gotama is one who speaks the Dhamma.
When this was said, the brahmin student Assalāyana replied: “Surely, Sirs, I am not getting through to you when I say:’The recluse Gotama is one who speaks the Dhamma.’
When this was said, the brahmin student Assalāyana said to the Blessed One: “Magnificent, Master Gotama!
When this was said, the brahmin student Assalāyana sat silent and dismayed, with shoulders drooping and head down, glum, and without response.
When this was said, the brahmin student Sangārava said to the Blessed One: “Magnificent, Master Gotama!
When this was said, the brahmin student Sangārava said to the Blessed One: “Master Gotama’s striving was unfaltering, Master Gotama’s striving was that of a true man, as it should be for an Accomplished One, a Fully Enlightened One.
When this was said, the brahmin student Sañjikāputta said to Prince Bodhi: “Master Bodhi says: ‘Oh the Buddha!
When this was said, the brahmin student Subha, Todeyya’s son, said to the Blessed One: “Magnificent, Master Gotama!
When this was said, the brahmin student Subha, Todeyya’s son, said to the Blessed One: “Magnificent, Master Gotama!
When this was said, the brahmin student Subha, Todeyya’s son, said to the Blessed One: “Master Gotama, I have heard that the recluse Gotama knows the path to the company of Brahmā.”
When this was said, the brahmin student Subha, Todeyya’s son, was angry and displeased with the simile of the file of blind men, and he reviled, disparaged, and censured the Blessed One, saying: “The recluse Gotama will be worsted.”
When this was said, the brahmin student Uttara, Pārāsariya’s pupil, sat silent, dismayed, with shoulders drooping and head down, glum, and without response.
When this was said, the brahmin students Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja said to the Blessed One: “Magnificent, Master Gotama!
When this was said, the brahmin Sundarika Bhāradvāja said: “Magnificent, Master Gotama!
When this was said, the brahmin Vassakāra, the minister of Magadha, said to General Upananda: “What do you think, general?
When this was said, the brahmin, awestruck and with his hair standing on end, replied: “We wanted to tell Master Gotama about that very thing, but Master Gotama has anticipated us.”
When this was said, the clansman Raṭṭhapāla was silent.
When this was said, the clansman Raṭṭhapāla was silent.
When this was said, the householder Anāthapiṇḍika wept and shed tears.
When this was said, the householder Potaliya thought: “The recluse Gotama addresses me as ‘householder,’” and angry and displeased, he remained silent.
When this was said, the householder Potaliya thought: “The recluse Gotama addresses me as ‘householder,’” and angry and displeased, he said to the Blessed One: “Master Gotama, it is neither fitting nor proper that you address me as ‘householder.’”
When this was said, the householder Upāli rose from his seat, and arranging his upper robe on one shoulder, he extended his hands in reverential salutation in the direction of the Blessed One and told the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta:
When this was said, the householder Upāli said to the Blessed One: “Good, good, venerable sir, on the part of Tapassī!
When this was said, the householder Upāli said to the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta: “Good, good, venerable sir, Dīgha Tapassī!
When this was said, the matted-hair ascetic Keṇiya extended his right arm and said: “There, where that green line of the grove is, Master Sela.”
When this was said, the Nigaṇṭha Dīgha Tapassī said to the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta: “Venerable sir, I do not agree that the householder Upāli should refute the recluse Gotama’s doctrine.
When this was said, the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta said: “Householder, you are mad, you are an imbecile.
When this was said, the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta told him: “Good, good, Tapassī!
When this was said, the venerable Abhiya Kaccāna said to the carpenter Pañcakanga: “It is a gain for you, householder, it is a great gain for you that you have abandoned your state of doubt and have had the opportunity to hear this discourse on the Dhamma.”
When this was said, the venerable Abhiya Kaccāna said to the venerable Anuruddha: “Good, venerable Anuruddha, yet I have something further to ask: Are all those radiant ones deities of Limited Radiance, or are some of them deities of Immeasurable Radiance?”
When this was said, the venerable Abhiya Kaccāna said to the venerable Anuruddha: “Good, venerable Anuruddha.
When this was said, the venerable Bhaddāli told the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, I am not willing to eat at a single session; for if I were to do so, I might have worry and anxiety about it.” 
When this was said, the venerable Mahā Cunda said to the venerable Channa: “Therefore, friend Channa, this instruction of the Blessed One’s is to be constantly given attention: ‘There is wavering in one who is dependent, there is no wavering in one who is independent; when there is no wavering, there is tranquillity; when there is tranquillity, there is no bias; when there is no bias, there is no coming and going; when there is no coming and going, there is no passing away and reappearing; when there is no passing away and reappearing, there is no here nor beyond nor in between.
When this was said, the venerable Mahā Moggallāna asked the venerable Sāriputta: “Friend Sāriputta, should these things be undertaken and practised only by a forest-dwelling bhikkhu or by one who dwells near a village as well?”
When this was said, the venerable Mahā Moggallāna addressed the venerable Sāriputta thus: “Friend Sāriputta, we have all spoken according to our own inspiration.
When this was said, the venerable Mahā Moggallāna asked the venerable Sāriputta: “Friend Sāriputta, what is the cause and reason why, of these two persons with a blemish, one is called the inferior man and one is called the superior man?
When this was said, the venerable Mahā Moggallāna said to the venerable Sāriputta: “A simile occurs to me, friend Sāriputta.”—“State it, friend Moggallāna.”—“On one occasion, friend, I was living at the Hill Fort at Rājagaha.
When this was said, the venerable Mālunkyāputta replied: “Venerable sir, I remember the five lower fetters as taught by the Blessed One.” 
When this was said, the venerable Puṇṇa Mantāṇiputta asked the venerable Sāriputta: “What is the venerable one’s name, and how do his companions in the holy life know the venerable one?”
When this was said, the venerable Sāriputta said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, I understand the detailed meaning of the Blessed One’s utterance, which he has spoken in brief without expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus:
When this was said, the venerable Sāriputta said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, I understand the detailed meaning of the Blessed One’s utterance, which he has spoken in brief without expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus:
When this was said, the venerable Sāriputta said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, I understand the detailed meaning of the Blessed One’s utterance, which he has spoken in brief without expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus:
When this was said, the venerable Sāriputta addressed the venerable Anuruddha thus: “Friend Anuruddha, the venerable Revata has spoken according to his own inspiration.
When this was said, the venerable Sāriputta addressed the venerable Mahā Kassapa thus: “Friend Kassapa, the venerable Anuruddha has spoken according to his own inspiration.
When this was said, the venerable Sāriputta addressed the venerable Mahā Moggallāna thus: “Friend Moggallāna, the venerable Mahā Kassapa has spoken according to his own inspiration.
When this was said, the venerable Sāriputta addressed the venerable Revata thus: “Friend Revata, the venerable Ānanda has spoken according to his own inspiration.
When this was said, the venerable Sāriputta asked the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, which of us has spoken well?” “You have all spoken well, Sāriputta, each in his own way.
When this was said, the venerable Sāriputta asked the venerable Puṇṇa Mantāṇiputta: “What is the venerable one’s name, and how do his companions in the holy life know the venerable one?ʺ 
When this was said, the venerable Udāyin said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, perhaps the venerable Samiddhi spoke thus referring to: ‘Whatever is felt is included in suffering.’” 
When this was said, the venerable Udena stepped down from the walk and went into his dwelling, where he sat down on a seat made ready.
When this was said, the venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One: “It is wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous!
When this was said, the venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One: “Surely, venerable sir, that young god must have been Anāthapiṇḍika.
When this was said, the venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, here a bhikkhu is practising thus: ‘It might not be, and it might not be mine; it will not be, and it will not be mine.
When this was said, the venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One: “Venerable sir, just as if a man exhausted by hunger and weakness came upon a honeyball, wherever he would taste it he would find a sweet delectable flavour; so too, venerable sir, any able-minded bhikkhu, wherever he might scrutinize with wisdom the meaning of this discourse on the Dhamma, would find satisfaction and confidence of mind.
When this was said, the venerable Ānanda told the bhikkhus: “Friends, Tathāgatas are wonderful and have wonderful qualities.
When this was said, the venerable ̄nanda asked the Blessed One: “In what way, venerable sir, can a bhikkhu be called a wise man and an inquirer?”
When this was said, the wanderer Dīghanakha remarked: “Master Gotama commends my point of view, Master Gotama recommends my point of view.”
When this was said, the wanderer Māgandiya rubbed his own limbs with his hands and said: “This is that health, Master Gotama, this is that Nibbāna; for I am now healthy and happy and nothing afflicts me.” 
When this was said, the wanderer Māgandiya said to the Blessed One: “It is wonderful, Master Gotama, it is marvellous how well that has been expressed by Master Gotama: 
When this was said, the wanderer Māgandiya said: “Magnificent, Master Gotama!
When this was said, the wanderer Sakuludāyin said to the Blessed One: “Magnificent, venerable sir!
When this was said, the wanderer Sakuludāyin’s assembly addressed him thus: “Do not lead the holy life under the recluse Gotama, Master Udāyin.
When this was said, the wanderer Sakuludāyin’s assembly made an uproar, saying very loudly and noisily: “We are lost along with our own teachers’ doctrines!
When this was said, the wanderer Vacchagotta asked the Blessed One: “Master Gotama, is there any householder who, without abandoning the fetter of householdership, on the dissolution of the body has made an end of suffering?” 
When this was said, the wanderer Vacchagotta said to the Blessed One: “Master Gotama, suppose there were a great sāla tree not far from a village or town, and impermanence wore away its branches and foliage, its bark and sapwood, so that on a later occasion, being divested of branches and foliage, divested of bark and sapwood, it became pure, consisting entirely of heartwood; so too, this discourse of Master Gotama’s is divested of branches and foliage, divested of bark and sapwood, and is pure, consisting entirely of heartwood.
When this was said, the wanderer Vekhanassa said to the Blessed One: “Magnificent, Master Gotama!
When this was said, the wanderer Vekhanassa said: “It is wonderful, Master Gotama, it is marvellous, how well that has been expressed by Master Gotama: ‘Thus sensual pleasure through sensual pleasures, but beyond sensual pleasure there is a pleasure at the peak of the sensual, and that is declared to be the highest among them.’”
When this was said, the wanderer Vekhanassa was angry and displeased, and he reviled, disparaged, and censured the Blessed One, saying: “The recluse Gotama will be worsted.”
When this was said, those bhikkhus were silent.
When this was said, venerable sir, the venerable Ānanda said to us: ‘Friends, Tathāgatas are wonderful and have wonderful qualities.
When those cold wintry nights came during the ‘eight-days period of snowfall,’ I would dwell by night in the open and by day in the grove.
When venerable Ānanda had spoken, the householder Dasama of Aṭṭhakanāgara said to him: “Venerable Ānanda, just as if a man seeking one entrance to a hidden treasure came all at once upon eleven entrances to a hidden treasure, so too, while I was seeking one door to the Deathless, I have come all at once to hear of eleven doors to the Deathless.
When we took to quarreling and brawling and were deep in disputes, we said and did many things improper for a recluse.
When we took to quarreling and brawling and were deep in disputes, we said and did many things improper for a recluse.
When you associate with true men, you will hear the true Dhamma.
When you gather together, bhikkhus, you should do either of two things: hold discussion on the Dhamma or maintain noble silence.
When you give it to the Sangha, both I and the Sangha will be honoured.”
When you give it to the Sangha, both I and the Sangha will be honoured.” 
When you have abandoned it, that will lead to your welfare and happiness for a long time.
When you have abandoned it, that will lead to your welfare and happiness for a long time.
When you have abandoned it, that will lead to your welfare and happiness for a long time.
When you have abandoned it, that will lead to your welfare and happiness for a long time.
When you have abandoned it, that will lead to your welfare and happiness for a long time.
When you have abandoned them, that will lead to your welfare and happiness for a long time.
When you hear the true Dhamma, you will practise in accordance with the true Dhamma.
When you practise in accordance with the true Dhamma, you will know and see for yourself thus: ‘These are diseases, tumours, and darts; but here these diseases, tumours, and darts cease without remainder.
When you reflect, if you know: ‘This action that I am doing with the body leads to my own affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of both; it is an unwholesome bodily action with painful consequences, with painful results,’ then you should suspend such a bodily action.
When you reflect, if you know: ‘This action that I did with the body led to my own affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of both; it was an unwholesome bodily action with painful consequences, with painful results,’ then you should confess such a bodily action, reveal it, and lay it open to the Teacher or to your wise companions in the holy life.
When you reflect, if you know: ‘This action that I wish to do with the body would lead to my own affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of both; it is an unwholesome bodily action with painful consequences, with painful results,’ then you definitely should not do such an action with the body.
When you say thus: ‘Consciousness is my self,’ do you exercise any such power over that consciousness as to say: ‘Let my consciousness be thus; let my consciousness not be thus’?”—“No, Master Gotama.”
When you say thus: ‘Feeling is my self,’ do you exercise any power over that feeling as to say: ‘Let my feeling be thus; let my feeling not be thus’?”—“No, Master Gotama.”
When you say thus: ‘Formations are my self,’ do you exercise any such power over those formations as to say: ‘Let my formations be thus; let my formations not be thus’?”—“No, Master Gotama.”
When you say thus: ‘Material form is my self,’ do you exercise any such power over that material form as to say: ‘Let my form be thus; let my form not be thus’?”
When you say thus: ‘Material form is my self,’ do you exercise any such power over that material form as to say: ‘Let my form be thus; let my form not be thus’?”—“No, Master Gotama.”
When you say thus: ‘Perception is my self,’ do you exercise any power over that perception as to say: ‘Let my perception be thus; let my perception not be thus’?”—“No, Master Gotama.”
When you take to quarrelling and brawling and are deep in disputes, stabbing each other with verbal daggers, do you on that occasion maintain acts of loving-kindness by body, speech, and mind in public and in private towards your companions in the holy life?” “No, venerable sir.”
When you understand you should say: ‘We understand’; when you do not understand you should say: ‘We do not understand’; when you are doubtful or perplexed you should ask me: ‘How is this, venerable sir?
When you were asked: ‘But if you have no refuge, Master Ānanda, what is the cause for your concord?’ you answered: ‘We are not without a refuge, brahmin.
When you were asked: ‘Is there, Master Ānanda, any single bhikkhu who has been chosen by the Sangha and appointed by a number of elder bhikkhus thus: “He will be our refuge after the Blessed One has gone,” and whom you now have recourse to?’ you answered: ‘There is no such single bhikkhu……whom we now have recourse to.’
When you were twenty or twenty-five years old, were you an expert rider of elephants, an expert horseman, an expert charioteer, an expert archer, an expert swordsman, strong in thighs and arms, sturdy, capable in battle?”
When, by knowing the impermanence, change, fading away, and cessation of forms, one sees as it actually is with proper wisdom that forms both formerly and now are all impermanent, suffering, and subject to change, equanimity arises.
When, by knowing the impermanence, change, fading away, and cessation of forms, one sees as it actually is with proper wisdom that forms both formerly and now are all impermanent, suffering, and subject to change, joy arises.
When, by knowing the impermanence, change, fading away, and cessation of forms, one sees as it actually is with proper wisdom that forms both formerly and now are all impermanent, suffering, and subject to change, one generates a longing for the supreme liberations thus: ‘When shall I enter upon and abide in that base that the noble ones now enter upon and abide in?’
When, by realising for himself with direct knowledge, he here and now enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints, that pertains to his true knowledge.
When, with his teeth clenched and his tongue pressed against the roof of his mouth, he beats down, constrains, and crushes mind with mind, then any evil unwholesome thoughts connected with desire, with hate, and with delusion are abandoned in him and subside.
When, with the divine eye…he sees beings passing away and reappearing and understands how beings pass on according to their actions, that pertains to his true knowledge.
Whenever a strong man loosens the embankment, would water come out?”— “Yes, venerable sir.”—“So too, bhikkhus, when anyone has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body…he attains the ability to witness any aspect therein, there being a suitable basis.
Whenever a strong man tips it, would water come out?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”—“So too, bhikkhus, when anyone has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body, then when he inclines his mind towards realising any state that may be realised by direct knowledge, he attains the ability to witness any aspect therein, there being a suitable basis.
Whenever a thought of cruelty arose in me, I abandoned it, removed it, did away with it.
Whenever a thought of sensual desire arose in me, I abandoned it, removed it, did away with it.
Where among these recluses and brahmins does Master Gotama stand?”
Where has this being come from?
Where has this being come from?
Where have those worthy brahmin seers gone?’
Where have those worthy brahmin seers gone?”
Where these perceptions cease without remainder, that is the peaceful, that is the sublime, namely, the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.’
Where these perceptions cease without remainder, that is the peaceful, that is the sublime, namely, the base of nothingness.’
Where will it go?’ 
Where will it go?’?”—“No, venerable sir.”
Wherein Dūsī roasted, assailant
Wherein Dūsī roasted, assailant
Whereupon Sakka then answered
Whereupon the sombre spirit
Whether he is walking or standing or sleeping or awake, his hands and feet are continuously and uninterruptedly cut off, but he would know this only when he reviews the fact.
Whether it be a noble, or a brahmin, or a merchant, or a worker—those of all four castes are capable of developing a mind of loving-kindness towards a certain region, without hostility and without ill will.”
Whether it be a noble, or a brahmin, or a merchant, or a worker—those of all four castes are capable of developing a mind of loving-kindness towards this region, without hostility and without ill will.”
Whether it be a noble, or a brahmin, or a merchant, or a worker—those of all four castes are capable of taking a loofah and bath powder, going to the river, and washing off dust and dirt.”
Whether it be a noble, or a brahmin, or a merchant, or a worker—those of all four castes are capable of taking a loofah and bath powder, going to the river, and washing off dust and dirt.”
Whether it be a noble, or a brahmin, or a merchant, or a worker—those of all four castes who abstain from killing living beings…and hold right view, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.”
Whether it be a noble, or a brahmin, or a merchant, or a worker—those of all four castes who kill living beings …and hold wrong view, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.”
Whether there is the view ‘after death a Tathāgata both exists and does not exist’ or the view ‘after death a Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist,’ there is birth, there is ageing, there is death, there are sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair, the destruction of which I prescribe here and now.
Whether there is the view ‘the world is eternal’ or the view ‘the world is not eternal,’ there is birth, there is ageing, there is death, there are sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair, the destruction of which I prescribe here and now.
whether things are so or are not so.
Which goes against the worldly stream, Subtle, deep, and difficult to see.’
Which intends, ‘Let me burn the fool,’
Which is better—hell or the animal realm?”—“The animal realm, Master Sāriputta.”—“Which is better—the animal realm or the realm of ghosts?”—“The realm of ghosts, Master Sāriputta.”—“Which is better—the realm of ghosts or the realm of human beings?”—“Human beings, Master Sāriputta.” “Which is better—human beings or the gods of the heaven of the Four Great Kings?”—“The gods of the heaven of the Four Great Kings, Master Sāriputta.”—“Which is better—the gods of the heaven of the Four Great Kings or the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three?”—“The gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three, Master Sāriputta.”—“Which is better—the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three or the Yāma gods?”—“The Yāma gods, Master Sāriputta.”—“Which is better—the Yāma gods or the gods of the Tusita heaven?”—“The gods of the Tusita heaven, Master Sāriputta.”—“Which is better—the gods of the Tusita heaven or the gods who delight in creating?”—“The gods who delight in creating, Master Sāriputta.”—“Which is better—the gods who delight in creating or the gods who wield power over others’ creations?”—“The gods who wield power over others’ creations, Master Sāriputta.”
Which is better—the gods who wield power over others’ creations or the Brahma-world?”—“Master Sāriputta said ‘the Brahma-world.’
Which is the greater, this small stone that I have taken, the size of my hand, or Himalaya, the king of mountains?”
Which is the greater, this small stone that I have taken, the size of my hand, or Himalaya, the king of mountains?”
Which it covers all-pervasively.
Which it covers all-pervasively.
Which of them would brahmins feed first at a funeral feast, or at a ceremonial milk-rice offering, or at a sacrificial feast, or at a feast for guests?”
Which of them would brahmins feed first at a funeral feast, or at a ceremonial milk-rice offering, or at a sacrificial feast, or at a feast for guests?”
Which of these four kinds of persons satisfies your mind, Pessa?”
Which of these two fires would have a flame, colour, and radiance—a fire that might burn in dependence on fuel, such as grass and wood, or a fire that might burn independent of fuel, such as grass and wood?”
Which should I ask him about: good in this life or good in the lives to come?”
Which will last long, O End-maker!
Whichever of us returns last eats any food left over, if he wishes; otherwise he throws it away where there is no greenery or drops it into water where there is no life.
Whichever of us returns last eats any food left over, if he wishes; otherwise he throws it away where there is no greenery or drops it into water where there is no life.
While eating, drinking, and amusing yourself, you can be happy enjoying sensual pleasures and making merit.
While eating, drinking, and amusing yourself, you can be happy enjoying sensual pleasures and making merit.
While failing to reach the goal from life to life.
While he harbours doubt within, he meditates, premeditates, out-meditates, and mismeditates.
While he harbours sensual lust within, he meditates, premeditates, out-meditates, and mismeditates.
While he is giving attention to imperturbability, his mind does not enter into imperturbability or acquire confidence, steadiness, and decision.
While he is giving attention to imperturbability, his mind enters into imperturbability and acquires confidence, steadiness, and decision.
While he is giving attention to voidness internally, his mind does not enter into voidness internally or acquire confidence, steadiness, and decision.
While he is giving attention to voidness internally, his mind enters into voidness internally and acquires confidence, steadiness, and decision.
While he is living there his unestablished mindfulness becomes established, his unconcentrated mind becomes concentrated, his undestroyed taints come to destruction, he attains the unattained supreme security from bondage; and also the requisites of life that should be obtained by one gone forth—robes, almsfood, resting place, and medicinal requisites—are easy to come by.
While he is living there his unestablished mindfulness becomes established, his unconcentrated mind becomes concentrated, his undestroyed taints come to destruction, he attains the unattained supreme security from bondage; yet the requisites of life that should be obtained by one gone forth…are hard to come by.
While he is living there his unestablished mindfulness does not become established, his unconcentrated mind does not become concentrated, his undestroyed taints do not come to destruction, he does not attain the unattained supreme security from bondage; and also the requisites of life that should be obtained by one gone forth—robes, almsfood, resting place, and medicinal requisites—are hard to come by.
While he is living there his unestablished mindfulness does not become established, his unconcentrated mind does not become concentrated, his undestroyed taints do not come to destruction, he does not attain the unattained supreme security from bondage; yet the requisites of life that should be obtained by one gone forth…are easy to come by.
While he lives thus withdrawn, brahmins and householders from town and country visit him, and as a result he goes astray, becomes filled with desire, succumbs to craving, and reverts to luxury.
While he lives thus withdrawn, brahmins and householders from town and country visit him, and as a result he goes astray, becomes filled with desire, succumbs to craving, and reverts to luxury.
While he lives thus withdrawn, brahmins and householders from town and country visit him, and as a result he goes astray, becomes filled with desire, succumbs to craving, and reverts to luxury.
While he lives thus withdrawn, brahmins and householders from town and country visit him, yet he does not go astray, or become filled with desire, succumb to craving, and revert to luxury.
While he lives thus withdrawn, the Teacher censures him, wise companions in the holy life who have made investigation censure him, gods censure him, and he censures himself.
While he lives thus withdrawn, the Teacher does not censure him, wise companions in the holy life who have made investigation do not censure him, gods do not censure him, and he does not censure himself.
While he still does not attain to the rapture and pleasure that are secluded from sensual pleasures and secluded from unwholesome states, or to something more peaceful than that, covetousness invades his mind and remains, ill will invades his mind and remains, sloth and torpor invade his mind and remain, restlessness and remorse invade his mind and remain, doubt invades his mind and remains, discontent invades his mind and remains, weariness invades his mind and remains.
While his heirs take over his wealth, this being
While I am living here my unestablished mindfulness does not become established…I do not attain the unattained supreme security from bondage; and also the requisites of life…are hard to come by.’
While I am living here my unestablished mindfulness does not become established…I do not attain the unattained supreme security from bondage; yet the requisites of life that should be obtained by one gone forth…are easy to come by.
While I am living here my unestablished mindfulness has become established...I have attained the unattained supreme security from bondage; and also the requisites of life…are easy to come by.’
While I am living here my unestablished mindfulness has become established…I have attained the unattained supreme security from bondage; yet the requisites of life…are hard to come by.
While I did many deeds that lead
While I did so, my body reached a state of extreme emaciation.
While I did so, sweat ran from my armpits.
While I did so, there was a loud sound of winds coming out from my earholes.
While I did so, there was a violent burning in my body.
While I did so, there were violent pains in my head.
While I did so, violent winds carved up my belly.
While I did so, violent winds cut through my head.
While I lay down, the fear and dread came upon me; I neither walked nor stood nor sat down till I had subdued that fear and dread.
While I sat, the fear and dread came upon me; I neither walked nor stood nor lay down till I had subdued that fear and dread.
While I stood, the fear and dread came upon me; I neither walked nor sat nor lay down till I had subdued that fear and dread.
While she was doing so, she recognised the characteristic features of his hands, his feet, and his voice.
While taints, vexation, and fever might arise in one who abides with the eye faculty unrestrained, there are no taints, vexation, or fever in one who abides with the eye faculty restrained.
While taints, vexation, and fever might arise in one who does not avoid these things, there are no taints, vexation, and fever in one who avoids them.
While taints, vexation, and fever might arise in one who does not develop these enlightenment factors, there are no taints, vexation, or fever in one who develops them.
While taints, vexation, and fever might arise in one who does not endure such things, there are no taints, vexation, or fever in one who endures them.
While taints, vexation, and fever might arise in one who does not remove these thoughts, there are no taints, vexation, or fever in one who removes them.
While the colt is being made to get used to doing these things, because he is doing something that he has never done before, he displays some contortion, writhing, and vacillation, but through constant repetition and gradual practice, he becomes peaceful in those actions.
While the colt is being made to get used to wearing the bit, because he is doing something that he has never done before, he displays some contortion, writhing, and vacillation, but through constant repetition and gradual practice, he becomes peaceful in that action.
While the colt is being made to get used to wearing the harness, because he is doing something that he has never done before, he displays some contortion, writhing, and vacillation, but through constant repetition and gradual practice, he becomes peaceful in that action.
While the very senior brahmins were conversing with the Blessed One, he repeatedly broke in and interrupted their talk.
While the visiting bhikkhus were exchanging greetings with the resident bhikkhus, and were preparing resting places and putting away their bowls and outer robes, they were very loud and noisy.
Who are you?’
Who checks the evil deeds he did
Who directly knows this fact.
Who directly knows this fact.
Who directly knows this fact.
Who directly knows this fact.
Who directly knows this fact.
Who directly knows this fact.
Who directly knows this fact.
Who does not flare up with anger, Dutiful, virtuous, and humble, Subdued, bearing his final body:
Who endures without a trace of hate
Who follows in the Master’s own way?
Who give themselves to negligence, But those of wisdom guard diligence
Who has abandoned craving too, And wanders here in homelessness, With craving and being both destroyed:
Who has abandoned sensual pleasures
Who has been reciting the summary and exposition of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night’?”
Who has cut each strap and thong, The reins and bridle-band as well, Whose cross-bar is lifted, the awakened one:
Who has cut off all fetters
Who has dropped all lust and hate, Dropped conceit and contempt, Like mustard seed on the point of an awl:
Who has gained firm footing in the Deathless:
Who has had a single excellent night,’
Who has had a single excellent night,’
Who has had a single excellent night.
Who has had a single excellent night.
Who has had a single excellent night.’
Who has had a single excellent night.”
Who has had a single excellent night.”
Who has laid aside the rod
Who has no impediments at all, Before, behind, or in the middle, Who is unimpeded and clings no more:
Who has no more indulgences
Who has no more inner yearnings
Who has no rod nor any weapon.
Who has passed beyond the swamp, The mire, saṁsāra, all delusion, Who has crossed to the further shore
Who has transcended all ties here
Who have won to destruction of taints.
Who in the world will never take
Who is it who helps you to turn
Who is the better, one who for the sake of his parents behaves contrary to the Dhamma, behaves unrighteously, or one who for the sake of his parents behaves according to the Dhamma, behaves righteously?”
Who is the better, one who for the sake of his wife and children……for the sake of his slaves, servants, and workers…for the sake of his friends and companions……for the sake of his kinsmen and relatives…for the sake of his guests…for the sake of his departed ancestors…for the sake of the deities……for the sake of the king…for the sake of refreshing and nourishing this body behaves contrary to the Dhamma, behaves unrighteously, or one who for the sake of refreshing and nourishing this body behaves according to the Dhamma, behaves righteously?”
Who is the brahmin, who the wise one?
Who is there able to dispute with him about this assertion?”
Who is unimpeded and clings no more:
Who is unopposed among opponents, Peaceful among those given to violence, Who does not cling among those who cling:
Who is your general, that disciple
Who is your teacher?
Who is your teacher?
Who knows and sees what?
Who knows his manifold past lives
Who knows how beings pass away
Who knows right here within himself
Who lead others to accept the Dhamma.
Who leaves behind all human bonds
Who leaves behind delight and discontent, Who is cool and acquisitionless, The hero who has transcended the whole world:
Who makes his living among men
Who makes his living among men
Who makes his living among men
Who makes his living among men
Who makes his living among men
Who makes his living among men
Who utters speech free from harshness, Full of meaning, ever truthful, Which does not offend anyone:
Who will understand this Dhamma quickly?’
Who will understand this Dhamma quickly?’
Who will understand this Dhamma quickly?’
Who with deep understanding, wise, Can tell the path from the not-path
Who with uplifted hands implore:
Who, even though of outcast birth, Would not believe him when he saw
Who, like the rain on lotus leaves, Or mustard seed on the point of an awl, Clings not at all to sensual pleasures:
Who, pure as the spotless moon, Is clear and limpid, and in whom
Who, venerable sir, would not praise the praiseworthy?”
Whoever governs among men
Whoever notices that the pots of water for drinking, washing, or the latrine are low or empty takes care of them.
Whoever notices that the pots of water for drinking, washing, or the latrine are low or empty takes care of them.
Wholesome habits originate from this.
Wholesome intentions originate from this.
Whose destination is unknown
Whose Dhamma do you profess?’
Whose Dhamma do you profess?” 
Whose disciple should we consider you to be?”
Whose fires are quenched and extinguished.
Why are applied thought and sustained thought the verbal formation?
Why are perception and feeling the mental formation?”
Why can you not do so too?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why is that?
Why not?
Why not?
Why not?
Why not?
Why should we abandon visible here and now to pursue at a future time?
Why shouldn’t I ask him only about good in the lives to come?”
Why shouldn’t I take this recluse’s life?”
Why so?
Why was that?
Why was that?
Why was that?
Why was that?
Why, being myself subject to ageing, sickness, death, sorrow, and defilement, do I seek what is also subject to ageing, sickness, death, sorrow, and defilement?
Wife and children are subject to ageing, men and women slaves, goats and sheep, fowl and pigs, elephants, cattle, horses, and mares, gold and silver are subject to ageing.
Wife and children are subject to birth, men and women slaves, goats and sheep, fowl and pigs, elephants, cattle, horses, and mares, gold and silver are subject to birth.
Wife and children are subject to death, men and women slaves, goats and sheep, fowl and pigs, elephants, cattle, horses, and mares are subject to death.
Wife and children are subject to defilement, men and women slaves, goats and sheep, fowl and pigs, elephants, cattle, horses, and mares, gold and silver are subject to defilement.
Wife and children are subject to sickness, men and women slaves, goats and sheep, fowl and pigs, elephants, cattle, horses, and mares are subject to sickness.
Wife and children are subject to sorrow, men and women slaves, goats and sheep, fowl and pigs, elephants, cattle, horses, and mares are subject to sorrow.
Will find a fruitful going forth.”
Will never discern this abstruse Dhamma
Wise attention and unwise attention.
Wishing to discredit the Buddha, some wandering ascetics persuaded Sundarı̄ to visit Jeta’s Grove at night and then let herself be seen returning at dawn, so people would become suspicious.
With a clear translucent lustre, Where iridescent sea-nymphs dance
With all its gods, because I have
With beauty so rare why should you
With blood running from his cut head, the venerable Vidhura followed close behind the Blessed One Kakusandha, accomplished and fully enlightened.
With contact as condition there is feeling.
With contact as condition there is feeling.
With eyes clear, with countenance bright, Majestic, erect as a flame, In the midst of this body of recluses
With four doors, one set in each side, Walled up with iron all around
With four doors, one set in each side, Walled up with iron and all around
With hands held out in adoration.
With his clinging as condition, being; with being as condition, birth; with birth as condition, ageing and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair come to be.
With his clinging as condition, being; with being as condition, birth; with birth as condition, ageing and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair come to be.
With his mind invaded by lust, he would incur death or deadly suffering.
With his robe completed, at the end of the three months, the Blessed One will set out wandering.
With his toe to incite the gods: 
With his toe, the Order watching.
With jewellery and earrings too, A skeleton wrapped up in skin, Made attractive by its clothes.
With my clinging as condition, being; with being as condition, birth; with birth as condition, ageing and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair come to be.
With no consequence in the future, there is the destruction of action.
With no consequence in the future, there is the destruction of action.
With no consequence in the future…all suffering will be exhausted.”
With no consequence in the future…all suffering will be exhausted.”
With no consequence…all suffering will be exhausted.”
With reference to what is this said, ‘one who is unwise’?”
With reference to what is this said, ‘one who is wise’?”
With reference to what is ‘consciousness’ said?”
With reference to what is ‘feeling’ said?”
With reference to what is ‘perception’ said?”
With sense desires and being destroyed:
With skin of so golden a sheen—
With that he abandons aversion, and the underlying tendency to aversion does not underlie that.
With that he abandons ignorance, and the underlying tendency to ignorance does not underlie that.” 
With that he abandons lust, and the underlying tendency to lust does not underlie that.
With that the Tathāgata is not satisfied and feels no satisfaction, and he is not dissatisfied and feels no dissatisfaction; remaining free from both satisfaction and dissatisfaction, he dwells in equanimity, mindful, and fully aware.
With that the Tathāgata is not satisfied and feels no satisfaction; yet he dwells unmoved, mindful, and fully aware.
With that the Tathāgata is satisfied and feels satisfaction; yet he dwells unmoved, mindful, and fully aware.
With the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, he enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
With the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, he enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
With the abandoning of pleasure and pain...he enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna.
With the abandoning of them his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness, and concentrated.
With the abandoning of them his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness, and concentrated.
With the abandoning of them his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness, and concentrated.
With the abandoning of them his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness, and concentrated.
With the abandoning of them his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness, and concentrated.
With the arising of being there is the arising of birth.
With the arising of birth there is the arising of ageing and death.
With the arising of clinging there is the arising of being.
With the arising of consciousness there is the arising of mentality-materiality.
With the arising of contact there is the arising of feeling.
With the arising of craving there is the arising of clinging.
With the arising of craving there is the arising of nutriment.
With the arising of delight, Puṇṇa, there is the arising of suffering, I say.
With the arising of delight, Puṇṇa, there is the arising of suffering, I say.
With the arising of feeling there is the arising of craving.
With the arising of formations there is the arising of consciousness.
With the arising of ignorance there is the arising of formations.
With the arising of ignorance there is the arising of the taints.
With the arising of mentality-materiality there is the arising of the sixfold base.
With the arising of the sixfold base there is the arising of contact.
With the arising of the taints there is the arising of ignorance.
With the cessation of being there is the cessation of birth.
With the cessation of birth there is the cessation of ageing and death.
With the cessation of clinging there is the cessation of being.
With the cessation of consciousness there is the cessation of mentality-materiality.
With the cessation of contact there is the cessation of feeling.
With the cessation of craving there is the cessation of clinging.
With the cessation of craving there is the cessation of nutriment.
With the cessation of delight, Puṇṇa, there is the cessation of suffering, I say.
With the cessation of feeling there is the cessation of craving.
With the cessation of formations there is the cessation of consciousness.
With the cessation of his delight comes cessation of clinging; with the cessation of clinging, cessation of being; with the cessation of being, cessation of birth; with the cessation of birth, ageing and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair cease.
With the cessation of ignorance there is the cessation of formations.
With the cessation of ignorance there is the cessation of the taints.
With the cessation of mentality-materiality there is the cessation of the sixfold base.
With the cessation of my clinging comes cessation of being; with the cessation of being, cessation of birth; with the cessation of birth, ageing and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair cease.
With the cessation of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, unworldly pleasure arises, and with the cessation of unworldly pleasure, neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling arises.
With the cessation of the pleasant feeling, painful feeling arises.
With the cessation of the pleasant feeling, painful feeling arises.
With the cessation of the rapture of seclusion, grief arises, and with the cessation of grief, the rapture of seclusion arises.
With the cessation of the sixfold base there is the cessation of contact.
With the cessation of the taints there is the cessation of ignorance.
With the cessation of unworldly pleasure, the rapture of seclusion arises, and with the cessation of the rapture of seclusion, unworldly pleasure arises.
With the change and becoming otherwise of that consciousness, his consciousness is not preoccupied with the change of consciousness.
With the change and becoming otherwise of that consciousness, his consciousness is preoccupied with the change of consciousness.
With the change and becoming otherwise of that material form, his consciousness is not preoccupied with the change of material form.
With the change and becoming otherwise of that material form, his consciousness is preoccupied with the change of material form.
With the complete surmounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite,’ he enters upon and abides in the base of infinite space: this is the fourth direction.
With the complete surmounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite,’ one enters upon and abides in the base of infinite space: this is the fourth liberation.
With the destruction of action, there is the destruction of suffering.
With the destruction of action, there is the destruction of suffering.
With the destruction of feeling, all suffering will be exhausted.’
With the destruction of feeling, all suffering will be exhausted.”
With the destruction of suffering, there is the destruction of feeling.
With the destruction of suffering, there is the destruction of feeling.
With the destruction of the five lower fetters, he has reappeared spontaneously and will there attain final Nibbāna, without ever returning from that world.”
With the destruction of the five lower fetters, the clansman Pukkusāti has reappeared spontaneously and will attain final Nibbāna there without ever returning from that world.” 
With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate.
With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate.
With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, I saw beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate.
With the fading away as well of rapture, he abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna, on account of which noble ones announce: ‘He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.’
With the fading away as well of rapture, he abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna, on account of which noble ones announce: ‘He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.’
With the name of ‘Finger-garland,’
With the simile of the skeleton…with the simile of the piece of meat…with the simile of the grass torch…with the simile of the pit of coals…with the simile of the dream…with the sim-ile of the borrowed goods…with the simile of fruits on a tree…with the simile of the butcher’s knife and block…with the simile of the sword stake…with the simile of the snake’s head, I have stated that sensual pleasures provide little gratification, much suffering and despair, and that the danger in them is still more.
With the simile of the skeleton…with the simile of the piece of meat…with the simile of the grass torch…with the simile of the pit ofcoals…with the simile of the dream…with the simile of the borrowed goods…with the simile of fruits on a tree…with the simile of the butcher’s knife and block…with the simile of the sword stake…with the simile of the snake’s head, the Blessed One has stated that sensual pleasures provide little gratification, much suffering and despair, and that the danger in them is still more.ʺ 
With the simile of the skeleton…with the simile of the snake’s head, I have stated…that the danger in them is still more.
With the simile of the skeleton…with the simile of the snake’s head, the Blessed One has stated…that the danger in them is still more.”
With the stilling of applied and sustained thought, he enters upon and abides in the second jhāna, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
With the stilling of applied and sustained thought, he enters upon and abides in the second jhāna, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
With the stilling of applied and sustained thought, I entered upon and abided in the second jhāna…With the fading away as well of rapture…I entered upon and abided in the third jhāna…With the abandoning of pleasure and pain…I entered upon and abided in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
With the support of no anger and irritation, anger and irritation are to be abandoned.
With the support of no rapacity and greed, rapacity and greed are to be abandoned.
With the support of no spite and scolding, spite and scolding are to be abandoned.
With the support of non-arrogance, arrogance is to be abandoned.
With the support of taking only what is given, the taking of what is not given is to be abandoned.
With the support of the non-killing of living beings, the killing of living beings is to be abandoned.
With the support of truthful speech, false speech is to be abandoned.
With the support of unmalicious speech, malicious speech is to be abandoned.
With trusting heart a gift righteously obtained, Placing faith that the fruit of action is great, That gift, I say, is the best of worldly gifts.” 
With trusting heart a gift righteously obtained, Placing faith that the fruit of action is great, That gift, I say, will come to full fruition.
With trusting heart a gift righteously obtained, Placing faith that the fruit of action is great, The giver’s virtue purifies the offering.
With untrusting heart a gift unrighteously obtained, Nor places faith that the fruit of action is great, Neither’s virtue purifies the offering.
With untrusting heart a gift unrighteously obtained, Nor places faith that the fruit of action is great, The receiver’s virtue purifies the offering.
With warriors and great princes
With what one has mentally proliferated as the source, perceptions and notions mental proliferation beset a man with respect to past, future, and present forms cognizable through the eye.
With what one has mentally proliferated as the source, perceptions and notions mental proliferation beset a man with respect to past, future, and present mind-objects cognizable through the mind.
With your present forces you can conquer it.
Without approving or disapproving, a question should be put thus: ‘Friend, there are four kinds of expression rightly proclaimed by the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened.
Without damaging the inner mass of flesh and without damaging the outer hide, he would cut, sever, and carve away the inner tendons, sinews, and ligaments with the sharp butcher’s knife.
Without doing either he rose from his seat and went away, thinking: “I shall learn the meaning of this statement in the presence of the Blessed One.”
Without doing either they rose from their seats and went away, thinking: “We shall come to understand the meaning of these words in the Blessed One’s presence.”
Would a head-anointed noble king—for example, King Pasenadi of Kosala or King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha—exercise the power in his own realm to execute those who should be executed, to fine those who should be fined, and to banish those who should be banished?”
Would a Wheel-turning Monarch experience pleasure and joy because of possessing these seven treasures and these four kinds of success?”
Would he be able: ‘It was for the sake of my parents that I behaved contrary to the Dhamma, that I behaved unrighteously, so let not the wardens of hell to hell’?
Would he be able: ‘It was for the sake of refreshing and nourishing this body that I behaved contrary to the Dhamma, that I behaved unrighteously, so let not the wardens of hell to hell’?
Would he be speaking rightly if he were to say: ‘This cow is joined to this hide just as it was before’?”
Would he be speaking rightly?”
Would he be speaking rightly?”
Would he be speaking rightly?”
Would he be speaking rightly?”
Would he walk across himself, or would he dispose his body otherwise, or would he say ‘No’?”
Would he walk across himself, or would he dispose his body otherwise, or would he say ‘No’?”
Would my disciples, knowing and seeing thus, break in and interrupt me?”—“No, venerable sir.”—“I do not expect instruction from my disciples; invariably, it is my disciples who expect instruction from me.
Would not sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair arise in that man when he sees that woman standing with another man, chatting, joking, and laughing?”
Would not the wanderers of other sects confute you with the simile of the infant?
Would not the wanderers of other sects confute you with this simile of the infant?”
Would sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair arise in that man when he sees that woman standing with another man…?”
Would that be enough for that man to become dejected?”
Would that bhikkhu on such an occasion choose for his own affliction, or for another’s affliction, or for the affliction of both?”—“No, venerable sir.”—“Does not that bhikkhu sustain himself with blameless food on that occasion?”
Would that bhikkhu on such an occasion choose for his own affliction, or for another’s affliction, or for the affliction of both?”—“No, venerable sir.”—“Does not that bhikkhu sustain himself with blameless food on that occasion?”
Would that blind turtle put his neck into that yoke with one hole in it?”
Would that dog get rid of his hunger and weakness by gnawing such a well hacked, clean hacked skeleton of meatless bones smeared with blood?”
Would that first man listen to him, give him ear, and exert his mind to understand?” —“Yes, venerable sir.”—“So too, Sunakkhatta, it is possible that some person here may be intent on worldly material things.
Would that heavy ball find entry into that mound of wet clay?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”— “So too, bhikkhus, when anyone has not developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body, Māra finds an opportunity and a support in him.
Would that light ball of string find entry through that door-panel made entirely of heartwood?”—“No, venerable sir.”—“So too, bhikkhus, when anyone has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body, Māra cannot find an opportunity or a support in him.
Would that man be slow or hesitant in answering?”
Would that man envy that leper for his burning charcoal pit or his use of medicine?”
Would that man experience pain and grief because of being struck with the three hundred spears?”
Would that man twist his body this way and that?”
Would that man twist his body this way and that?”
Would that young god surrounded by the group of nymphs in the Nandana Grove, enjoying himself, provided and endowed with the five cords of divine sensual pleasure, envy the householder or the householder’s son for the five cords of human sensual pleasure or would he be enticed by human sensual pleasures?”
Would the bronze dish thus get cleaner and brighter later on?”—“Yes, friend.”—“So too, friend, when a person with a blemish understands it as it actually is thus: ‘I have a blemish in myself,’ it can be expected…that he will die…with mind undefiled.
Would the bronze dish thus get cleaner and brighter later on?”—“Yes, friend.”—“So too, friend, when a person with no blemish understands it as it actually is thus: ‘I have no blemish in myself,’ it can be expected…that he will die…with mind undefiled.
Would the bronze dish thus get more defiled and more stained later on?”—“Yes, friend.”—“So too, friend, when a person with no blemish does not understand it as it actually is thus: ‘I have no blemish in myself,’ it can be expected that he will die…with mind defiled.
Would the bronze dish thus get more defiled and stained later on?”—“Yes, friend.”—“So too, friend, when a person with a blemish does not understand it as it actually is thus: ‘I have a blemish in myself,’ it can be expected…that he will die…with mind defiled.
Would the two tamable elephants or tamable horses or tamable oxen that were well tamed and well disciplined, being tamed, acquire the behaviour of the tamed, would they arrive at the grade of the tamed?”
Would the two tamable elephants, horses, or oxen that were well tamed and well disciplined, being tamed, acquire the behaviour of the tamed, would they arrive at the grade of the tamed?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”—“But would the two tamable elephants, horses, or oxen that were untamed and undisciplined, being untamed, acquire the behaviour of the tamed, would they arrive at the grade of the tamed, like the two tamable elephants, horses, or oxen that were well tamed and well disciplined?”—“No, venerable sir.”—“So too, Aggivessana, it is impossible that Prince Jayasena, living in the midst of sensual pleasures,…could know, see, or realise that which must be known through renunciation, seen through renunciation, attained through renunciation, realised through renunciation.
Would there be any difference among these fires lit with different kinds of wood, that is, between the flame of one and the flames of the others, or between the colour of one and the colours of the others, or between the radiance of one and the radiances of the others?”
Would you know: ‘This fire is burning before me’?”
Would you like to see the loveliness of the Vejayanta Palace, good sir Moggallāna?”
Would you recognise him if you saw him?” 
Yasassin…Sudassana…Piyadassin…Gandhāra…Piṇḍola… Up̄sabha...Nītha...Tatha...Sutav̄...Bh̄vitatta dwelt long on this mountain Isigili.
Yes, Master Gotama.”* 
Yet although pressed and questioned and cross-questioned by those bhikkhus in this way, the bhikkhu Ariṭṭha, formerly of the vulture killers, still obstinately adhered to that pernicious view and continued to insist upon it.
Yet although pressed and questioned and cross-questioned by those bhikkhus in this way, the bhikkhu Sāti, son of a fisherman, still obstinately adhered to that pernicious view and continued to insist upon it.
Yet by encompassing the venerable ones’ minds with my own mind, I know that they have obtained those abidings and attainments.
Yet despite this, they do not do such honour to me as they do to the Blessed One.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
Yet I do not recall that I ever aroused an evil mind against them.
Yet I do not say that both of us are cut off and annihilated with the dissolution of the body, that after death we shall not exist.
Yet I do not say that both of us will make an end of suffering by running and wandering through the round of rebirths.
Yet I do not say that both will be purified without cause or condition.
Yet I do not say that whatever both do, no evil is done.
Yet in pain and grief, weeping with tearful face, he leads the perfect and pure holy life.
Yet in spite of this, they are less respectful towards me than they are towards the Blessed One.
Yet the underlying tendency to adhere to rules and observances lies within him.
Yet the underlying tendency to doubt lies within him.
Yet the underlying tendency to identity view lies within him.
Yet the underlying tendency to ill will lies within him.
Yet the underlying tendency to sensual lust lies within him.
Yet the venerable Mahā Kaccāna is praised by the Teacher and esteemed by his wise companions in the holy life.
Yet the venerable Mahā Kaccāna is praised by the Teacher and esteemed by his wise companions in the holy life.
Yet they abandon that and do not show discourtesy towards me or towards those bhikkhus desirous of training.
Yet this good recluse or brahmin still clings, clinging either to a view about the past or to a view about the future or to a fetter of sensual pleasure or to the rapture of seclusion or to unworldly pleasure or to neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.
Yet when I am sitting in council, they break in and interrupt me.
Yet when my disciples have been thus advised and instructed by me, some of them attain Nibbāna, the ultimate goal, and some do not attain it.
Yet while I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One thus, at times states of greed, hate, and delusion invade my mind and remain.
Yet will not purify dark deeds.
yet you do not indicate what that splendour is.
Yet you made this statement: ‘I will debate on the basis of truth, venerable sir, so let us have some conversation about this.’”
Yet you made this statement: ‘I will debate on the basis of truth, venerable sir, so let us have some conversation about this.’”
Yet you made this statement: ‘I will debate on the basis of truth, venerable sir, so let us have some conversation about this.’”
Yet you made this statement: ‘I will debate on the basis of truth, venerable sir, so let us have some conversation about this.’”
You are a lion free from clinging, You have abandoned fear and dread.
You are experiencing here and now the result of deeds because of which you might have been tortured in hell for many years, for many hundreds of years, for many thousands of years.” 
You are fit to be a king, a lord of charioteers, A monarch who makes the wheel turn, A victor in all the four quarters
You are inconsistent.
You are inconsistent.
You are Māra, Evil One, and the Brahmā and the Brahmā’s Assembly and the members of the Brahmā’s Assembly have all fallen into your hands, they have all fallen into your power.
You are Māra, Evil One.
You are Māra, Evil One.
You are proved wrong.
You are refuted.
You are standing against the door bar, Evil One.
You are the Buddha, you are the Teacher, You are the Sage, the conqueror of Māra.
You can consume food within the proper time, you cannot consume food outside the proper time; you can eat within the proper time, you cannot eat outside the proper time; you can taste food within the proper time, you cannot taste food outside the proper time; you can drink within the proper time, you cannot drink outside the proper time.’ 
You can consume what is allowable, you cannot consume what is not allowable; you can eat what is allowable, you cannot eat what is not allowable; you can taste what is allowable, you cannot taste what is not allowable; you can drink what is allowable, you cannot drink what is not allowable.
You do not have that noble vision, Māgandiya, by means of which you might know health and see Nibbāna.”
You do not know or see that, but I know and see it.
You explained in accordance with the Dhamma in such a way that nothing which provides a ground for censure can be legitimately deduced from your assertion.
You have been raised in comfort, brought up in comfort; you know nothing of suffering, dear Raṭṭhapāla.
You have been raised in comfort, brought up in comfort; you know nothing of suffering, dear Raṭṭhapāla.
You have been raised in comfort, brought up in comfort; you know nothing of suffering, friend Raṭṭhapāla.
You have surmounted all acquisitions, You have removed all the taints.
You may bring to me whatever you think would be suitable for him.”
You may come at your own convenience.”
You may come there.”
You may come, sir, at your own convenience.”
You may go at your own convenience.”
You may go at your own convenience.”
You may go to pay your respects to that Blessed One, venerable sir.” 
You now enjoy yourself provided and endowed with the five cords of sensual pleasure, but will you be able to have it of the life to come: ‘Let me likewise enjoy myself provided and endowed with these same five cords of sensual pleasure’?
You only burn yourself alone.
You say: ‘Venerable sir, that splendour is the perfect splendour which is unsurpassed by any other splendour higher or more sublime,’ yet you do not indicate what that splendour is.
You see, bhikkhus, do you not, that mountain Gijjhakuṭa—the Vulture Peak?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”
You see, bhikkhus, do you not, that mountain Isigili—the Gullet of the Seers?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”
You see, bhikkhus, do you not, that mountain Paṇḍava?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”
You see, bhikkhus, do you not, that mountain Vepulla?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”
You shine like the blazing sun.
You should ask me such a question as this: ‘Friend Bakkula, in these eighty years how many times have perceptions of sensual desire arisen in you?’”
You should listen, Ānanda, to the Tathāgata as he expounds the great exposition of action.”
You should not live near me.”
You should train thus: ‘I will not cling to the ear…I will not cling to the nose…I will not cling to the tongue…I will not cling to the body…I will not cling to the mind, and my consciousness will not be dependent on the mind.’
You think thus, Evil One: “Those to whom the recluse Gotama teaches the Dhamma will escape from my sphere.”
You went saying: ‘Venerable sir, I shall refute the recluse Gotama’s doctrine,’ and you have come back caught by the vast net of his doctrine.
You were her son, so you were my nephew.
You were thinking thus, Evil One: ‘This recluse does not know me, he does not see me when he says that.
You will explain in accordance with the Dhamma in such a way that nothing which provides a ground for censure can be legitimately deduced from your assertion.
You will explain in accordance with the Dhamma in such a way that nothing which provides a ground for censure can be legitimately deduced from your assertion.”
You, Evil One, think: “This one too has fallen into my hands, he too has fallen into my power”; but I have not fallen into your hands, Evil One, I have not fallen into your power.’
You, sir, are a good speaker with a good delivery; you speak words that are courteous, distinct, flawless, and communicate the meaning.
You, sir, are a master of the Three Vedas with their vocabularies, liturgy, phonology, and etymology, and the histories as a fifth; skilled in philology and grammar, you are fully versed in natural philosophy and in the marks of a Great Man.
You, sir, are handsome, comely, and graceful, possessing supreme beauty of complexion, with sublime beauty and sublime presence, remarkable to behold.
You, sir, are honoured, respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed by King Pasenadi of Kosala.
You, sir, are honoured, respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed by the brahmin Pokkharasāti.
You, sir, are rich, with great wealth and great possessions.
You, sir, are virtuous, mature in virtue, possessing mature virtue.
You, sir, rule over Opasāda, a crown property abounding in living beings...a sacred grant given to you by King Pasenadi of Kosala.
You, sir, teach the teachers of many, and you teach the recitation of the hymns to three hundred brahmin students.
You, who rely on the teachers’ doctrines, are not their spoon-holder Puṇṇa.” 
Young, shaven-headed, sixteen years old, he was a master of the Three Vedas with their vocabularies, liturgy, phonology, and etymology, and the histories as a fifth; skilled in philology and grammar, he was fully versed in natural philosophy and in the marks of a Great Man.
Young, shaven-headed, sixteen years old, he was a master of the Three Vedas with their vocabularies, liturgy, phonology, and etymology, and the histories as a fifth; skilled in philology and grammar, he was fully versed in natural philosophy and in the marks of a Great Man.
Young…fully versed in natural philosophy and in the marks of a Great Man.
Your assertion has been shown up.
Your doctrine is refuted.
Your faculties are deranged.”
Your parents do not permit you to go forth from the home life into homelessness.
Your parents permit you to go forth from the home life into homelessness.
Your way is wrong.
Your way is wrong.
Ñā˚ananda interprets it to mean “concepts characterised by the mind’s prolific tendency,” but this explanation still leaves the word saññā out of account.
Ñm had taken the words in the latter sense, but the fact that neither MA nor Ṁ glosses ratta implies that “night” is intended; for if the word were used to mean attachment, an unwholesome state in typical Buddhist discourse, some commentarial clarification would surely have been offered.
Ñm had translated the former as “diversification” and the latter as “calculations about perceptions of diversification.”
Ñm, however, understands the implicit object of conceiving to be the percept itself, and accordingly translates: “having had from earth a percept of earth, he conceives earth, he conceives in earth, he conceives from earth,” etc.
Ñm, in Ms, explains that he takes pabhaṁ to be a negative present participle of pabhavati—apabhaṁ—the negative-prefix a dropping off in conjunction with sabbato: “The sense can be paraphrased freely by ‘not predicating being in relation to “all,”’ or ‘not assuming of “all” that it is or is not in an absolute sense.’” But if we take pabhaṁ as “luminous,” which seems better justified, the verse links up with the idea of the mind as intrinsically luminous and also suggests the light of wisdom, called the best of lights.
Ānanda, speaking rightly, should speak just as he did.
Ānanda, when there are two men living, he under whom there occurs a breach of this good practice—he is the last man among them.
Ānanda’s answer thus implies that it is their censure and not that of ordinary ascetics that should be avoided.
ʺ There can be, bhikkhu, ʺ the Blessed One said.
ʺHere, bhikkhu, someone thinks thus: ‘Alas, I had it!
ʺIf asked, ‘Are there found in the Tathāgata or not cleansed states cognizable through the eye or through the ear?’ the Tathāgata would answer thus: ‘Cleansed states cognizable through the eye or through the ear are found in the Tathāgata.
Ṁ simply gives word resolutions and says this refers to a person cultivating insight.
– are sometimes added to the two eightfold paths—see MN.–;
– are ten of the sixteen imperfections that defile the mind, mentioned in MN.;
– are the last seven factors of the eightfold path—wrong and right—the first factor being identical with;
– are the last three of the five hindrances—see MN.—the first two being identical with and;
– are the seven bad qualities and the seven good qualities mentioned in MN.–.
– are the ten courses of unwholesome and wholesome action —see MN.,.;
–.
–.
–.
–.
–.
–.
–.
–.
–.
–.
–.
–.
–.
–.
–.Then the Blessed One addressed the venerable Nandaka: “Well then, Nandaka, tomorrow too you should advise those bhikkhunīs in exactly the same way.”
–.Then the Blessed One went to the Peacocks’ Sanctuary, thewanderers’park.
–.“Again, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with compassion…with a mind imbued with altruistic joy…with a mind imbued with equanimity, likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth; so above, below, around, and everywhere, and to all as to himself, he abides pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind imbued with equanimity, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility, and without ill will.
–.“Again, a bhikkhu is contemptuous and insolent…envious and avaricious…fraudulent and deceitful…has evil wishes and wrong view…adheres to his own views, holds on to them tenaciously, and relinquishes them with difficulty.
–.“Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith…and wisdom.
–.“Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith…and wisdom.
–.“Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith…and wisdom.
–.“Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith…and wisdom.
–.“Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith…and wisdom.
–.“Again, as though he were to see a corpse thrown aside in a charnel ground, a skeleton with flesh and blood, held together with sinews...a fleshless skeleton smeared with blood, held together with sinews...a skeleton without flesh and blood, held together with sinews…disconnected bones scattered in all directions—here a hand-bone, there a foot-bone, here a shin-bone, there a thigh-bone, here a hip-bone, there a back-bone, here a rib-bone, there a breast-bone, here an arm-bone, there a shoulder-bone, here a neck-bone, there a jaw-bone, here a tooth, there the skull—a bhikkhu compares this same body with it thus: ‘This body too is of the same nature, it will be like that, it is not exempt from that fate.’ 
–.“Again, as though he were to see a corpse thrown aside in a charnel ground, a skeleton with flesh and blood, held together with sinews…a fleshless skeleton smeared with blood, held together with sinews...a skeleton without flesh and blood, held together with sinews…disconnected bones scattered in all directions—here a hand-bone, there a foot-bone, here a shin-bone, there a thigh-bone, here a hip-bone, there a back-bone, here a rib-bone, there a breast-bone, here an arm-bone, there a shoulder-bone, here a neck-bone, there a jaw-bone, here a tooth, there the skull—a bhikkhu compares this same body with it thus: ‘This body too is of the same nature, it will be like that, it is not exempt from that fate.’
–.“Again, as though he were to see a corpse thrown aside in a charnel ground, bones bleached white, the colour of shells...bones heaped up...bones more than a year old, rotted and crumbled to dust, a bhikkhu compares this same body with it thus: ‘This body too is of the same nature, it will be like that, it is not exempt from that fate.’
–.“Again, as though he were to see a corpse thrown aside in a charnel ground, bones bleached white, the colour of shells… bones heaped up…bones more than a year old, rotted and crumbled to dust, a bhikkhu compares this same body with it thus: ‘This body too is of the same nature, it will be like that, it is not exempt from that fate.’
–.“Again, bhikkhus, here a Tathāgata appears in the world, accomplished, fully enlightened…… he purifies his mind from doubt.
–.“Again, Dhānañjāni, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with compassion…with a mind imbued with altruistic joy…with a mind imbued with equanimity, likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth; so above, below, around, and everywhere, and to all as to himself, he abides pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind imbued with equanimity, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.
–.“Again, one might see that same woman as a corpse thrown aside in a charnel ground, being devoured by crows, hawks, vultures, dogs, jackals, or various kinds of worms…...a skeleton with flesh and blood, held together with sinews...a fleshless skeleton smeared with blood, held together with sinews…a skeleton without flesh and blood, held together with sinews…disconnected bones scattered in all directions—here a hand-bone, there a foot-bone, here a thigh-bone, there a rib-bone, here a hip-bone, there a back-bone, here the skull…bones bleached white, the colour of shells…bones heaped up…bones more than a year old, rotted and crumbled to dust.
–.“Again, Sāriputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: ‘Are the four right kinds of striving developed in me?…Are the four bases for spiritual power developed in me?…Are the five faculties developed in me?...Are the five powers developed in me?...Are the seven enlightenment factors developed in me?...Is the Noble Eightfold Path developed in me?...Are serenity and insight developed in me?’
–.“Again, Sāriputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: ‘On the path by which I went to the village for alms, or in the place where I wandered for alms, or on the path by which I returned from the almsround, was there any desire, lust, hate, delusion, or aversion in my mind regarding sounds cognizable by the ear?…regarding odours cognizable by the nose?…regarding flavours cognizable by the tongue?…regarding tangibles cognizable by the body?…regarding mind-objects cognizable by the mind?’
–.“Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna…the third jhāna…the fourth jhāna.
–.“Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna…With the fading away as well of rapture…he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna…With the abandoning of pleasure and pain he enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna…On such an occasion he does not choose for his own affliction, or for another’s affliction, or for the affliction of both.
–.“Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, he enters upon and abides in the second jhāna…With the fading away as well of rapture...he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna...
–.“And how, Ānanda, is one a noble one with developed faculties?
–.“And it can also be understood from this how sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair are born from those who are dear, arise from those who are dear.
–.“And it can also be understood from this how sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair are born from those who are dear, arise from those who are dear.
–.“And what is the gratification in the case of sensual pleasures?
–.“Brahmin, there are four kinds of persons to be found existing in the world.
–.“Brahmin, what kind of person torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself?
–.“Friend, in the eighty years since I went forth I do not recall any perception of ill will…any perception of cruelty to have ever arisen in me.”
–.“Friend, in the eighty years since I went forth I do not recall any thought of ill will…any thought of cruelty to have ever arisen in me.”
–.“Friend, in the eighty years since I went forth I do not recall ever having accepted a robe from a householder...ever having worn a robe given by a householder…ever having cut a robe with a cutter…ever having sewn a robe with a needle… ever having coloured a robe with dye…ever having sewn a robe at the kaṭhina time…ever having worked on making robes for my companions in the holy life.”
–.“Friend, in the eighty years since I went forth I do not recall ever having accepted an invitation to a meal…ever having given rise to the thought: ‘Oh, may someone invite me to a meal!’…ever having sat down inside a house…ever having eaten inside a house.”
–.“Friend, in the eighty years since I went forth I do not recall ever having bathed in a bath house…ever having bathed with bath powder…ever having undertaking the work of massaging the limbs of my companions in the holy life …ever having had an affliction arise in me even for as long as it takes to milk a cow…ever having carried medicine around, even as much as a piece of gallnut…ever having used a bolster…ever having made up a bed…ever having entered upon residence for the Rains in a resting place inside a village.”
–.“Friend, in the eighty years since I went forth I do not recall ever having given the going forth…ever having given the full admission…ever having given dependence…ever having had a novice wait on me.”
–.“Friend, in the eighty years since I went forth I do not recall ever having grasped at the signs and features of a woman...ever having taught the Dhamma to a woman, even as much as a four-line stanza…ever having gone to the bhikkhunīs’ quarters…ever having taught the Dhamma to a bhikkhunī...
–.“He abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with compassion…with a mind imbued with altruistic joy…with a mind imbued with equanimity, likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth; so above, below, around, and everywhere, and to all as to himself, he abides pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind imbued with equanimity, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.
–.“He too directly knows water as water…Nibbāna as Nibbāna…Why is that?
–.“He too directly knows water as water…Nibbāna as Nibbāna…Why is that?
–.“He too directly knows water as water…Nibbāna as Nibbāna…Why is that?
–.“He too directly knows water as water…Nibbāna as Nibbāna…Why is that?
–.“He too directly knows water as water…Nibbāna as Nibbāna…Why is that?
–.“He too directly knows water as water…Nibbāna as Nibbāna…Why is that?
–.“Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu lives in dependence upon a certain city…
–.“Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu lives in dependence upon a certain country…
–.“Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu lives in dependence upon a certain town…
–.“Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu lives in dependence upon a certain village...
–.“Here, Sandaka, a Tathāgata appears in the world, accomplished, fully enlightened......he purifies his mind from doubt.
–.“Here, Udāyin, a Tathāgata appears in the world, accomplished, fully enlightened......he purifies his mind from doubt.
–.“I considered thus: ‘Whenever recluses or brahmins unpurified in verbal conduct...unpurified in mental conduct…unpurified in livelihood resort to remote jungle-thicket resting places in the forest…they evoke unwholesome fear and dread.
–.“I considered: ‘This Dhamma that I have attained is profound’......and the six of us lived on what those two bhikkhus brought back from their almsround.
–.“I was doing so thus, venerable sir: 
–.“It is possible that a bhikkhu here might wish: ‘Oh that I might be the one to get a superior robe, …superior almsfood...
–.“It is possible that a bhikkhu here might wish: ‘Oh that I might teach the Dhamma to the bhikkhus…that I might teach the Dhamma to the bhikkhunīs…men lay followers…women lay followers visiting the monastery, not some other bhikkhu!’ And it is possible that some other bhikkhu teaches the Dhamma …
–.“It is possible that a bhikkhu here might wish: ‘Oh that the bhikkhus…bhikkhunīs…men lay followers…women lay followers might honour, respect, revere, and venerate me, not some other bhikkhu!’ And it is possible that they honour…some other bhikkhu…
–.“Kaccāna, you might continue for a long time in this way......
–.“Later, Bhāradvāja, while still young......And I sat down thinking: ‘This will serve for striving.’
–.“Later, prince, while still young, a black-haired young man endowed with the blessing of youth, in the prime of life…...And I sat down there thinking: ‘This will serve for striving.’
–.“Moreover, an untrue man who has gone forth from a great family…from a wealthy family…from an influential family considers thus: ‘I have gone forth from an influential family; but these other bhikkhus have not gone forth from influential families.’
–.“Moreover, an untrue man who is learned…who is expert in the Discipline……who is a preacher of the Dhamma…who is a forest dweller…who is a refuse-rag wearer……an almsfood eater...a tree-root dweller......a charnel-ground dweller...an open-air dweller...a continual sitter…an any-bed dweller...an open-air dweller...a continual sitter...an any-bed user…a one-session eater considers thus: ‘I am a one-session eater; but these other bhikkhus are not one-session eaters.’
–.“Moreover, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, an untrue man enters upon and abides in the second jhāna…With the fading away as well of rapture…he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna…With the abandoning of pleasure and pain…he enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna…
–.“Now at the end of many years, many hundred years, many thousand years, King Makhādeva’s son addressed his barber thus:.........By developing the four divine abodes, on the dissolution of the body, after death, he passed on to the Brahma-world.
–.“Now these three similes occurred to me spontaneously never heard before......the five bhikkhus were disgusted and left me, thinking: ‘The recluse Gotama now lives luxuriously; he has given up his striving and reverted to luxury.’
–.“Now three similes occurred to me spontaneously, never heard before......as happens in one who abides diligent, ardent, and resolute.
–.“Now when I had eaten solid food and regained my strength, then quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states......as happens in one who abides diligent, ardent, and resolute.”
–.“Rāhula, what do you think?
–.“So too, Aggivessana, a Tathāgata appears in the world, accomplished, fully enlightened......he shaves off his hair and beard, puts on the yellow robe, and goes forth from the home life into homelessness.
–.“Sāriputta, there are certain recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this: ‘Purification comes about through food.’
–.“The evil herein is anger and resentment…contempt and insolence…envy and avarice…deceit and fraud…obstinacy and rivalry…conceit and arrogance…vanity and negligence.
–.“Then at the end of many years, many hundred years, many thousand years, King Nimi addressed his barber thus:.........By developing the four divine abodes, on the dissolution of the body, after death, he passed on to the Brahma-world.
–.“What do you think, Dhānañjāni?
–.“What do you think, Dhānañjāni?
–.“What do you think, sire?
–.“When his concentrated mind is thus purified......He understands: ‘Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.’
–.“When one does not know and see the ear as it actually is…When one does not know and see the nose as it actually is…When one does not know and see the tongue as it actually is…When one does not know and see the body as it actually is… When one does not know and see the mind as it actually is…one experiences bodily and mental suffering.
–.“When one knows and sees the body as it actually is… These are the things that should be realised by direct knowledge.
–.“When one knows and sees the ear as it actually is… These are the things that should be realised by direct knowledge.
–.“When one knows and sees the mind as it actually is… These are the things that should be realised by direct knowledge.”
–.“When one knows and sees the nose as it actually is… These are the things that should be realised by direct knowledge.
–.“When one knows and sees the tongue as it actually is...These are the things that should be realised by direct knowledge.
–.“‘Having thus gone forth and possessing the bhikkhus’ training and way of life...
—.
‘A person who lauds himself and disparages others… …A person who adheres to his own views, holds on to them tenaciously, and relinquishes them with difficulty is displeasing and disagreeable to me.
‘A person with evil wishes and dominated by evil wishes is displeasing and disagreeable to me.
‘After death a Tathāgata both exists and does not exist’—I have left undeclared.
‘After death a Tathāgata does not exist’—I have left undeclared.
‘After death a Tathāgata exists’—I have left undeclared.
‘After death a Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist’—I have left undeclared.
‘Arrow’ is a term for craving.
‘Blemish,’ friend, is a term for the spheres of evil unwholesome wishes.
‘By your claims, friend, you ought to be the Universal Victor.ʹ 
‘Chilled by night and scorched by day, Alone in awe-inspiring groves, Naked, no fire to sit beside, The sage yet pursues his quest.’
‘Deer herd’ is a term for recluses and brahmins.
‘Deer-trapper’ is a term for Māra the Evil One.
‘Do I have evil wishes and am I dominated by evil wishes?’
‘Do you know then, friend, deliverance
‘Enough with teaching the Dhamma
‘Harmless’ is the name I bear, Though I was dangerous in the past.
‘He abused me, he struck me, 
‘He abused me, he struck me, He defeated me, he robbed me.’
‘He reappears’ does not apply; ‘he does not reappear’ does not apply; ‘he both reappears and does not reappear’ does not apply; ‘he neither reappears nor does not reappear’ does not apply.
‘He reappears’ does not apply; ‘he does not reappear’ does not apply; ‘he both reappears and does not reappear’ does not apply; ‘he neither reappears nor does not reappear’ does not apply.”
‘I am one who has transcended all, a knower of all, Unsullied among all things, renouncing all, By craving’s ceasing freed.
‘I shall so act that neither doubt nor inattention nor sloth and torpor nor fear will arise in me again.’
‘I shall so act that neither doubt nor inattention…nor excess of energy nor deficiency of energy will arise in me again.’
‘I shall so act that neither doubt nor inattention…nor fear nor elation will arise in me again.’
‘I shall so act that neither doubt nor inattention…nor inertia nor excess of energy will arise in me again.’
‘In Magadha there have appeared till now
‘Is there still found in you, friend, The wrong view you once accepted?
‘It feels, it feels,’ friend, that is why ‘feeling’ is said.” 
‘It perceives, it perceives,’ friend; that is why ‘perception’ is said.” 
‘Knife’ is a term for noble wisdom.
‘Leave the Nāga serpent; do not harm the Nāga serpent; honour the Nāga serpent.’
‘Let not a person revive the past
‘Let not a person revive the past…
‘Let not a person revive the past…
‘Let not a person revive the past…
‘O may we live the holy life
‘Oh blessed is this Jeta’s Grove…
‘One is a brahmin by birth.’
‘Open for them are the doors to the Deathless, Let those with ears now show their faith.
‘Others will adhere to their own views, hold on to them tenaciously, and relinquish them with difficulty; we shall not adhere to our own views or hold on to them tenaciously, but shall relinquish them easily’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be angry; we shall not be angry here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be arrogant; we shall not be arrogant here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be avaricious; we shall not be avaricious here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be contemptuous; we shall not be contemptuous here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be covetous; we shall be uncovetous here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be cruel; we shall not be cruel here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be deceitful; we shall not be deceitful here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be difficult to admonish; we shall be easy to admonish here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be doubters; we shall go beyond doubt here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be envious; we shall not be envious here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be faithless; we shall be faithful here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be fraudulent; we shall not be fraudulent here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be insolent; we shall not be insolent here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be lazy; we shall be energetic here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be negligent; we shall be diligent here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be obstinate; we shall not be obstinate here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be of little learning; we shall be of great learning here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be of wrong action; we shall be of right action here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be of wrong concentration; we shall be of right concentration here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be of wrong deliverance; we shall be of right deliverance here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be of wrong effort; we shall be of right effort here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be of wrong intention; we shall be of right intention here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be of wrong knowledge; we shall be of right knowledge here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be of wrong livelihood; we shall be of right livelihood here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be of wrong mindfulness; we shall be of right mindfulness here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be of wrong speech; we shall be of right speech here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be of wrong view; we shall be of right view here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be overcome by sloth and torpor; we shall be free from sloth and torpor here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be resentful; we shall not be resentful here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be restless; we shall not be restless here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be shameless; we shall be shameful here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be uncelibate; we shall be celibate here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will be unmindful; we shall be established in mindfulness here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will gossip; we shall abstain from gossip here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will have bad friends; we shall have good friends here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will have ill will; we shall be without ill will here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will have no fear of wrongdoing; we shall be afraid of wrongdoing here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will kill living beings; we shall abstain from killing living beings here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will lack wisdom; we shall possess wisdom here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will speak falsehood; we shall abstain from false speech here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will speak harshly; we shall abstain from harsh speech here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will speak maliciously; we shall abstain from malicious speech here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Others will take what is not given; we shall abstain from taking what is not given here’: effacement should be practised thus.
‘Poisonous humour’ is a term for ignorance.
‘Probe’ is a term for mindfulness.
‘Surgeon’ is a term for the Tathāgata, the Accomplished One, the Fully Enlightened One.
‘The decoy’ is a term for delight and lust.
‘The deer-trapper’s following’ is a term for Māra’s following.
‘The dummy’ is a term for ignorance.
‘The false path’ is a term for the wrong eightfold path, that is: wrong view, wrong intention, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong concentration.
‘The greatest of all gains is health, Nibbāna is the greatest bliss, The eightfold path is the best of paths
‘The greatest of all gains is health, Nibbāna is the greatest bliss.’
‘The greatest of all gains is health, Nibbāna is the greatest bliss.’
‘The inner tendons, sinews, and ligaments’ is a term for delight and lust.
‘The large herd of deer’ is a term for beings.
‘The man desiring their good, welfare, and protection’ is a term for the Tathāgata, accomplished and fully enlightened.
‘The man desiring their ruin, harm, and bondage’ is a term for Māra the Evil One.
‘The noble clan is held to be
‘The outer hide’ is a term for the six external bases.
‘The safe and good path to be traveled joyfully’ is a term for the Noble Eightfold Path, that is: right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
‘The sharp butcher’s knife’ is a term for noble wisdom—the noble wisdom that cuts, severs, and carves away the inner defilements, fetters, and bonds.
‘The soul is one thing and the body another’—I have left undeclared.
‘The soul is the same as the body’—I have left undeclared.
‘The victors are those like me
‘The world is eternal’—I have left undeclared.
‘The world is finite’—I have left undeclared.
‘The world is infinite’—I have left undeclared.
‘The world is not eternal’—I have left undeclared.
‘There is found in me no longer, Sir, the wrong view that once I held;
‘There is nothing given, nothing offered, nothing sacrificed; no fruit or result of good and bad actions; no this world, no other world; no mother, no father; no beings who are reborn spontaneously; no good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have realised for themselves by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.’
‘There is what is given and what is offered and what is sacrificed; there is fruit and result of good and bad actions; there is this world and the other world; there is mother and father; there are beings who are reborn spontaneously; there are in the world good and virtuous recluses and brahmins who have realised for themselves by direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.’
‘This is suffering’—I have declared.
‘This is the cessation of suffering’—I have declared.
‘This is the origin of suffering’—I have declared.
‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering’—I have declared.
‘Throw out the bar: abandon ignorance.
‘Throw out the butcher’s knife and block: abandon the five cords of sensual pleasure.
‘Throw out the fork: abandon doubt.
‘Throw out the piece of meat: abandon delight and lust.
‘Throw out the sieve: abandon the five hindrances.
‘Throw out the toad: abandon anger and irritation.
‘Throw out the tortoise: abandon the five aggregates affected by clinging.
“ Brahmin, the brahmin Gopaka Moggall̄na asked me: ‘Master Ānanda, is there any single bhikkhu who possesses in each and every way all those qualities that were possessed by Master Gotama, accomplished and fully enlightened?’
“ Good, bhikkhus.
“ Here, bhikkhu, someone does not have the view: ‘That which is the self is the world…I shall endure as long as eternity.’
“ Here, bhikkhu, someone does not think thus: ‘Alas I had it!
“ Here, bhikkhu, someone has the view: ‘That which is the self is the world; after death I shall be permanent, everlasting, eternal, not subject to change; I shall endure as long as eternity.’
“ I considered thus: ‘Whenever recluses or brahmins devoid of wisdom, drivellers, resort to remote jungle-thicket resting places in the forest, then owing to the defect of their being devoid of wisdom and drivellers these good recluses and brahmins evoke unwholesome fear and dread.
“ Later, while still young, ablack-haired young man endowed with the blessing of youth, in the prime of life, though my mother and father wished otherwise and wept with tearful faces, I shaved off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and went forth from the home life into homelessness.
“ There can be, bhikkhu,” the Blessed One said.
“ ‘Consciousness, consciousness’ is said, friend.
“ ‘It cognizes, it cognizes,’ friend; that is why ‘consciousness’ is said.
“ ‘One does not wisely understand, one does not wisely understand,’ friend; that is why it is said, ‘one who is unwise.’
“A bhikkhu who thus possesses the fifteen factors including enthusiasm is capable of breaking out, capable of enlightenment, capable of attaining the supreme security from bondage.
“A bhikkhu whose mind is liberated thus, Aggivessana, sides with none and disputes with none; he employs the speech currently used in the world without adhering to it.” 
“A dispute about livelihood or about the Pātimokkha would be trifling, Ānanda.
“A fool feels pain and grief here and now in three ways.
“A fool who has given himself over to misconduct of body, speech, and mind, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappears in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, even in hell.
“A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should apply himself to the higher Dhamma and the higher Discipline.
“A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should apply himself to the superhuman state.
“A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should apply himself to those liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms.
“A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be concentrated.
“A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be devoted to wakefulness.
“A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be energetic.
“A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be established in mindfulness.
“A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be moderate in eating.
“A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be wise.
“A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should guard the doors of his sense faculties.
“A householder or householder’s son or one born in some other clan hears that Dhamma.
“A householder or householder’s son or one born in some other clan hears that Dhamma.
“A reflective acceptance of the teachings is most helpful for zeal, Bhāradvāja.
“A second and a third time Ghaṭīkāra said: ‘My dear Jotipāla, there is the monastery of the Blessed One Kassapa…’ And a second and a third time the brahmin student Jotipāla replied: ‘Enough, my dear Ghaṭīkāra, what is the use of seeing that bald-pated recluse?’
“A second and a third time King Kikī of Kāsi said: ‘Venerable sir, let the Blessed One accept from me a residence for the Rains in Benares; that will be helpful for the Sangha.’—‘Enough, king, my residence for the Rains has already been provided for.’
“A second and third time the potter Ghaṭīkāra said: ‘My dear Jotipāla, let us go and see the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened.
“A second time the bhikkhus of the group of five said to me: ‘FriendGotama…how will you have achieved any superhuman states, any distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones?’
“A simile occurs to me, Master Gotama.”
“A Tathāgata has these four kinds of intrepidity, possessing which he claims the herd-leader’s place, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahmā.
“A well-taught noble disciple who has regard for noble ones and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, who has regard for true men and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, does not abide with a mind obsessed and enslaved by identity view; he understands as it actually is the escape from the arisen identity view, and identity view together with the underlying tendency to it is abandoned in him.
“A wise man among those recluses and brahmins who hold the doctrine and view ‘Nothing is acceptable to me’ considers thus: ‘If I obstinately adhere to my view “Nothing is acceptable to me” and declare: “Only this is true, anything else is wrong,” then I may clash with the two others: with a recluse or brahmin who holds the doctrine and view “Everything is acceptable to me” and with a recluse or brahmin who holds the doctrine and view “Something is acceptable to me, something is not acceptable to me.”
“A wise man among those recluses and brahmins who hold the doctrine and view ‘Something is acceptable to me, something is not acceptable to me’ considers thus: ‘If I obstinately adhere to my view “Something is acceptable to me, something is not acceptable to me” and declare: “Only this is true, anything else is wrong,” then I may clash with the two others: with a recluse or brahmin who holds the doctrine and view “Everything is acceptable to me” and with a recluse or brahmin who holds the doctrine and view “Nothing is acceptable to me.”
“A wise man feels pleasure and joy here and now in three ways.
“A wise man who has given himself over to good conduct of body, speech, and mind, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappears in a happy destination, even in heaven.
“Abandoning false speech, he abstains from false speech; he speaks truth, adheres to truth, is trustworthy and reliable, one who is no deceiver of the world.
“Abandoning false speech, he abstains from false speech; he speaks truth, adheres to truth, is trustworthy and reliable, one who is no deceiver of the world.
“Abiding thus mindful, he investigates and examines that state with wisdom and embarks upon a full inquiry into it.
“About this a wise man considers thus: ‘If there is another world, then on the dissolution of the body, after death, this good person will reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
“About this a wise man considers thus: ‘If there is causality, then on the dissolution of the body, after death, this good person will reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
“About this a wise man considers thus: ‘If there is doing, then on the dissolution of the body, after death, this good person will reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
“About this a wise man considers thus: ‘If there is no causality, then on the dissolution of the body this good person will have made himself safe enough.
“About this a wise man considers thus: ‘If there is no doing, then on the dissolution of the body this good person will have made himself safe enough.
“About this a wise man considers thus: ‘If there is no other world, then on the dissolution of the body this good person will have made himself safe enough.
“About this a wise man considers thus: ‘These good recluses and brahmins hold the doctrine and view “there are definitely no immaterial realms,” but that has not been seen by me.
“About this a wise man considers thus: ‘These good recluses and brahmins hold the doctrine and view “there is definitely no cessation of being,” but that has not been seen by me.
“About this a wise man considers thus: ‘This good teacher claims to be omniscient and all-seeing, to have complete knowledge and vision…When he is questioned: “How is this?” he replies: “I had to…that is why I asked.”’ So when he finds that this holy life is without consolation, he turns away from it and leaves it.
“About this a wise man considers thus: ‘This good teacher holds this doctrine and view: “There are these seven bodies… fools and the wise both will make an end of suffering.”
“About this a wise man considers thus: ‘This good teacher holds this doctrine and view: “There is no cause…in the six classes.”
“About this a wise man considers thus: ‘This good teacher holds this doctrine and view: “There is nothing given…after death they do not exist.”
“About this a wise man considers thus: ‘This good teacher holds this doctrine and view: “When one acts…there is no merit and no outcome of merit.”
“About this a wise man considers thus: ‘This good teacher is a reasoner…some is true and some is otherwise.’
“About this a wise man considers thus: ‘This good teacher is a traditionalist…some is true and some is otherwise.’
“About this a wise man considers thus: ‘This good teacher is dull and confused… he engages in verbal wriggling, in eel-wriggling…’ So when he finds that this holy life is without consolation, he turns away from it and leaves it.
“Again, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with altruistic joy…without ill will.
“Again, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with compassion…without ill will.
“Again, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with equanimity…without ill will.
“Again, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth; so above, below, around, and everywhere, and to all as to himself, he abides pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.
“Again, a bhikkhu does not eat as much as he likes until his belly is full and does not indulge in the pleasures of sleeping, lolling, and drowsing…As his mind inclines to ardour…this fourth shackle in the heart has been severed by him.
“Again, a bhikkhu does not live the holy life aspiring to some order of gods thus: ‘By this virtue or observance or asceticism or holy life, I shall become a god or some god,’ and thus his mind inclines to ardour, devotion, perseverance, and striving.
“Again, a bhikkhu dwells both in public and in private possessing in common with his companions in the holy life that view that is noble and emancipating, and leads one who practises in accordance with it to the complete destruction of suffering.
“Again, a bhikkhu dwells both in public and in private possessing in common with his companions in the holy life that view that is noble and emancipating, and leads the one who practises in accordance with it to the complete destruction of suffering.
“Again, a bhikkhu dwells both in public and in private possessing in common with his companions in the holy life those virtues that are unbroken, untorn, unblotched, unmottled, liberating, commended by the wise, not misapprehended, and conducive to concentration.
“Again, a bhikkhu dwells both in public and in private possessing in common with his companions in the holy life those virtues that are unbroken, untorn, unblotched, unmottled, liberating, commended by the wise, not misapprehended, and conducive to concentration.
“Again, a bhikkhu eats as much as he likes until his belly is full and indulges in the pleasures of sleeping, lolling, and drowsing…As his mind does not incline to ardour…that is the fourth shackle in the heart that he has not severed.
“Again, a bhikkhu enjoys things in common with his virtuous companions in the holy life; without making reservations, he shares with them any gain of a kind that accords with the Dhamma and has been obtained in a way that accords with the Dhamma, including even what is in his bowl.
“Again, a bhikkhu is angry and displeased with his companions in the holy life, resentful and callous towards them, and thus his mind does not incline to ardour, devotion, perseverance, and striving.
“Again, a bhikkhu is doubtful, uncertain, undecided, and unconfident about the Dhamma …As his mind does not incline to ardour…that is the second wilderness in the heart that he has not abandoned.
“Again, a bhikkhu is doubtful, uncertain, undecided, and unconfident about the Sangha…As his mind does not incline to ardour…that is the third wilderness in the heart that he has not abandoned.
“Again, a bhikkhu is doubtful, uncertain, undecided, and unconfident about the training…As his mind does not incline to ardour…that is the fourth wilderness in the heart that he has not abandoned.
“Again, a bhikkhu is free from lust, desire, affection, thirst, fever, and craving for form...As his mind inclines to ardour…this third shackle in the heart has been severed by him.
“Again, a bhikkhu is free from lust, desire, affection, thirst, fever, and craving for the body...As his mind inclines to ardour…this second shackle in the heart has been severed by him.
“Again, a bhikkhu is not angry and displeased with his companions in the holy life, nor resentful and callous towards them, and thus his mind inclines to ardour, devotion, perseverance, and striving.
“Again, a bhikkhu is not doubtful, uncertain, undecided, or unconfident about the Dhamma…As his mind inclines to ardour…this second wilderness in the heart has been abandoned by him.
“Again, a bhikkhu is not doubtful, uncertain, undecided, or unconfident about the Sangha…As his mind inclines to ardour…this third wilderness in the heart has been abandoned by him.
“Again, a bhikkhu is not doubtful, uncertain, undecided, or unconfident about the training…As his mind inclines to ardour…this fourth wilderness in the heart has been abandoned by him.
“Again, a bhikkhu is not free from lust, desire, affection, thirst, fever, and craving for form…As his mind does not incline to ardour…that is the third shackle in the heart that he has not severed.
“Again, a bhikkhu is not free from lust, desire, affection, thirst, fever, and craving for the body...As his mind does not incline to ardour…that is the second shackle in the heart that he has not severed.
“Again, a bhikkhu lives the holy life aspiring to some order of gods thus: ‘By this virtue or observance or asceticism or holy life, I shall become a god or some god,’ and thus his mind does not incline to ardour, devotion, perseverance, and striving.
“Again, a bhikkhu maintains mental acts of loving-kindness both in public and in private towards his companions in the holy life.
“Again, a bhikkhu maintains mental acts of loving-kindness both in public and in private towards his companions in the holy life.
“Again, a bhikkhu maintains verbal acts of loving-kindness both in public and in private towards his companions in the holy life.
“Again, a bhikkhu maintains verbal acts of loving-kindness both in public and in private towards his companions in the holy life.
“Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith …and wisdom.
“Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom.
“Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith…and wisdom.
“Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith…and wisdom.
“Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith…and wisdom.
“Again, a bhikkhu uses things in common with his virtuous companions in the holy life; without making reservations, he shares with them any gain of a kind that accords with the Dhamma and has been obtained in a way that accords with the Dhamma, including even the mere contents of his bowl.
“Again, a noble disciple considers thus: ‘Do I possess the character of a person who possesses right view?’
“Again, a noble disciple considers thus: ‘Do I possess the character of a person who possesses right view?’
“Again, a noble disciple considers thus: ‘Do I possess the strength of a person who possesses right view?’
“Again, a noble disciple considers thus: ‘Do I possess the strength of a person who possesses right view?’
“Again, a noble disciple considers thus: ‘Is there any other recluse or brahmin outside possessed of a view such as I possess?’
“Again, a noble disciple considers thus: ‘When I pursue, develop, and cultivate this view, do I personally obtain serenity, do I personally obtain quenching?’
“Again, a Wheel-turning Monarch is dear and agreeable to brahmins and householders.
“Again, a Wheel-turning Monarch is free from illness and affliction, possessing a good digestion that is neither too cool nor too warm, and he surpasses other human beings in that respect.
“Again, a Wheel-turning Monarch lives long and endures long, and he surpasses other human beings in that respect.
“Again, Aggivessana, a second simile occurred to me spontaneously, never heard before.
“Again, Aggivessana, a third simile occurred to me spontaneously, never heard before.
“Again, as though he were to see a corpse thrown aside in a charnel ground, being devoured by crows, hawks, vultures, dogs, jackals, or various kinds of worms, a bhikkhu compares this same body with it thus: ‘This body too is of the same nature, it will be like that, it is not exempt from that fate.’
“Again, as though he were to see a corpse thrown aside in a charnel ground, being devoured by crows, hawks, vultures, dogs, jackals, or various kinds of worms, a bhikkhu compares this same body with it thus: ‘This body too is of the same nature, it will be like that, it is not exempt from that fate.’
“Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of the five aggregates affected by clinging.
“Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of the Four Noble Truths.
“Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of the seven enlightenment factors.
“Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of the six internal and external bases.
“Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu considers thus: ‘While I live according to my pleasure, unwholesome states increase in me and wholesome states diminish; but when I exert myself in what is painful, unwholesome states diminish in me and wholesome states increase.
“Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu is one who acts in full awareness when going forward and returning; who acts in full awareness when looking ahead and looking away; who acts in full awareness when flexing and extending his limbs; who acts in full awareness when wearing his robes and carrying his outer robe and bowl; who acts in full awareness when eating, drinking, consuming food, and tasting; who acts in full awareness when defecating and urinating; who acts in full awareness when walking, standing, sitting, falling asleep, waking up, talking, and keeping silent.
“Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu is one who acts in full awareness when going forward and returning; who acts in full awareness when looking ahead and looking away; who acts in full awareness when flexing and extending his limbs; who acts in full awareness when wearing his robes and carrying his outer robe and bowl; who acts in full awareness when eating, drinking, consuming food, and tasting; who acts in full awareness when defecating or urinating; who acts in full awareness when walking, standing, sitting, falling asleep, waking up, talking, and keeping silent.
“Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu reviews this same body up from the soles of the feet and down from the top of the hair, bounded by skin, as full of many kinds of impurity thus: ‘In this body there are head-hairs, body-hairs, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone-marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, contents of the stomach, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, spittle, snot, oil of the joints, and urine.’
“Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu reviews this same body up from the soles of the feet and down from the top of the hair, bounded by skin, as full of many kinds of impurity thus: ‘In this body there are head-hairs, body-hairs, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone-marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, contents of the stomach, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, spittle, snot, oil of the joints, and urine.’
“Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu reviews this same body, however it is placed, however disposed, as consisting of elements thus: ‘In this body there are the earth element, the water element, the fire element, and the air element.’
“Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu reviews this same body, however it is placed, however disposed, by way of elements thus: ‘In this body there are the earth element, the water element, the fire element, and the air element.’  Just as though a skilled butcher or his apprentice had killed a cow and was seated at the crossroads with it cut up into pieces; so too, a bhikkhu reviews this same body…by way of elements thus: ‘In this body there are the earth element, the water element, the fire element, and the air element.’
“Again, bhikkhus, a noble disciple considers thus:  ‘ sensual pleasures here and now and sensual pleasures in lives to come, sensual perceptions here and now and sensual perceptions in lives to come; whatever material form, all material form is the four great elements and the material form derived from the four great elements.’
“Again, bhikkhus, a noble disciple considers thus: ‘I am not anything belonging to anyone anywhere, nor is there anything belonging to me in anyone anywhere.’
“Again, bhikkhus, a noble disciple considers thus: ‘Sensual pleasures here and now and sensual pleasures in lives to come, sensual perceptions here and now and sensual perceptions in lives to come, material forms here and now and material forms in lives to come, perceptions of forms here and now and perceptions of forms in lives to come, and perceptions of the imperturbable—all are perceptions.
“Again, bhikkhus, a noble disciple considers thus: ‘Sensual pleasures here and now and sensual pleasures in lives to come, sensual perceptions here and now and sensual perceptions in lives to come, material forms here and now and material forms in lives to come, perceptions of forms here and now and perceptions of forms in lives to come, perceptions of the imperturbable, and perceptions of the base of nothingness—all are perceptions.
“Again, bhikkhus, a noble disciple considers thus: ‘Sensual pleasures here and now and sensual pleasures in lives to come, sensual perceptions here and now and sensual perceptions in lives to come, material forms here and now and material forms in lives to come, perceptions of forms here and now and perceptions of forms in lives to come—both alike are impermanent.
“Again, bhikkhus, a noble disciple, gone to the forest or to the root of a tree or to an empty hut, considers thus: ‘This is void of a self or of what belongs to a self.’
“Again, bhikkhus, as though he were to see a corpse thrown aside in a charnel ground, one, two, or three days dead, bloated, livid, and oozing matter, a bhikkhu compares this same body with it thus: ‘This body too is of the same nature, it will be like that, it is not exempt from that fate.’
“Again, bhikkhus, as though he were to see a corpse thrown aside in a charnel ground, one, two, or three days dead, bloated, livid, and oozing matter, a bhikkhu compares this same body with it thus: ‘This body too is of the same nature, it will be like that, it is not exempt from that fate.’ 
“Again, bhikkhus, by completely surmounting the base of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing,’ Sāriputta entered upon and abided in the base of nothingness.
“Again, bhikkhus, by completely surmounting the base of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite,’ Sāriputta entered upon and abided in the base of infinite consciousness.
“Again, bhikkhus, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, Sāriputta entered upon and abided in the cessation of perception and feeling.
“Again, bhikkhus, by completely surmounting the base of nothingness, Sāriputta entered upon and abided in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
“Again, bhikkhus, I said to the Nigaṇṭhas: ‘What do you think, friend Nigaṇṭhas?
“Again, bhikkhus, I said to the Nigaṇṭhas: ‘What do you think, friend Nigaṇṭhas?
“Again, bhikkhus, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhāna, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
“Again, bhikkhus, when walking, a bhikkhu understands: ‘I am walking’; when standing, he understands: ‘I am standing’; when sitting, he understands: ‘I am sitting’; when lying down, he understands: ‘I am lying down’; or he understands accordingly however his body is disposed.
“Again, bhikkhus, when walking, a bhikkhu understands: ‘I am walking’; when standing, he understands: ‘I am standing’; when sitting, he understands: ‘I am sitting’; when lying down, he understands: ‘I am lying down’; or he understands accordingly however his body is disposed.
“Again, bhikkhus, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
“Again, bhikkhus, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
“Again, bhikkhus, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
“Again, bhikkhus, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, Sāriputta entered upon and abided in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
“Again, bhikkhus, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite,’ Sāriputta entered upon and abided in the base of infinite space.
“Again, bhikkhus, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna, on account of which noble ones announce: ‘He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.’
“Again, bhikkhus, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna, on account of which noble ones announce: ‘He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.’
“Again, bhikkhus, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna, on account of which noble ones announce: ‘He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.’
“Again, bhikkhus, with the fading away as well of rapture, Sāriputta abided in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling pleasure with the body, he entered upon and abided in the third jhāna, on account of which noble ones announce: ‘He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.’
“Again, bhikkhus, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
“Again, bhikkhus, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
“Again, bhikkhus, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
“Again, bhikkhus, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, Sāriputta entered and abided in the second jhāna, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite consciousness, aware that ‘there is nothing,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite consciousness.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite consciousness.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite consciousness.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite consciousness.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite space, aware that ‘consciousness is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite consciousness.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the cessation of perception and feeling.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the cessation of perception and feeling.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the cessation of perception and feeling.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of nothingness, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of nothingness, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of nothingness, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
“Again, by realising for himself with direct knowledge, the Tathāgata here and now enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.
“Again, I have seen certain learned brahmins who were clever…In actual fact, they too become his disciples.
“Again, I have seen certain learned householders who were clever……In actual fact, they too become his disciples.
“Again, I have seen certain learned recluses who were clever…They do not so much as ask him the question, so how should they refute his doctrine?
“Again, one might see that same woman afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill, lying fouled in her own urine and excrement, lifted up by some and set down by others.
“Again, one might see that same woman as a corpse thrown aside in a charnel ground, one, two, or three days dead, bloated, livid, and oozing matter.
“Again, Sandaka, here a certain teacher is a reasoner, an inquirer.
“Again, Sandaka, here a certain teacher is dull and confused.
“Again, Sandaka, here some teacher holds such a doctrine and view as this:  ‘There are these seven bodies that are unmade, not brought forth, uncreated, without a creator, barren, standing like mountain peaks, standing like pillars.
“Again, Sandaka, here some teacher holds such a doctrine and view as this: ‘There is no cause or condition for the defilement of beings; beings are defiled without cause or condition.
“Again, Sandaka, here some teacher holds such a doctrine and view as this: ‘When one acts or makes others act, when one mutilates or makes others mutilate, when one tortures or makes others inflict torture, when one inflicts sorrow or makes others inflict sorrow, when one oppresses or makes others inflict oppression, when one intimidates or makes others inflict intimidation, when one kills living beings, takes what is not given, breaks into houses, plunders wealth, commits burglary, ambushes highways, seduces another’s wife, utters falsehood—no evil is done by the doer.
“Again, Sandaka, here some teacher is a traditionalist, one who regards oral tradition as truth; he teaches a Dhamma by oral tradition, by legends handed down, by the authority of the collections.
“Again, Sāriputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: ‘Are the five aggregates affected by clinging fully understood by me?’
“Again, Sāriputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: ‘Are the five cords of sensual pleasure abandoned in me?’
“Again, Sāriputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: ‘Are the five hindrances abandoned in me?’
“Again, Sāriputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: ‘Are the four foundations of mindfulness developed in me?’
“Again, Sāriputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: ‘Are true knowledge and deliverance realised by me?’
“Again, student, I speak about this after making an analysis; I do not speak about this one-sidedly.
“Again, the counsellor-treasure appears to the Wheel-turning Monarch, wise, shrewd, and sagacious, capable of getting the Wheel-turning Monarch to promote that which is worthy of being promoted, to dismiss that which should be dismissed, and to establish that which should be established.
“Again, the elephant-treasure appears to the Wheel-turning Monarch, all white, with sevenfold stance, with supernormal power, flying through the air, the king of elephants named ‘Uposatha.’
“Again, the horse-treasure appears to the Wheel-turning Monarch, all white, with raven-black head, with mane like muñja grass, with supernormal power, flying through the air, the king of horses named ‘Valāhaka’.
“Again, the jewel-treasure appears to the Wheel-turning Monarch.
“Again, the steward-treasure appears to the Wheel-turning Monarch.
“Again, the Tathāgata recollects his manifold past lives, that is, one birth, two births......Thus with their aspects and particulars he recollects his manifold past lives.
“Again, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is how beings have different inclinations.
“Again, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the defilement, the cleansing, and the emergence in regard to the jhānas, liberations, concentrations, and attainments.
“Again, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the disposition of the faculties of other beings, other persons.
“Again, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the results of actions undertaken, past, future, and present, by way of possibilities and causes.
“Again, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the ways leading to all destinations.
“Again, the Tathāgata understands as it actually is the world with its many and different elements.
“Again, the woman-treasure appears to the Wheel-turning Monarch, beautiful, comely and graceful, possessing the supreme beauty of complexion, neither too tall nor too short, neither too slim nor too stout, neither too dark nor too fair, surpassing human beauty without reaching divine beauty.
“Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to create from this body another body having form, mind-made, with all its limbs, lacking no faculty.
“Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the eight bases for transcendence.
“Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the eight liberations.
“Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the five powers.
“Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the five spiritual faculties.
“Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the four bases for spiritual power.
“Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the four foundations of mindfulness.
“Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the four jhānas.
“Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the four right kinds of striving.
“Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the Noble Eightfold Path.
“Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the seven enlightenment factors.
“Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to develop the ten kasiṇa bases.
“Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to recollect their manifold past lives, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many aeons of world-contraction, many aeons of world-expansion, many aeons of world-contraction and expansion: ‘There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my nutriment, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life-term; and passing away from there, I reappeared elsewhere; and there too I was so named…and passing away from there, I reappeared here.’
“Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to understand the minds of other beings, of other persons, having encompassed them with their own minds.
“Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to understand thus: ‘This body of mine, made of material form, consisting of the four great elements, procreated by a mother and father, and built up out of boiled rice and porridge, is subject to impermanence, to being worn and rubbed away, to dissolution and disintegration, and this consciousness of mine is supported by it and bound up with it.’
“Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to wield the various kinds of supernormal power: having been one, they become many; having been many, they become one; they appear and vanish; they go unhindered through walls, through enclosures, through mountains, as though through space; they dive in and out of the earth as though it were water; they walk on water without sinking as though it were earth; seated cross-legged, they travel in space like birds; with their hands they touch and stroke the moon and sun so powerful and mighty; they wield bodily mastery even as far as the Brahma-world.
“Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way whereby by realising for themselves with direct knowledge, they here and now enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.
“Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way whereby with the divine ear element, which is purified and surpasses the human, they hear both kinds of sounds, the divine and the human, those that are far as well as near.
“Again, Udāyin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way whereby with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, they see beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate.
“Again, Udāyin, my disciples esteem me for my excellent knowledge and vision thus: ‘When the recluse Gotama says “I know,” he truly knows; when he says “I see,” he truly sees.
“Again, Udāyin, my disciples esteem me for the higher wisdom thus: ‘The recluse Gotama is wise; he possesses the supreme aggregate of wisdom.
“Again, Udāyin, when my disciples have met with suffering and become victims of suffering, prey to suffering, they come to me and ask me about the noble truth of suffering.
“Again, venerable sir, being a head-anointed noble king, I am able to have executed those who should be executed, to fine those who should be fined, to exile those who should be exiled.
“Again, venerable sir, I have seen here certain learned brahmins…
“Again, venerable sir, I have seen here certain learned householders…
“Again, venerable sir, I have seen here certain learned nobles who were clever, knowledgeable about the doctrines of others, as sharp as hairsplitting marksmen; they wander about, as it were, demolishing the views of others with their sharp wits.
“Again, venerable sir, I have seen here certain learned recluses…They do not so much as ask him the question, so how should they refute his doctrine?
“Again, venerable sir, I have walked and wandered from park to park and from garden to garden.
“Again, venerable sir, Isidatta and Purāṇa, my two inspectors, eat my food and use my carriages; I provide them with a livelihood and bring them fame.
“Again, venerable sir, kings quarrel with kings, nobles with nobles, brahmins with brahmins, householders with householders; mother quarrels with son, son with mother, father with son, son with father; brother quarrels with brother, brother with sister, sister with brother, friend with friend.
“Again, venerable sir, the Blessed One is a noble and I am a noble; the Blessed One is a Kosalan and I am a Kosalan; the Blessed One is eighty years old and I am eighty years old.
“Again, when a fool is on his chair or on his bed or resting on the ground, then the evil actions that he did in the past—his bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct—cover him, overspread him, and envelop him.
“Again, when a robber culprit is caught, a fool sees kings having many kinds of torture inflicted on him:  having him flogged with whips, beaten with canes, beaten with clubs; having his hands cut off, his feet cut off, his hands and feet cut off; his ears cut off, his nose cut off, his ears and nose cut off; having him subjected to the ‘porridge pot,’ to the ‘polished-shell shave,’ to the ‘Rāhu’s mouth,’ to the ‘fiery wreath,’ to the ‘flaming hand,’ to the ‘blades of grass,’ to the ‘bark dress,’ to the ‘antelope,’ to the ‘meat hooks,’ to the ‘coins,’ to the ‘lye pickling,’ to the ‘pivoting pin,’ to the ‘rolled-up palliasse’; and having him splashed with boiling oil, and having him thrown to be devoured by dogs, and having him impaled alive on stakes, and having his head cut off with a sword.
“Again, when a robber culprit is caught, a wise man sees kings having many kinds of torture inflicted on him......Then the wise man thinks thus: ‘Because of such evil actions as those, when a robber culprit is caught, kings have many kinds of tortures inflicted on him.
“Again, when a wise man is on his chair or on his bed or resting on the ground, then the good actions that he did in the past—his good bodily, verbal, and mental conduct—cover him, overspread him, and envelop him.
“Again, with sensual pleasures as the cause, sensual pleasures as the source, sensual pleasures as the basis, the cause being simply sensual pleasures, kings quarrel with kings, nobles with nobles, brahmins with brahmins, householders with householders; mother quarrels with son, son with mother, father with son, son with father; brother quarrels with brother, brother with sister, sister with brother, friend with friend.
“Again, with sensual pleasures as the cause, sensual pleasures as the source, sensual pleasures as the basis, the cause being simply sensual pleasures, people indulge in misconduct of body, speech, and mind.
“Again, with sensual pleasures as the cause…men break into houses, plunder wealth, commit burglary, ambush highways, seduce others’ wives, and when they are caught, kings have many kinds of torture inflicted on them.
“Again, with sensual pleasures as the cause…men take swords and shields and buckle on bows and quivers, and they charge into battle massed in double array with arrows and spears flying and swords flashing; and there they are wounded by arrows and spears, and their heads are cut off by swords, whereby they incur death or deadly suffering.
“Again, with sensual pleasures as the cause…men take swords and shields and buckle on bows and quivers, and they charge slippery bastions, with arrows and spears flying and swords flashing; and there they are wounded by arrows and spears and splashed with boiling liquids and crushed under heavy weights, and their heads are cut off by swords, whereby they incur death or deadly suffering.
“Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
“Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
“Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
“Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
“Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
“Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
“Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, he enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
“Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain…a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna…He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This fourth jhāna is conditioned and volitionally produced.
“Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain…a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna…If his consciousness does not follow after the neither-pain-nor-pleasure, is not tied and shackled by gratification in the neither-pain-nor-pleasure, is not fettered by the fetter of gratification in the neither-pain-nor-pleasure, then his mind is called ‘not stuck internally.’
“Again, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite space.
“Again, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite space.
“Again, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite space.
“Again, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite space.
“Again, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that ‘space is infinite’, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite space.
“Again, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, the Tathāgata sees beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate...
“Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna, on account of which noble ones announce: ‘He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.’
“Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna, on account of which noble ones announce: ‘He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.’
“Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna, on account of which noble ones announce: ‘He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.’
“Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna, on account of which noble ones announce: ‘He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.’
“Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna, on account of which noble ones announce: ‘He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.’
“Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna, on account of which the noble ones announce: ‘He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.’
“Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu… enters upon and abides in the third jhāna…If his consciousness does not follow after the equanimity…then his mind is called ‘not stuck internally.’
“Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu…enters upon and abides in the third jhāna…He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This third jhāna is conditioned and volitionally produced.
“Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, he abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third jhāna, on account of which noble ones announce: ‘He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.’
“Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters and abides in the second jhāna…He considers this and understands it thus: ‘This second jhāna is conditioned and volitionally produced.
“Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
“Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
“Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna…Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu…enters upon and abides in the third jhāna…Again,a with the abandoning of pleasure and pain…a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
“Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna…If his consciousness does not follow after the rapture and pleasure born of concentration…then his mind is called ‘not stuck internally.’
“Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
“Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
“Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
“Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhāna, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
“Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, he enters upon and abides in the second jhāna, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.
“Again, Ānanda, a bhikkhu—not attending to the perception of earth, not attending to the perception of the base of infinite space—attends to the singleness dependent on the perception of the base of infinite consciousness.
“Again, Ānanda, a bhikkhu—not attending to the perception of forest, not attending to the perception of earth—attends to the singleness dependent on the perception of the base of infinite space.
“Again, Ānanda, a bhikkhu—not attending to the perception of people, not attending to the perception of forest—attends to the singleness dependent on the perception of earth.
“Again, Ānanda, a bhikkhu—not attending to the perception of the base of infinite consciousness, not attending to the perception of the base of nothingness—attends to the singleness dependent on the perception of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
“Again, Ānanda, a bhikkhu—not attending to the perception of the base of infinite space, not attending to the perception of the base of infinite consciousness—attends to the singleness dependent on the perception of the base of nothingness.
“Again, Ānanda, a bhikkhu—not attending to the perception of the base of nothingness, not attending to the perception of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception—attends to the singleness dependent on the signless concentration of mind.
“Again, Ānanda, a bhikkhu—not attending to the perception of the base of nothingness, not attending to the perception of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception—attends to the singleness dependent on the signless concentration of mind.
“Again, Ānanda, when a bhikkhu cognizes a mind-object with the mind, there arises in him what is agreeable, there arises what is disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable and disagreeable.
“Again, Ānanda, when a bhikkhu hears a sound with the ear, there arises in him what is agreeable, there arises what is disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable and disagreeable.
“Again, Ānanda, when a bhikkhu smells an odour with the nose, there arises in him what is agreeable, there arises what is disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable and disagreeable.
“Again, Ānanda, when a bhikkhu tastes a flavour with the tongue, there arises in him what is agreeable, there arises what is disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable and disagreeable.
“Again, Ānanda, when a bhikkhu touches a tangible with the body, there arises in him what is agreeable, there arises what is disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable and disagreeable.
“Ageing and death cease with the cessation of birth, venerable sir.
“Ageing and death have birth as condition, venerable sir.
“Aggivessana, are you not asserting thus: ‘Material form is my self, feeling is my self, perception is my self, formations are my self, consciousness is my self’?”
“Aggivessana, as to those recluses and brahmins who hold the doctrine and view ‘Something is acceptable to me, something is not acceptable to me’—the view of theirs as to what is acceptable is close to lust, close to bondage, close to delighting, close to holding, close to clinging, while the view of theirs as to what is not acceptable is close to non-lust, close to non-bondage, close to non-delighting, close to non-holding, close to non-clinging.
“Aggivessana, how is it possible that Prince Jayasena, living in the midst of sensual pleasures, enjoying sensual pleasures, being devoured by thoughts of sensual pleasures, being consumed by the fever of sensual pleasures, bent on the search for sensual pleasures, could know, see, or realise that which must be known through renunciation, seen through renunciation, attained through renunciation, realised through renunciation?
“Aggivessana, I recall teaching the Dhamma to an assembly of many hundreds, and even then each person thinks of me: ‘The recluse Gotama is teaching the Dhamma especially for me.’
“Aggivessana, if these two similes had occurred to you to Prince Jayasena, he would have spontaneously acquired confidence in you, and being confident, would have shown his confidence to you.”
“Aggivessana, there are some recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this: ‘Everything is acceptable to me.’
“Aggivessana, whatever comes about from giving to a recipient such as yourself—one who is not free from lust, not free from hate, not free from delusion— that will be for the givers.
“Also, Rāhula, after you have done an action by mind… …you can abide happy and glad, training day and night in wholesome states.
“Also, Rāhula, after you have done an action by speech… …you can abide happy and glad, training day and night in wholesome states.
“Also, Rāhula, after you have done an action with the body, you should reflect upon that same bodily action thus: ‘Did this action that I did with the body lead to my own affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of both?
“Also, Rāhula, while you are doing an action by mind… …you may continue in such a mental action.
“Also, Rāhula, while you are doing an action by speech… …you may continue in such an action by speech.
“Also, Rāhula, while you are doing an action with the body, you should reflect upon that same bodily action thus: ‘Does this action that I am doing with the body lead to my own affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of both?
“Also, this circumstance was not recognised by you: ‘Many bhikkhunīs have taken up residence at Sāvatthī for the Rains, and they too will know me thus: “The bhikkhu named Bhaddāli is one who does not fulfil the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.”’ This circumstance too was not recognised by you.
“Also, this circumstance was not recognised by you: ‘Many bhikkhus have taken up residence at Sāvatthī for the Rains, and they too will know me thus: “The bhikkhu named Bhaddāli is one who does not fulfil the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.”’ This circumstance too was not recognised by you.
“Also, this circumstance was not recognised by you: ‘Many men lay followers…Many women lay followers are staying at Sāvatthī, and they too will know me thus: “The bhikkhu named Bhaddāli is one who does not fulfil the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.”’ This circumstance too was not recognised by you.
“Also, this circumstance was not recognised by you: ‘Many recluses and brahmins of other sects have taken up residence at Sāvatthī for the Rains, and they too will know me thus: “The bhikkhu named Bhaddāli, an elder disciple of the recluse Gotama, is one who does not fulfil the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.”’ This circumstance too was not recognised by you.”
“Although Master Gotama says this, still the brahmins think thus: ‘Brahmins are the highest caste…heirs of Brahmā.’”
“Although Master Gotama says this, still the brahmins think thus: ‘Brahmins are the highest caste…heirs of Brahmā.’”
“Although Master Gotama says this, still the brahmins think thus: ‘Brahmins are the highest caste…heirs of Brahmā.’”
“Although Master Gotama says this, still the brahmins think thus: ‘Brahmins are the highest caste…heirs of Brahmā.’”
“Although Master Gotama says this, still the brahmins think thus: ‘Brahmins are the highest caste…heirs of Brahmā.’”
“Although Master Gotama says this, still the brahmins think thus: ‘Brahmins are the highest caste…heirs of Brahmā.’”
“Although Master Gotama says this, still the brahmins think thus: ‘Brahmins are the highest caste…heirs of Brahmā.’”
“And by realising for myself with direct knowledge, I here and now enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.
“And he will never infer of me according to Dhamma: ‘That Blessed One encompasses with his own mind the minds of other beings, other persons.
“And he will never infer of me according to Dhamma: ‘That Blessed One enjoys the various kinds of supernormal power: having been one, he becomes many; having been many, he becomes one; he appears and vanishes; he goes unhindered through a wall, through an enclosure, through a mountain, as though through space; he dives in and out of the earth as though it were water; he walks on water without sinking as though it were earth; seated cross-legged, he travels in space like a bird; with his hand he touches and strokes the moon and sun so powerful and mighty; he wields bodily mastery even as far as the Brahma-world.’
“And he will never infer of me according to Dhamma: ‘With the divine ear element, which is purified and surpasses the human, that Blessed One hears both kinds of sounds, the heavenly and the human, those that are far as well as near.’
“And how do disciples behave towards the Teacher with friendliness, not with hostility?
“And how does a noble disciple guard the doors of his sense faculties?
“And how does a noble disciple possess seven good qualities?
“And how does a pupil’s undoing come about?
“And how does a teacher’s undoing come about?
“And how does a true man act as a true man?
“And how does a true man associate as a true man?
“And how does a true man counsel as a true man?
“And how does a true man give gifts as a true man?
“And how does a true man hold views as a true man?
“And how does a true man speak as a true man?
“And how does a true man will as a true man?
“And how does an untrue man act as an untrue man?
“And how does an untrue man associate as an untrue man?
“And how does an untrue man counsel as an untrue man?
“And how does an untrue man give gifts as an untrue man?
“And how does an untrue man hold views as an untrue man?
“And how does an untrue man speak as an untrue man?
“And how does an untrue man will as an untrue man?
“And how does the undoing of one who lives the holy life come about?
“And how does this view that is noble and emancipating lead the one who practises in accordance with it to the complete destruction of suffering?
“And how is a bhikkhu a brahmin?
“And how is a bhikkhu a holy scholar?
“And how is a bhikkhu a noble one?
“And how is a bhikkhu a recluse?
“And how is a bhikkhu an arahant?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who has attained to knowledge?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who has been washed?
“And how is a noble disciple devoted to wakefulness?
“And how is a noble disciple moderate in eating?
“And how is a noble disciple one who obtains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and provide a pleasant abiding here and now?
“And how is a noble disciple possessed of virtue?
“And how is a true man possessed of good qualities?
“And how is an untrue man possessed of bad qualities?
“And how is exertion fruitful, bhikkhus, how is striving fruitful?
“And how is final knowledge achieved by gradual training, gradual practice, gradual progress?
“And how is the bhikkhu a noble one whose banner is lowered, whose burden is lowered, who is unfettered?
“And how is the bhikkhu one who has no bolt?
“And how is the bhikkhu one whose cross-bar has been lifted?
“And how is the bhikkhu one whose pillar has been uprooted?
“And how is the bhikkhu one whose trench has been filled in?
“And how is the offering purified both by the giver and by the receiver?
“And how is the offering purified by the giver, not by the receiver?
“And how is the offering purified by the receiver, not by the giver?
“And how is the offering purified neither by the giver nor by the receiver?
“And how is there covering over with grass?
“And how is there removal of litigation by confrontation?
“And how is there removal of litigation on account of memory?
“And how is there removal of litigation on account of past insanity?
“And how is there the effecting of acknowledgement of an offence?
“And how is there the opinion of a majority?
“And how is there the pronouncement of bad character against someone?
“And how practising does he practise the way to the cessation of unwholesome habits?
“And how practising does he practise the way to the cessation of unwholesome intentions?
“And how practising does he practise the way to the cessation of wholesome habits?
“And how practising does he practise the way to the cessation of wholesome intentions?
“And how, Aggivessana, is one developed in body and developed in mind?
“And how, bhikkhus, do the four foundations of mindfulness, developed and cultivated, fulfil the seven enlightenment factors?
“And how, bhikkhus, do the seven enlightenment factors, developed and cultivated, fulfil true knowledge and deliverance?
“And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu abide contemplating feelings as feelings?
“And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu abide contemplating mind as mind?
“And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu abide contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects?
“And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu abide contemplating the body as a body?
“And how, bhikkhus, does mindfulness of breathing, developed and cultivated, fulfil the four foundations of mindfulness?
“And how, bhikkhus, does one build up hope upon the future?
“And how, bhikkhus, does one not build up hope upon the future?
“And how, bhikkhus, does one not revive the past?
“And how, bhikkhus, does there come to be neither extolling nor disparaging but teaching only the Dhamma?
“And how, bhikkhus, does there come to be non-insistence on local language and non-overriding of normal usage?
“And how, bhikkhus, is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated, so that it is of great fruit and great benefit?
“And how, bhikkhus, is mindfulness of the body developed and cultivated so that it is of great fruit and great benefit?
“And how, bhikkhus, is one invincible in regard to presently arisen states?
“And how, bhikkhus, is one vanquished in regard to presently arisen states?
“And how, friends, is consciousness called ‘not distracted and scattered externally’?
“And how, friends, is the mind called ‘not stuck internally’?
“And how, friends, is the mind called ‘stuck inter-nally’?
“And how, friends, is there non-agitation due to non-clinging?
“And how, householders, are there four kinds of verbal conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct?
“And how, householders, are there four kinds of verbal conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct?
“And how, householders, are there three kinds of bodily conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct?
“And how, householders, are there three kinds of bodily conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct?
“And how, householders, are there three kinds of mental conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct?
“And how, householders, are there three kinds of mental conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct?
“And how, Ānanda, is one a disciple in higher training, one who has entered upon the way?
“And in so far as I wish, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, I see beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and I understand how beings pass on according to their actions……
“And it can also be understood from this how sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair are born from those who are dear, arise from those who are dear.
“And now, Master Gotama, we depart.
“And now, venerable sir, we depart.
“And some said this: ‘This Makkhali Gosāla...this Ajita Kesakambalin…this Pakudha Kaccāyana…this Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta…this Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta is the head of an order… is not honoured, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples, nor do his disciples live in dependence on him, honouring and respecting him.
“And some said this: ‘This recluse Gotama is the head of an order, the head of a group, the teacher of a group, the well-known and famous founder of a sect regarded by many as a saint.
“And the states in the base of infinite consciousness—the perception of the base of infinite consciousness and the unification of mind; the contact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind; the zeal, decision, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention—these states were defined by him one by one as they occurred; known to him those states arose, known they were present, known they disappeared.
“And the states in the base of infinite space—the perception of the base of infinite space and the unification of mind; the contact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind; the zeal, decision, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention—these states were defined by him one by one as they occurred; known to him those states arose, known they were present, known they disappeared.
“And the states in the base of nothingness—the perception of the base of nothingness and the unification of mind; the contact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind; the zeal, decision, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention—these states were defined by him one by one as they occurred; known to him those states arose, known they were present, known they disappeared.
“And the states in the first jhāna—the applied thought, the sustained thought, the rapture, the pleasure, and the unification of mind; the contact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind; the zeal, decision, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention—these states were defined by him one by one as they occurred; known to him those states arose, known they were present, known they disappeared.
“And the states in the fourth jhāna—the equanimity, the neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, the mental unconcern due to tranquillity, the purity of mindfulness, and the unification of mind; the contact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind; the zeal, decision, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention—these states were defined by him one by one as they occurred; known to him those states arose, known they were present, known they disappeared.
“And the states in the second jhāna—the self-confidence, the rapture, the pleasure, and the unification of mind; the contact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind; the zeal, decision, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention—these states were defined by him one by one as they occurred; known to him those states arose, known they were present, known they disappeared.
“And the states in the third jhāna—the equanimity, the pleasure, the mindfulness, the full awareness, and the unification of mind; the contact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind; the zeal, decision, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention—these states were defined by him one by one as they occurred; known to him those states arose, known they were present, known they disappeared.
“And what are formations, what is the origin of formations, what is the cessation of formations, what is the way leading to the cessation of formations?
“And what are the five aggregates affected by clinging?
“And what are the taints, what is the origin of the taints, what is the cessation of the taints, what is the way leading to the cessation of the taints?
“And what do these unwholesome habits originate from?
“And what do these unwholesome intentions originate from?
“And what do these wholesome habits originate from?
“And what do these wholesome intentions originate from?
“And what have I declared?
“And what is ageing and death, what is the origin of ageing and death, what is the cessation of ageing and death, what is the way leading to the cessation of ageing and death?
“And what is being, what is the origin of being, what is the cessation of being, what is the way leading to the cessation of being?
“And what is birth, what is the origin of birth, what is the cessation of birth, what is the way leading to the cessation of birth?
“And what is clinging, what is the origin of clinging, what is the cessation of clinging, what is the way leading to the cessation of clinging?
“And what is consciousness, what is the origin of consciousness, what is the cessation of consciousness, what is the way leading to the cessation of consciousness?
“And what is contact, what is the origin of contact, what is the cessation of contact, what is the way leading to the cessation of contact?
“And what is craving, what is the origin of craving, what is the cessation of craving, what is the way leading to the cessation of craving?
“And what is feeling, what is the origin of feeling, what is the cessation of feeling, what is the way leading to the cessation of feeling?
“And what is ignorance, what is the origin of ignorance, what is the cessation of ignorance, what is the way leading to the cessation of ignorance?
“And what is loss of relatives?
“And what is loss of wealth?
“And what is loss through ageing?
“And what is loss through sickness?
“And what is mentality-materiality, what is the origin of mentality-materiality, what is the cessation of mentality-materiality, what is the way leading to the cessation of mentality-materiality?
“And what is nutriment, what is the origin of nutriment, what is the cessation of nutriment, what is the way leading to the cessation of nutriment?
“And what is suffering, what is the origin of suffering, what is the cessation of suffering, what is the way leading to the cessation of suffering?
“And what is the cessation of suffering?
“And what is the material form aggregate affected by clinging?
“And what is the noble search?
“And what is the noble truth of suffering?
“And what is the origin of suffering?
“And what is the root of the unwholesome?
“And what is the root of the wholesome?
“And what is the sixfold base, what is the origin of the sixfold base, what is the cessation of the sixfold base, what is the way leading to the cessation of the sixfold base?
“And what is the way leading to the cessation of suffering?
“And what is the wholesome?
“And what kind of acquisition of individuality causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it?
“And what kind of acquisition of individuality causes unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who cultivates it?
“And what kind of acquisition of perception causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it?
“And what kind of acquisition of perception causes unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who cultivates it?
“And what kind of acquisition of view causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it?
“And what kind of acquisition of view causes unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who cultivates it?
“And what kind of bodily conduct causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it?
“And what kind of bodily conduct causes unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who cultivates it?
“And what kind of inclination of mind causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it?
“And what kind of inclination of mind causes unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who cultivates it?
“And what kind of meditation did the Blessed One praise?
“And what kind of mental conduct causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it?
“And what kind of mental conduct causes unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who cultivates it?
“And what kind of verbal conduct causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it?
“And what kind of verbal conduct causes unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who cultivates it?
“And what may be said to be subject to ageing?
“And what may be said to be subject to birth?
“And what may be said to be subject to death?
“And what may be said to be subject to defilement?
“And what may be said to be subject to sickness?
“And what may be said to be subject to sorrow?
“And what things should be abandoned by direct knowledge?
“And what things should be developed by direct knowledge?
“And what things should be fully understood by direct knowledge?
“And what things should be realised by direct knowledge?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the things that make one a recluse, that make one a brahmin?
“And what, bhikkhus, is equanimity that is diversified, based on diversity?
“And what, bhikkhus, is equanimity that is unified, based on unity?
“And what, bhikkhus, is right action that is affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions?
“And what, bhikkhus, is right action that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path?
“And what, bhikkhus, is right action?
“And what, bhikkhus, is right intention that is affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions?
“And what, bhikkhus, is right intention that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path?
“And what, bhikkhus, is right intention?
“And what, bhikkhus, is right livelihood that is affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions?
“And what, bhikkhus, is right livelihood that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path?
“And what, bhikkhus, is right livelihood?
“And what, bhikkhus, is right speech that is affected by taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions?
“And what, bhikkhus, is right speech that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path?
“And what, bhikkhus, is right speech?
“And what, bhikkhus, is right view that is affected by the taints, partaking of merit, ripening in the acquisitions?
“And what, bhikkhus, is right view that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path?
“And what, bhikkhus, is right view?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the danger in the case of feelings?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the danger in the case of material form?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the danger in the case of sensual pleasures?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the escape in the case of feelings?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the escape in the case of material form?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the escape in the case of sensual pleasures?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the gratification in the case of feelings?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the gratification in the case of material form?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the gratification in the case of sensual pleasures?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pain?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pleasure?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure?
“And what, bhikkhus, is wrong action?
“And what, bhikkhus, is wrong intention?
“And what, bhikkhus, is wrong livelihood?
“And what, bhikkhus, is wrong speech?
“And what, bhikkhus, is wrong view?
“And what, friend, is the deliverance of mind through nothingness?
“And what, friend, is the deliverance of mind through voidness?
“And what, friend, is the signless deliverance of mind?
“And what, friend, is the way in which these states are one in meaning and different only in name?
“And what, friends, are the five aggregates affected by clinging that, in short, are suffering?
“And what, friends, is ageing?
“And what, friends, is birth?
“And what, friends, is death?
“And what, friends, is despair?
“And what, friends, is grief?
“And what, friends, is lamentation?
“And what, friends, is pain?
“And what, friends, is right action?
“And what, friends, is right concentration?
“And what, friends, is right effort?
“And what, friends, is right intention?
“And what, friends, is right livelihood?
“And what, friends, is right mindfulness?
“And what, friends, is right speech?
“And what, friends, is right view?
“And what, friends, is sorrow?
“And what, friends, is the noble truth of suffering?
“And what, friends, is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering?
“And what, friends, is the noble truth of the origin of suffering?
“And what, friends, is the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering?
“And what, friends, is the unwholesome, what is the root of the unwholesome, what is the wholesome, what is the root of the wholesome?
“And what, friends, is ‘not to obtain what one wants is suffering’?
“And what, householder, is the exalted deliverance of mind?
“And what, Puṇṇa, is action that is neither dark nor bright with neither-dark-nor-bright result, action that leads to the destruction of action?
“And what, Puṇṇa, is bright action with bright result?
“And what, Puṇṇa, is dark action with dark result?
“And what, Puṇṇa, is dark-and-bright action with dark-and-bright result?
“And what, Ānanda, is the path, the way to the abandoning of the five lower fetters?
“And where do these unwholesome habits cease without remainder?
“And where do these unwholesome intentions cease without remainder?
“And where do these wholesome habits cease without remainder?
“And where do these wholesome intentions cease without remainder?
“And where is it that Māra and his following cannot go?
“And would the two tamable elephants or tamable horses or tamable oxen that were untamed and undisciplined, being untamed, acquire the behaviour of the tamed, would they arrive at the grade of the tamed, like the two elephants or horses or oxen that were well tamed and well disciplined?”
“Angulimāla, I have stopped forever, I abstain from violence towards living beings;
“Anuruddha, it is not for the purpose of scheming to deceive people or for the purpose of flattering people or for the purpose of gain, honour, or renown, or with the thought, ‘Let people know me to be thus,’ that when a disciple has died, the Tathāgata declares his reappearance thus: ‘So-and-so has reappeared in such-and-such a place; so-and-so has reappeared in such-and-such a place.’
“Any bodily behaviour that brings affliction, great king.”
“Any bodily behaviour that does not bring affliction, great king.”
“Any bodily behaviour that has painful results, great king.”
“Any bodily behaviour that has pleasant results, great king.”
“Any bodily behaviour that is blameless, great king.”
“Any bodily behaviour that is blameworthy, great king.”
“Any bodily behaviour that is unwholesome, great king.”
“Any bodily behaviour that is wholesome, great king.”
“Any bodily behaviour, great king, that does not lead to one’s own affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of both, and on account of which unwholesome states diminish and wholesome states increase.
“Any bodily behaviour, great king, that leads to one’s own affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of both, and on account of which unwholesome states increase and wholesome states diminish.
“Any mental behaviour that is unwholesome...
“Any recluses or brahmins who do not understand as they actually are the origin, the disappearance, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in the case of these two views are affected by lust, affected by hate, affected by delusion, affected by craving, affected by clinging, without vision, given to favouring and opposing, and they delight in and enjoy proliferation.
“Any recluses or brahmins who understand as they actually are the origin, the disappearance, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in the case of these two views are without lust, without hate, without delusion, without craving, without clinging, with vision, not given to favouring and opposing, and they do not delight in and enjoy proliferation.
“Any verbal behaviour that is wholesome...…”
“Apart from Master Gotama and the bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs, is there any one man lay follower, Master Gotama’s disciple, clothed in white leading a life of celibacy who, with the destruction of the five lower fetters, will reappear spontaneously and there attain final Nibbāna without ever returning from that world?” 
“Apart from Master Gotama and the bhikkhus, is there any one bhikkhunī, Master Gotama’s disciple, who by realising for herself with direct knowledge here and now enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints?”
“Apart from Master Gotama, is there any one bhikkhu, Master Gotama’s disciple, who by realising for himself with direct knowledge here and now enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints?” 
“Apart from Master Gotama, the bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs, and the men lay followers clothed in white leading lives of celibacy, is there any one man lay follower, Master Gotama’s disciple, clothed in white enjoying sensual pleasures, who carries out his instruction, responds to his advice, has gone beyond doubt, become free from perplexity, gained intrepidity, and become independent of others in the Teacher’s Dispensation?” 
“Apart from Master Gotama, the bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs, and the men lay followers clothed in white, both those leading lives of celibacy and those enjoying sensual pleasures, and the women lay followers clothed in white leading lives of celibacy, is there any one woman lay follower, Master Gotama’s disciple, clothed in white enjoying sensual pleasures, who carries out his instruction, responds to his advice, has gone beyond doubt, become free from perplexity, gained intrepidity, and become independent of others in the Teacher’s Dispensation?”
“Apart from Master Gotama, the bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs, and the men lay followers clothed in white, both those leading lives of celibacy and those enjoying sensual pleasures, is there any one woman lay follower, Master Gotama’s disciple, clothed in white leading a life of celibacy who, with the destruction of the five lower fetters, will reappear spontaneously and there attain final Nibbāna without ever returning from that world?”
“Application of the will is most helpful for scrutiny, Bhāradvāja.
“Are these not, venerable sir, the five aggregates affected by clinging; that is, the material form aggregate affected by clinging, the feeling aggregate affected by clinging, the perception aggregate affected by clinging, the formations aggregate affected by clinging, and the consciousness aggregate affected by clinging?”
“As I abided thus, diligent, ardent, and resolute, a thought of ill will arose in me…a thought of cruelty arose in me.
“As I abided thus, diligent, ardent, and resolute, a thought of non-ill will arose in me…a thought of non-cruelty arose in me.
“As I abided thus, diligent, ardent, and resolute, a thought of renunciation arose in me.
“As I abided thus, diligent, ardent, and resolute, a thought of sensual desire arose in me.
“As to that, brahmin, I will ask you a question in return.
“As to that, friend Kaccāna, I shall ask you a question in return.
“As to that, friend Kaccāna, I shall give a simile, for some wise men here understand the meaning of a statement by means of a simile.
“As to that, friend, I shall give you a simile, for some wise men understand the meaning of a statement by means of a simile.
“As to that, Nāgasamāla, you may remember this discourse on the Dhamma as ‘The Hair-Raising Discourse.’” 
“As to that, prince, I shall ask you a question in return.
“As to that, prince, I shall ask you a question in return.
“As to that, Sandaka, I shall give you a simile, for some wise men here understand the meaning of a statement by means of a simile.
“As to that, Ānanda, you may remember this discourse on the Dhamma as ‘The Honeyball Discourse.’”
“As to those recluses and brahmins who are not tied to these five cords of sensual pleasure, who are not infatuated with them or utterly committed to them, and who use them seeing the danger in them and understanding the escape from them, it may be understood of them: ‘They have not met with calamity, not met with disaster, the Evil One cannot do with them as he likes.’
“As to those recluses and brahmins who are tied to these five cords of sensual pleasure, infatuated with them and utterly committed to them, and who use them without seeing the danger in them or understanding the escape from them, it may be understood of them: ‘They have met with calamity, met with disaster, the Evil One may do with them as he likes.’
“As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent, ardent, and resolute, I perceived both light and a vision of forms.
“As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent, ardent, and resolute, I perceived light but I did not see forms; I saw forms but I did not perceive light, even for a whole night or a whole day or a whole day and night.
“As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent, ardent, and resolute, I perceived limited light and saw limited forms; I perceived immeasurable light and saw immeasurable forms, even for a whole night or a whole day or a whole day and night.
“As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent…I considered thus: ‘Deficiency of energy arose in me, and because of deficiency of energy my concentration fell away; when my concentration fell away, the light and the vision of forms disappeared.’
“As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent…I considered thus: ‘Elation arose in me, and because of elation my concentration fell away; when my concentration fell away, the light and the vision of forms disappeared.’
“As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent…I considered thus: ‘Excess of energy arose in me, and because of excess of energy my concentration fell away; when my concentration fell away, the light and the vision of forms disappeared.’
“As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent…I considered thus: ‘Excessive meditation upon forms arose in me, and because of excessive meditation upon forms my concentration fell away; when my concentration fell away, the light and the vision of forms disappeared.
“As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent…I considered thus: ‘Fear arose in me, and because of fear my concentration fell away; when my concentration fell away, the light and the vision of forms disappeared.’
“As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent…I considered thus: ‘Inertia arose in me, and because of inertia my concentration fell away; when my concentration fell away, the light and the vision of forms disappeared.
“As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent…I considered thus: ‘Longing arose in me, and because of that longing my concentration fell away; when my concentration fell away, the light and the vision of forms disappeared.
“As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent…I considered thus: ‘Perception of diversity arose in me, and because of perception of diversity my concentration fell away; when my concentration fell away, the light and the vision of forms disappeared.
“As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent…I considered thus: ‘Sloth and torpor arose in me, and because of sloth and torpor my concentration fell away; when my concentration fell away, the light and the vision of forms disappeared.
“Ask what you like, Aggivessana.” 
“At Benares, bhikkhus, in the Deer Park at Isipatana the Tathāgata, accomplished and fully enlightened, set rolling the matchless Wheel of the Dhamma, which cannot be stopped by any recluse or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or anyone in the world—that is, the announcing, teaching, describing, establishing, revealing, expounding, and exhibiting of the Four Noble Truths.
“At Benares, bhikkhus, in the Deer Park at Isipatana the Tathāgata, accomplished and fully enlightened, set rolling the matchless Wheel of the Dhamma, which cannot be stopped by any recluse or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or anyone in the world—that is, the announcing, teaching, describing, establishing, revealing, expounding, and exhibiting of these Four Noble Truths.
“At Benares, friends, in the Deer Park at Isipatana the Tathāgata, accomplished and fully enlightened, set rolling the matchless Wheel of the Dhamma, which cannot be stopped by any recluse or brahmin or god or Māra or Brahmā or anyone in the world—that is, the announcing, teaching, describing, establishing, revealing, expounding, and exhibiting of these Four Noble Truths.”
“At Benares, friends, in the Deer Park at Isipatana the Tathāgata, accomplished and fully enlightened, set rolling the matchless Wheel of the Dhamma…and exhibiting of the Four Noble Truths.
“At that the Brahmā and the Brahmā’s Assembly and the members of the Brahmā’s Assembly were struck with wonder and amazement, saying: ‘It is wonderful, sirs, it is marvellous, the great power and great might of the recluse Gotama!
“At the conclusion of the exposition, King Kikī of Kāsi said: ‘Venerable sir, let the Blessed One together with the Sangha of bhikkhus consent to accept tomorrow’s meal from me.’
“At this point, householder, the cutting off of affairs in the Noble One’s Discipline has been achieved entirely and in all ways.
“Auspicious is that converting magic, venerable sir, good is that converting magic!
“Based upon that same supreme mindfulness whose purity is due to equanimity, by realising for himself with direct knowledge, this noble disciple here and now enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.
“Based upon that same supreme mindfulness whose purity is due to equanimity, by realising for himself with direct knowledge, this noble disciple here and now enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.
“Based upon that same supreme mindfulness whose purity is due to equanimity, this noble disciple recollects his manifold past lives, that is, one birth, two births……Thus with their aspects and particulars he recollects his manifold past lives.
“Based upon that same supreme mindfulness whose purity is due to equanimity, this noble disciple recollects his manifold past lives……Thus with their aspects and particulars he recollects his manifold past lives.
“Based upon that same supreme mindfulness whose purity is due to equanimity, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, this noble disciple sees beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate……and he understands how beings pass on according to their actions.
“Based upon that same supreme mindfulness whose purity is due to equanimity, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, this noble disciple sees beings passing away and reappearing……he understands how beings pass on according to their actions.
“Be careful what you say, Māgandiya, be careful what you say!
“Before my enlightenment, while I was still only an unenlightened Bodhisatta, I too clearly saw as it actually is with proper wisdom how sensual pleasures provide little gratification, much suffering, and much despair, and how great is the danger in them, but as long as I still did not attain to the rapture and pleasure that are apart from sensual pleasures, apart from unwholesome states, or to something more peaceful than that, I recognised that I still could be attracted to sensual pleasures.
“Before my enlightenment, while I was still only an unenlightened Bodhisatta, I too considered thus: ‘Remote jungle-thicket resting places in the forest are hard to endure…the jungles must rob a bhikkhu of his mind, if he has no concentration.’
“Behold a puppet here pranked out, 
“Being asked thus, Master Gotama, I would answer: ‘This fire burns in dependence on fuel of grass and sticks.’”
“Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate.
“Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate.
“Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate.
“Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate.
“Being has clinging as condition, venerable sir.
“Beings are owners of their actions, student, heirs of their actions; they originate from their actions, are bound to their actions, have their actions as their refuge.
“Beyond this, Udāyin, I know of very many gods the radiance of the sun and moon does not match, yet I do not say that there is no other splendour higher or more sublime than that splendour.
“Bhaddāli, on that occasion were you not empty, hollow, and mistaken?”
“Bhaddāli, suppose a clever horse-trainer obtains a fine thoroughbred colt.
“Bhaddāli, this circumstance was not recognised by you: ‘The Blessed One is living at Sāvatthī, and the Blessed One will know me thus: “The bhikkhu named Bhaddāli is one who does not fulfil the training in the Teacher’s Dispensation.”’ This circumstance was not recognised by you.
“Bhāradvāja, first you took your stand on faith, now you speak of oral tradition.
“Bhāradvāja, I say that there is a diversity among those recluses and brahmins who claim the fundamentals of the holy life after having reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge here and now.
“Bhāradvāja, when one is asked, ‘Are there gods?’ whether one answers, ‘There are gods,’ or ‘It is known to me to be the case,’ a wise man can draw the definite conclusion that there are gods.”
“Bhikkhu, any kind of material form whatever, whether past or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near—one sees all material form as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’
“Bhikkhu, any kind of material form whatever, whether past, future, or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near—this is the material form aggregate.
“Bhikkhu, as to the source through which perceptions and notions mental proliferation beset a man: if nothing is found there to delight in, welcome and hold to, this is the end of the underlying tendency to lust, of the underlying tendency to aversion, of the underlying tendency to views, of the underlying tendency to doubt, of the underlying tendency to conceit, of the underlying tendency to desire for being, of the underlying tendency to ignorance; this is the end of resorting to rods and weapons, of quarrels, brawls, disputes, recrimination, malicious words, and false speech; here these evil unwholesome states cease without remainder.”
“Bhikkhu, bhikkhu, this ant-hill fumes by night and flames by day.
“Bhikkhu, do you know that young deity?”
“Bhikkhu, do you remember the summary and exposition of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night’?”
“Bhikkhu, do you remember the summary and exposition of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night’?” 
“Bhikkhu, I remember the stanza of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night.’”
“Bhikkhu, I remember the stanza of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night’ thus.
“Bhikkhu, I too do not remember the stanzas of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night.’
“Bhikkhu, I too do not remember the summary and exposition of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night.’
“Bhikkhu, I too do not remember the summary and exposition of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night.’
“Bhikkhu, once the Blessed One was living among the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three, on the Red Marble Stone at the root of the Pāricchattaka tree.
“Bhikkhu, Tathāgatas do not give the full admission to anyone whose bowl and robes are not complete.”
“Bhikkhu, that clinging is neither the same as these five aggregates affected by clinging, nor is the clinging something apart from the five aggregates affected by clinging.
“Bhikkhu, that young deity is named Candana.
“Bhikkhu, the ant-hill is a symbol for this body, made of material form, consisting of the four great elements, procreated by a mother and father, built up out of boiled rice and porridge, and subject to impermanence, to being worn and rubbed away, to dissolution and disintegration.
“Bhikkhu, this person consists of six elements, six bases of contact, and eighteen kinds of mental exploration, and he has four foundations.
“Bhikkhu, you should go to the Blessed One and ask him about this riddle.
“Bhikkhu, ‘I am’ is a conceiving; ‘I am this’ is a conceiving; ‘I shall be’ is a conceiving; ‘I shall not be’ is a conceiving; ‘I shall be possessed of form’ is a conceiving; ‘I shall be formless’ is a conceiving; ‘I shall be percipient’ is a conceiving; ‘I shall be non-percipient’ is a conceiving; ‘I shall be neither-percipient-nor-non-percipient’ is a conceiving.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu should examine things in such a way that while he is examining them, his consciousness is not distracted and scattered externally nor stuck internally, and by not clinging he does not become agitated.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu such as this is called a recluse, a brahmin, one who has been washed, one who has attained to knowledge, a holy scholar, a noble one, an arahant.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is an arahant with taints destroyed, who has lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached his own goal, destroyed the fetters of being, and is completely liberated through final knowledge,  he too directly knows earth as earth.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is an arahant…completely liberated through final knowledge, he too directly knows earth as earth.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is an arahant…completely liberated through final knowledge, he too directly knows earth as earth.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is an arahant…completely liberated through final knowledge, he too directly knows earth as earth.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is an inquirer, not knowing how to gauge another’s mind, should investigate the Tathāgata with respect to two kinds of states, states cognizable through the eye and through the ear thus: ‘Are there found in the Tathāgata or not any defiled states cognizable through the eye or through the ear?ʹ When he investigates him, he comes to know: ‘No defiled states cognizable through the eye or through the ear are found in the Tathāgata.’
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is an inquirer, not knowing how to gauge another’s mind, should make an investigation of the Tathāgata in order to find out whether or not he is fully enlightened.”
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is in higher training, whose mind has not yet reached the goal, and who is still aspiring to the supreme security from bondage, directly knows earth as earth.
“Bhikkhus, a deer-trapper does not lay down bait for a deer herd intending thus: ‘May the deer herd enjoy this bait that I have laid down and so be long-lived and handsome and endure for a long time.’
“Bhikkhus, a disciple should approach the Teacher who speaks thus in order to hear the Dhamma.
“Bhikkhus, a true man is possessed of good qualities; he associates as a true man, he wills as a true man, he counsels as a true man, he speaks as a true man, he acts as a true man, he holds views as a true man, and he gives gifts as a true man.
“Bhikkhus, a well-taught noble disciple who has regard for noble ones and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, who has regard for true men and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, regards material form thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.’
“Bhikkhus, a well-taught noble disciple, who has regard for noble ones and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, who has regard for true men and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, understands what things are fit for attention and what things are unfit for attention.
“Bhikkhus, an untrue man is possessed of bad qualities; he associates as an untrue man, he wills as an untrue man, he counsels as an untrue man, he speaks as an untrue man, he acts as an untrue man, he holds views as an untrue man, and he gives gifts as an untrue man.
“Bhikkhus, any recluses or brahmins who speculate about the future and hold views about the future, who assert various doctrinal propositions concerning the future, all assert these five bases or a certain one among them.
“Bhikkhus, anyone who has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body has included within himself whatever wholesome states there are that partake of true knowledge.
“Bhikkhus, are you thus free from doubt here: ‘This has come to be’?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”—“Bhikkhus, are you thus free from doubt here: ‘Its origination occurs with that as nutriment’?” —“Yes, venerable sir.”—“Bhikkhus, are you thus free from doubt here: ‘With the cessation of that nutriment, what has come to be is subject to cessation’?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”
“Bhikkhus, be my heirs in Dhamma, not my heirs in material things.
“Bhikkhus, before my enlightenment, while I was still only an unenlightened Bodhisatta, I too, being myself subject to birth, sought what was also subject to birth; being myself subject to ageing, sickness, death, sorrow, and defilement, I sought what was also subject to ageing, sickness, death, sorrow, and defilement.
“Bhikkhus, before my enlightenment, while I was still only an unenlightened Bodhisatta, it occurred to me: ‘Suppose that I divide my thoughts into two classes./ Then I set on one side thoughts of sensual desire, thoughts of ill will, and thoughts of cruelty, and I set on the other side thoughts of renunciation, thoughts of non-ill will, and thoughts of non-cruelty.
“Bhikkhus, bodily conduct is of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.
“Bhikkhus, both formerly and now what I teach is suffering and the cessation of suffering.
“Bhikkhus, by depending and relying on non-identification, abandon and surmount equanimity that is unified, based on unity.
“Bhikkhus, consciousness is reckoned by the particular condition dependent upon which it arises.
“Bhikkhus, dependent on the ear and sounds, ear-consciousness arises…Dependent on the mind and mind-objects, mind-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with contact as condition there arises felt as pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant…Bhikkhus, that one shall here and now make an end of suffering by abandoning the underlying tendency to lust for pleasant feeling…by abandoning ignorance and arousing true knowledge—this is possible.
“Bhikkhus, dependent on the ear and sounds, ear-consciousness arises…Dependent on the mind and mind-objects, mind-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with contact as condition there arises felt as pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant…Bhikkhus, that one should here and now make an end of suffering without abandoning the underlying tendency to lust for pleasant feeling…without abandoning ignorance and arousing true knowledge—this is impossible.
“Bhikkhus, dependent on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with contact as condition there arises felt as pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant.
“Bhikkhus, dependent on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with contact as condition there arises felt as pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant.
“Bhikkhus, do you remember the five lower fetters as taught by me?”
“Bhikkhus, do you see: ‘This has come to be’?” —“Yes, venerable sir.”—“Bhikkhus, do you see: ‘Its origination occurs with that as nutriment’?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”—“Bhikkhus, do you see: ‘With the cessation of that nutriment, what has come to be is subject to cessation’?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”
“Bhikkhus, does doubt arise when one is uncertain thus: ‘Has this come to be’?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”—“Bhikkhus, does doubt arise when one is uncertain thus: ‘Does its origination occur with that as nutriment’?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”—“Bhikkhus, does doubt arise when one is uncertain thus: ‘With the cessation of that nutriment, is what has come to be subject to cessation’?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”
“Bhikkhus, dwell possessed of virtue, possessed of the Pātimokkha, restrained with the restraint of the Pātimokkha, perfect in conduct and resort, and seeing fear in the slightest fault, train by undertaking the training precepts.
“Bhikkhus, even if bandits were to sever you savagely limb by limb with a two-handled saw, he who gave rise to a mind of hate towards them would not be carrying out my teaching.
“Bhikkhus, even those teachers from Okkala, Vassa and Bhañña, who held the doctrine of non-causality, the doctrine of non-doing, and the doctrine of nihilism, would not think that this Dhamma discourse on the Great Forty should be censured and rejected.
“Bhikkhus, even with a teacher who is concerned with material things, an heir to material things, attached to material things, such haggling would not be proper: ‘If we get this, we will do it; if we don’t get this, we won’t do it’; so what the Tathāgata, who is utterly detached from material things?
“Bhikkhus, for a faithful disciple who is intent on fathoming the Teacher’s Dispensation, it is natural that he conduct himself thus: ‘The Blessed One is the Teacher, I am a disciple; the Blessed One knows, I do not know.’
“Bhikkhus, for the most part beings have this wish, desire, and longing: ‘If only unwished for, undesired, disagreeable things would diminish and wished for, desired, agreeable things would increase!’ Yet although beings have this wish, desire, and longing, unwished for, undesired, disagreeable things increase for them and wished for, desired, agreeable things diminish.
“Bhikkhus, guided by the Tathāgata, accomplished and fully enlightened, the person to be tamed goes in eight directions.
“Bhikkhus, guided by the Tathāgata, accomplished and fully enlightened, the person to be tamed goes in these eight directions.
“Bhikkhus, has it been seen well by you as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: ‘This has come to be’?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”—“Bhikkhus, has it been seen well by you as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: ‘Its origination occurs with that as nutriment’?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”—“Bhikkhus, has it been seen well by you as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: ‘With the cessation of that nutriment, what has come to be is subject to cessation’?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”
“Bhikkhus, have you known me to teach the Dhamma in such a way as this: ‘Whatever this person experiences, whether pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant, unwholesome states diminish in him and wholesome states increase’?” —“No, venerable sir.”
“Bhikkhus, have you not known me to teach the Dhamma in such a way as this: ‘Here, when someone feels a certain kind of pleasant feeling, unwholesome states increase in him and wholesome states diminish; but when someone feels another kind of pleasant feeling, unwholesome states diminish in him and wholesome states increase.
“Bhikkhus, having encompassed his mind with my own mind, I already knew of the bhikkhu Vacchagotta: ‘The bhikkhu Vacchagotta has attained the threefold true knowledge and has great supernormal power and might.’
“Bhikkhus, here some clansman goes forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness, considering: ‘I am a victim of birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering.
“Bhikkhus, I abstain from eating at night.
“Bhikkhus, I am content with this progress.
“Bhikkhus, I am skilled in this world and in the other world, skilled in Māra’s realm and in what is outside Māra’s realm, skilled in the realm of Death and in what is outside the realm of Death.
“Bhikkhus, I could tell you in many ways about hell.
“Bhikkhus, I could tell you in many ways about the animal kingdom, so much so that it is hard to finish describing the suffering in the animal kingdom.
“Bhikkhus, I do not say of all bhikkhus that they still have work to do with diligence; nor do I say of all bhikkhus that they have no more work to do with diligence.
“Bhikkhus, I do not say that final knowledge is achieved all at once.
“Bhikkhus, I eat at a single session.
“Bhikkhus, I have given this simile in order to convey a meaning.
“Bhikkhus, I have given this simile in order to convey a meaning.
“Bhikkhus, I say that the destruction of the taints is for one who knows and sees, not for one who does not know and see.
“Bhikkhus, I shall show you how the Dhamma is similar to a raft, being for the purpose of crossing over, not for the purpose of grasping.
“Bhikkhus, I shall teach you a discourse on jungle thickets.
“Bhikkhus, I shall teach you a discourse on the great sixfold base.
“Bhikkhus, I shall teach you a discourse on the restraint of all the taints.
“Bhikkhus, I shall teach you a discourse on the root of all things.
“Bhikkhus, I shall teach you a discourse on what should be cultivated and what should not be cultivated.
“Bhikkhus, I shall teach you a summary and an exposition.
“Bhikkhus, I shall teach you an exposition of non-conflict.
“Bhikkhus, I shall teach you an exposition of the sixfold base.
“Bhikkhus, I shall teach you noble right concentration with its supports and its requisites.
“Bhikkhus, I shall teach you reappearance in accordance with one’s aspiration.
“Bhikkhus, I shall teach you the character of a true man and the character of an untrue man.
“Bhikkhus, I shall teach you the Dhamma that is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing; I shall reveal a holy life that is utterly perfect and pure, that is, the six sets of six.
“Bhikkhus, I shall teach you the summary and exposition of ‘One Who Has Had a Single Excellent Night.’
“Bhikkhus, I tell you this not as something I heard from another recluse or brahmin.
“Bhikkhus, if a bhikkhu of such virtue, such a state, and such wisdom eats almsfood consisting of choice hill rice along with various sauces and curries, even that will be no obstacle for him.
“Bhikkhus, if any recluse or brahmin thinks that this Dhamma discourse on the Great Forty should be censured and rejected, then there are ten legitimate deductions from his assertions that would provide grounds for censuring him here and now.
“Bhikkhus, if anyone from a clan of nobles goes forth from the home life into homelessness, and by realising for himself with direct knowledge here and now enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints, then he is already a recluse because of the destruction of the taints.
“Bhikkhus, if anyone should develop these four foundations of mindfulness in such a way for seven years, one of two fruits could be expected for him: either final knowledge here and now, or if there is a trace of clinging left, non-return.
“Bhikkhus, if through the mere wearing of the patchwork cloak a patchwork-cloak wearer who was covetous abandoned covetousness, who had a mind of ill will abandoned ill will… who had wrong view abandoned wrong view, then his friends and companions, his kinsmen and relatives, would make him a patchwork-cloak wearer as soon as he was born and have him undertake the patchwork-cloak wearing thus: ‘Come, my dear, be a patchwork-cloak wearer so that, by the mere wearing of the patchwork-cloak, when you are covetous you will abandon covetousness, when you have a mind of ill will you will abandon ill will…when you have wrong view you will abandon wrong view.’
“Bhikkhus, if you keep this advice on the simile of the saw constantly in mind, do you see any course of speech, trivial or gross, that you could not endure?”—“No, venerable sir.”—“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should keep this advice on the simile of the saw constantly in mind.
“Bhikkhus, in such a Dhamma and Discipline as that, it is plain that confidence in the Teacher is not rightly directed, that confidence in the Dhamma is not rightly directed, that fulfilment of the precepts is not rightly directed, and that the affection among companions in the Dhamma is not rightly directed.
“Bhikkhus, in such a Dhamma and Discipline as that, it is plain that confidence in the Teacher is rightly directed, that confidence in the Dhamma is rightly directed, that fulfilment of the precepts is rightly directed, and that the affection among companions in the Dhamma is rightly directed.
“Bhikkhus, is doubt abandoned in one who sees as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: ‘This has come to be’?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”—“Bhikkhus, is doubt abandoned in one who sees as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: ‘Its origination occurs with that as nutriment’?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”—“Bhikkhus, is doubt abandoned in one who sees as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: ‘With the cessation of that nutriment, what has come to be is subject to cessation’?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”
“Bhikkhus, just as the bulls, the fathers and leaders of the herd, breasted the stream of the Ganges and got safely across to the further shore, so too, those bhikkhus who are arahants with taints destroyed, who have lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached their own goal, destroyed the fetters of being, and are completely liberated through final knowledge—by breasting Māra’s stream they have gotten safely across to the further shore.
“Bhikkhus, knowing and seeing in this way, would you run back to the past thus: ‘Were we in the past?
“Bhikkhus, knowing and seeing in this way, would you speak thus: ‘The Teacher is respected by us.
“Bhikkhus, on one occasion I was living at Ukkaṭṭhā in the Subhaga Grove at the root of a royal sāla tree.
“Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating feelings as feelings, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world…...the equanimity enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
“Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind as mind, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world......the equanimity enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
“Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.........the equanimity enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.
“Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world—on that occasion unremitting mindfulness is established in him.
“Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating impermanence’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating impermanence’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating fading away’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating fading away’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating cessation’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating cessation’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in contemplating relinquishment’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out contemplating relinquishment’—on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
“Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing rapture’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing rapture’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing pleasure’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing pleasure’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing the mental formation’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing the mental formation’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in tranquillising the mental formation’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out tranquillising the mental formation’—on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating feelings as feelings, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
“Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing the mind’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing the mind’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in gladdening the mind’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out gladdening the mind’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in concentrating the mind’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out concentrating the mind’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in liberating the mind’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out liberating the mind’—on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind as mind, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
“Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu, breathing in long, understands: ‘I breathe in long,’ or breathing out long, understands: ‘I breathe out long’; breathing in short, understands: ‘I breathe in short,’ or breathing out short, understands: ‘I breathe out short’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in experiencing the whole body’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out experiencing the whole body’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe in tranquillising the bodily formation’; trains thus: ‘I shall breathe out tranquillising the bodily formation’—on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
“Bhikkhus, only here is there a recluse, only here a second recluse, only here a third recluse, only here a fourth recluse.
“Bhikkhus, purified and bright as this view is, if you adhere to it, cherish it, treasure it, and treat it as a possession, would you then understand that the Dhamma has been taught as similar to a raft, being for the purpose of crossing over, not for the purpose of grasping?” —“No, venerable sir.”—“Bhikkhus, purified and bright as this view is, if you do not adhere to it, cherish it, treasure it, and treat it as a possession, would you then understand that the Dhamma has been taught as similar to a raft, being for the purpose of crossing over, not for the purpose of grasping?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”
“Bhikkhus, remember this of mine briefly as deliverance in the destruction of craving; but the bhikkhu Sāti, son of a fisherman, as caught up in a vast net of craving, in the trammel of craving.”
“Bhikkhus, rightly speaking, were it to be said of anyone: ‘He has attained mastery and perfection in noble virtue, attained mastery and perfection in noble concentration, attained mastery and perfection in noble wisdom, attained mastery and perfection in noble deliverance,’ it is of Sāriputta indeed that rightly speaking this should be said.
“Bhikkhus, rightly speaking, were it to be said of anyone: ‘He is the son of the Blessed One, born of his breast, born of his mouth, born of the Dhamma, created by the Dhamma, an heir in the Dhamma, not an heir in material things,’ it is of Sāriputta indeed that rightly speaking this should be said.
“Bhikkhus, Sāriputta is wise; Sāriputta has great wisdom; Sāriputta has wide wisdom; Sāriputta has joyous wisdom; Sāriputta has quick wisdom; S̄riputta has keen wisdom; Sāriputta has penetrative wisdom.
“Bhikkhus, sensual pleasures are impermanent, hollow, false, deceptive; they are illusory, the prattle of fools.
