They experience births and deaths That take place in various worlds. {56}
Originating in dependence— This is how things arise
What is it?
The Blessed One replied, “Su­bhūti, physical forms are indeed without limit.
May all vajra holders also bless you. Speak well!”
They renounce happiness after already renouncing suffering. Because both mental happiness and mental displeasure decline, there is neither happiness nor suffering.
His intention pledged, he said, “So long as I have not found an undefiled state, I shall not uncross my legs.”
likewise, they do not consider whether the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty are entities or non-entities.
Unstable and fleeting, they move like the wind;
Su­bhūti, do you think that the real nature of physical forms can be terminated or abandoned, or does it cease?
It contains all sorts of jewels, and all manner of precious stones can be found there.
and both types of feeling conjoined.
Monks, then the Great Top-Knotted Brahmā, surrounded and escorted by six million eight hundred thousand Brahmās,
Noble son, because they perceive such objectives the thus-gone ones may praise themselves.
To him I will grant accomplishment.
Her hair is soft, clean, and sweetly scented, Black like the excellent bee and arranged in braids.
84,000 beings in the meditation of equanimity.
“What is skill in gaining certainty concerning phenomena? It is the inexpressibility of all phenomena.
With the second third, enthrallment is achieved,
Do not take the lives of living beings,
“Noble son, in the past, that is what I heard from the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Padmottama.”
Similarly, physical forms have been taught without apprehending anything.
“Young brahmins, listen.
“Pāpīyān, moreover, when a bodhisattva with superior intent dons the great armor for the sake of liberating all beings, such a bodhisattva will have set out with superior intent.
The five-pronged vajra is the five gnoses.
In each mansion were emanated 84,000 goddesses.
‘Oh! What is the use of practicing the vinaya of individual liberation, ethical discipline, and good conduct?
All those beings, in all their lifetimes, became renunciants with those sixteen, gazed upon them, and heard the Dharma from them.
He is called the one who sends light rays equally to all sentient beings in a limitless manner through his love, care, and great compassion.
“Why is it the knowledge of those who have reached happiness? Because it is the cessation of all distress.
He gave him a jewel of great value,
The whole of “The Chapter on Going Forth”
therefore, it is called appropriating desire.
it is devoid of concepts; it is devoid of creation;
Facing Directly, Going Far, Immovable,
As soon as he cried out, the guardians of hell lifted their maces and clubbed him on the head,
“May we also obtain the prophecy of our attainment of the highest, complete enlightenment!”
"སེམས་ཅན་དེ་དག་ལ་ཡང་ཐ་བ་དང་སྡང་བའི་སེམས་<tMoreover, not only should one keep the resolve not to have harsh or angry feelings toward such beings, one should have an attitude of loving kindness for them as well.
and are reborn among gods.
Venerable Lord, if the notion of the eyes as arising is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of the eyes as ceasing become a bodhisattva?
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is emptiness.”
The gods then said to the Blessed One,
he can prevent that [first] arrow from falling to the ground as long as he wishes,
They had listened to the Bodhisattva’s words and had prepared to make offerings to him. Now they hurried quickly to the city of Kapilavastu.
noble son, I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
she thought, ‘Now I shall by all means make him act according to my desire; I shall seduce him.’
This universe of a thousand million worlds shook in six ways: it trembled,
Fearlessly use words that are like echoes And that are analogous to dreams. {68}
Their downpour of flowers covered the wide earth up to knee height.
and then perfect the pristine cognition of omniscience, are endowed with that cognition,
That has four corners, four doors,
“Young man, when bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have great compassion and
“Ten thousand million devas Who were residing in the sky
I have today saved them all And therefore today I am perfectly happy.
I saw the form of a very attractive woman, together with pleasure groves filled with a thousand people.
He replied, “This is owing to the absence of attachment and absence of obstruction with respect to all knowledge!”
“I request that the Bhagavān teach. I request that the Sugata teach.
Just as their love extends to one being, so does it reach all others, pervading throughout all the realms of sentient beings.
Take these ornaments and my horse Kaṇṭhaka and return to the palace.”
Pristine One, purified by Brahmā, Master of all forms of knowledge, Delighter of beings, king of physicians, Healer of all worlds,
“Śāriputra, the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas who in the future will appear in countless, innumerable worlds in the ten directions
He demonstrated the method of subsisting on A single berry, sesame seed, or rice grain.
They say, ‘I have understood these teachings with my own intelligence; I teach them to you in this way because I am compassionate.
“Noble son, you may wonder about the character of the bodhisattvas’ excellent power of not being subjugated.
so in this Great Vehicle, also, coming, going, and abiding are not discernible.
The Thus-Gone One replied: “I am a worthy one of the world; I am the unsurpassed teacher.
Without dedicating these roots of virtue to the level of the śrāvakas or to the level of the pratyekabuddhas, they master all these roots of virtue, and
You will honor many millions of buddhas, You will accomplish powerful conduct,
“ ‘It is possessed by the sons of the buddhas. It is the path taught for those who seek enlightenment.
The demons cannot conquer him. For those of skillful means, he is the measure of time;
any thought of non-composure, and any thought of stupidity
If separated from you, I will perish
I will eat all the food, Even what is mixed with the five impure foods!
they do not speak harshly,
Out of compassion for the two brothers,
There is no such field of activity among the tathāgatas, let alone among the bodhisattvas.’
“Desire can never cause harm To the bodhisattvas who possess this samādhi.
guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the realms of the great trichiliocosm.
“It is as follows: Mañjuśrī, if all sentient beings included in the three world spheres were to be born in the hells, or as animals, or as pretas in the world of Yama,
“Venerables, I shall remain right here.”
“The transcendent perfection of generosity has the defining characteristic of renunciation,
This Dharma has been discovered today By one who renounces all mad carelessness.
Then the bodhisattva mahāsattva Akṣayamati took from around his own neck a long necklace of pearls of the value of a hundred thousand silver coins
There were also countless bodhisattva mahāsattvas who possessed the Dharma.
Śāradvatī­putra, just as [the notion of] an illusory person engaging in the emptiness of internal phenomena is without foundation
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the eyes constitute a bodhisattva
“Kāśyapa, the Dharma is taught in this way:
They will hear where they are the beautiful songs Of cuckoos, peacocks, and avadavats, Partridges and other birds Living in the mountains or in caves.
in the same way, Venerable Lord, the transcendent perfection of wisdom also acts according to the objective for which it is emanated, but
[7] all the doorways to their rebirth in lower existences are closed; [8] it is not difficult for them to be reborn in the paradise of Brahmā;
The Buddha declared, “In the same way, Śāriputra,
Some replied, “As a human in the form of a young brahmin.”
That is how the element of consciousness experiences non-merit.
and the utterly unborn on the ultimate level is also ultimately the same as views.
Teach the Dharma that we request!
“This is not the level of the numerous śrāvakas. When you have attained this level of peace,
Yet until I attain awakening, so hard to find even through many eons,
Again they will be incinerated by an inferno, and having been incinerated, they will pass away.
Having submerged him, face down, in water,
Accomplish your own good qualities And have equanimity toward the conduct of others. {98}
Here I attained the absorption of pristine mindfulness And struck down with a strong blow of the sword of knowledge The enemies of conceptual mind and actions, And the hostile way they reinforce existence.
“For example, Su­bhūti, space is neither apprehensible, [nor is it not apprehensible].
The palaces are to be painted. With red ocher or sindhura
‘Alas! The transcendent perfection of wisdom is flaccid, insignificant, and pointless.
Naravīrā, and so forth,
When the Bodhisattva knew that they were settled, he taught them a Dharma teaching and instructed them, inspired them, and delighted them.
She entered homelessness in all their teachings And obtained the supreme peace of this samādhi. {39}
To this the response came, “This is not a worthy place, for these people are malicious and violent.
if they do not understand the limitations of perception, they have not been favored by the transcendent perfection of generosity.
the features of awakened body, speech, and mind,
people continued to remark on how my previously beautiful complexion had disappeared.
The entire army of Māra was felled in a confrontation.
focusing on the notion that senses are illusory, and grant their gifts without apprehending the giver, the gift, and the recipient,
those beings would not become liberated through those dharmas.
One should visualize one’s own body
know accurately the motivation, conduct, and thoughts of other beings and individuals.
It is our wish that we turn back today!’
“If you ask what are the ‘four formless meditative absorptions,’
all the sentient beings in Jambūdvīpa think, ‘Here there is not a cloud.’
they do not consider whether these are permanent or impermanent, imbued with happiness or suffering, a self or not a self, empty or not empty, with signs or signless, having aspirations or lacking aspirations, calm or not calm, void or not, afflicted or purified, arising or ceasing, and entities or non-entities.
then, [Venerable] Lord, how do great bodhisattva beings who practice the six transcendent perfections, and
Venerable Lord! This sacred doctrine is compatible with all things.
nor with [any of the other fruits], up to and including that of the level of the pratyekabuddhas.
This will have a long-lasting purpose and bring you benefit and happiness.”
They remain within the four noble families. The wise ones are neither hypocritical nor boastful.
Senior Su­bhūti then said to the Blessed One,
fulfilled the wishes of those who had aspirations, and never abandoned those who came to him for refuge.
‘Likewise, though it is seen in a pool, The moon never enters any water.
With regard to these and [all the other sensory elements], up to and including the sensory element of the mental faculty, the sensory element of mental phenomena, and the sensory element of mental consciousness,
In the same way they dispense generosity toward human beings, and likewise they dispense generosity toward non-human beings.
“What is not forsaking the solitary life? It is not abandoning dedication to good actions and delighting in residing in a remote place;
“The foolish conceptualize Through consciousness and perception.
and thought, “So those rogues have come here.
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, the bodhisattvas who apprehend [the transcendent perfections], without attention endowed with omniscience,
However, on the relative level, the vinaya of the bodhisattva great beings gathers all accumulations of roots of virtue, comforts all beings, and tames them by taking birth in the three realms.
Like lions, they are unafraid, fearless, and undisturbed.
This is false view.
divide the alms, setting aside one fourth for those who maintain pure conduct, another fourth for those who suffer, another fourth for those who have fallen into error, and the final fourth for themselves.
the sense field of neither perception nor non-perception has been completely transcended in all respects, and
“Whoever possesses this sūtra after my nirvāṇa Will become a friend for beings.
have served many hundred thousand quintillions of buddhas;
Even if the beings governed by them are critical, gossip, or speak inappropriately,
There is nothing but fixation. There is nothing at all that can be apprehended in terms of inherent existence.
these are specific phenomena, these are non-specific phenomena,
When Vimalakīrti had spoken this discourse, eight thousand of the gods in the company of the crown prince Mañjuśrī conceived the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
“Vimalatejā, what is truly meant by the qualities of ordinary beings?”
They were expert in knowing the spiritual faculties of all living beings.
And they will never have any confusion. These are the benefits from possessing this sūtra.
“They will be arrogant, conceited, wicked, and reckless. They will associate with sinners and be greedy for food.
Likewise, the lord buddhas of the future also will acquire their sacred doctrines that are equal to the unequaled after practicing this transcendent perfection of wisdom;
who sees affliction as purity, and who sees saṃsāric realms as the sphere of nirvāṇa, will attain purification of karmic obscurations.
Even if the universe were filled with fireflies, They could be destroyed and eclipsed by a single sun.
do not habitually engage in the ways of the ten non-virtuous actions, even in their dreams, let alone when they are awake.
“Ānanda, over the course of a hundred thousand cycles of three incalculable eons, the mighty strongman Vimalatejā will fully awaken to unsurpassed and completely perfect buddhahood.
With great courage, the venerable Saṅgharakṣita set out but he could see no trail.
The thrones descended from the sky and came to rest in the house of the Licchavi Vimalakīrti.
I myself will never [hurt anyone with harsh, cruel, insulting, or defamatory words,] order someone to be so hurt, [or rejoice in anyone being so hurt!’]
(1) The lord buddhas are endowed with copper-colored nails.
and a sentient being makes a wish, sentient beings will perceive corresponding words coming forth from the jewel. However, that great, precious jewel does not form mental constructs or concepts.
when a householder living in Śrāvastī took a wife of equal caste
Noble son, such are the kiṃnaras that live there.
Blessed One, what food do those beings seek?
In the same way, Śāriputra, a tathāgata, arhat, perfectly enlightened buddha has the wisdom, strengths, and fearlessnesses of a tathāgata,
Brother Rāhula also,
receives this queen of incantations, Great Upholder of the Secret Mantra, and
“How come this jewel parasol appeared? Whose karmic result is this?”
It is born of patience and gentleness.
Friends, behold the splendors of the universe Abhirati, the Tathāgata Akṣobhya, the array of his buddhafield, and the splendors of these disciples and bodhisattvas!
“The ones who will read this sūtra Because of their compassion for beings
“Consider also the analogy of someone intoxicated by liquor.
likewise, Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva who is skilled in this Dharma discourse dispels the afflictions of all sentient beings and thus causes the light of exalted wisdom to manifest.
These childish beings are cut up, like sheep on a slaughtering log.
‘This is the conduct associated with cyclic existence, but
Friends, for these reasons you should pay homage to the Bodhisattva and joyfully assist him in every way possible!”
It becomes conscious of coming into existence there where it was attracted with that thought.
so on until there is the cessation of the great mass of sheer suffering.
This son of noble family possesses the perfect buddhas’ primordial wisdom complete with all adornments, including the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha.
Noble son, thinking in such ways bodhisattvas gain knowledge of themselves.
At that point, this verse was heard from the jewel canopy:
At the time of this great gathering, light rays shone in the great Avīci hell.
perceive,
The three-pronged vajra signifies the three buddha bodies.
Those śrāvakas, both those in training and those who had passed beyond training,
It teaches the direct cognition of phenomena and is a gateway to the absence of constructs with respect to all phenomena.
and until their final rebirth, great bodhisattva beings purify the negativity of others, including their negativity of body, their negativity of speech, and their negativity of mind.”
Countless beings developed the aspiration for attaining the result of becoming an arhat.
She must be free from anger, jealousy, and greed.
you should see that the transcendent perfection of wisdom is not endowed with the powers [of the tathāgatas].
the illuminator Named Śālendrarāja,
I was told, ‘Why should we attend upon an indolent?’ And now this.” The king sat and reflected thus.
“I was that bhikṣu Yaśaḥprabha, Who meditated on patience in previous lives
When the sages looked down below,
On the third ground, their minds are free of anger and ill will. Hence, they attain the body that is free of wounds.
With a smiling and trusting face free from anger, she spoke to King Śuddhodana in these verses:
The Sage, pure and stainless, washes himself in the river out of love for the world.
for as long as I live, seek refuge in the Buddha, supreme among men;
those two holy beings,
His daughters wailed and cried out, “Oh no, father, oh no, father!”
Then the two do not go together?
As the sun and moon appear from behind clouds.”
“Senior Śāradvatī­putra, the transcendent perfection of generosity is empty of the transcendent perfection of generosity.
neither form nor no form;
They then behold other noble sons accepting, becoming vessels for, and teaching this profound teaching,
Moreover, Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of perseverance
One is without avarice and speaks profusely, Laughs, and is prone to anger.
Ānanda, this strong and powerful secret mantra, which has been practiced for a long time,
“Why is it the cessation of suffering? Because it brings the elimination of desire, anger, and ignorance.
The reduction in the prosperity of one’s family, possessions, and wealth, the loss of facilities and having to rely on others,
When her limbs have been sprinkled with this powder, She runs, her body swooning with every step.
He then said to the Blessed One,
and who relentlessly persevere until unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment is attained,
They support the severance from desires, befit noble beings, and are commended by the thus-gone ones, praised by the thus-gone ones.’
From the supreme realm of Sukhāvatī For this question,
I asked it, ‘How do you know she is a rākṣasī?’
Moreover, Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings who practice the six transcendent perfections see sentient beings lacking luminosity,
so who will slay this bhikṣu?’
“Venerable Lord,” he asked, “with respect to what will they attain emancipation owing to their non-apprehension?”
their dharmas will not diminish,
the bhagavat Śikhin looked at the great gathering and began to speak of the Dharma within that assembly.
those whose roots of virtue have matured, to the receptive, to those who have served the victorious ones in the past,
Practice the roots of virtue, that is, the noble eightfold path.
O Protector, please liberate sentient beings that have attained this opportunity!
Come back!” As the householder reached out to grab at him, the monk said,
Mañjuśrī replied,
And at that time, I was the dharmabhāṇaka. {95}
“Noble one, what is this?” “Have a closer look,” he replied.
One should say, ‘After eating this, may all fevers and diseases quickly go away.
as well as the element of dharmas,
As for the outer perimeter, It is adorned with a garland of utpalas.
“They will make offerings to me With bherī drums, conches, and mṛdaṅga drums.
It harbors no wish to harm any being, is free of strife, and inflicts no injury with body, speech, or mind.
some mansions were made of flowers of pāruṣaka, mahāpāruṣaka, mañjuṣaka, mahāmañjuṣaka, roca, mahāroca, cakra, mahācakra, sarvacakra, atyartha­śobhati­cakra, candra, mahācandra, atyartha­śobhati­candra, paramacandra, sthāla, and mahāsthāla;
“In what way, you may then wonder, do bodhisattvas apply the remedy for dullness and how do they abandon the conditions for dullness to arise?
Some arrive with eyes blazing like the fire at the end of an eon, Showing the dissolution and the creation.
Śāriputra declared, “Bhagavān Śākyamuni, king of the Śākyas, you have fully awakened to unsurpassable, completely perfect enlightenment in this Sahā world. You have taught the Dharma that the whole world was reluctant to accept at the time of the degeneration of the eon,
Seeing this, the thus-gone ones wish to teach them the Dharma so that their livelihood may become pure.
Venerable Lord, if the notion of the eyes as a self is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of the eyes as a non-self become a bodhisattva?
In the west is a hand showing the mudrā of fearlessness, And in the north, one draws a lotus.
They will honor, venerate, show respect for, and make offerings to buddha bhagavāns as numerous as the atoms in fifty worlds, and be holders of their Dharma.
“I rejoice in those who live in the forest, Always alone and solitary like a rhinoceros, Always with pure
“They walk into ravines, fire, and desolate areas; Naked, they smear themselves in soil and ashes.
The entire assembly also beheld throughout the ten directions, numerous as the sands of the River Ganges, the Lord Buddha who taught this doctrinal sūtra on the chapters of the transcendent perfection of wisdom, which had been requested by the fully ordained monks Śāradvatī­putra and Su­bhūti, in its entirety, without omitting or adding any words and syllables.
“The yakṣas and rākṣasas lead him to a lion throne of divine gold and jewels, upon which he sits.
Therefore, noble son, relinquish your diligence!
Also present was
Completely obliterating them all, it turns them into the nature of space. Such is the unimpeded force with which the wind rises.
and neither is it associated with anything, nor is it disassociated from anything.
“ ‘Noble son, it is like this. As a comparison, if for a year of twelve months,
Throughout all ten directions in all these worlds.
The ordinand responds: “I have lived it properly.” If the ordinand says he has lived the holy life properly, the inquirer asks him:
speaking appropriately and giving up inappropriate speech;
The Bodhisattva exclaimed: “How sad that old age destroys youth! How sad that health is destroyed by various sicknesses!
They set in place and protect sentient beings, and
They will practice celibacy with their immaterial bodies. They will emit their own light. They will have miraculous powers. They will fly through the air.
Just as the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Śākyamuni
Comfortable and free from afflictions,
Decorate them with gold and gems and cover them with lattices of gold.
“That is what I heard Krakucchanda say.”
their conduct, ritual purity, and observances;
As such, they consider how the Blessed One has taught:
As bodhisattvas, unafflicted, She always maintained homelessness. {40}
They will have dressed Śākyamuni in Dharma robes.
when a brahmin living in Rājagṛha took a wife of equal caste and together they sported,
There are two obstacles: first, to life, And second, to liberation.
Dear boy! Kolita! Come home. There is pleasure to be had while living here, too.
“Those who have been prophesied by the Buddha Will be born into the Ikṣvāku family.
He is overjoyed to see them,
What are those ten? They are stainlessness, nonattachment, peace, infinite insight, infinite wisdom, accord with the sameness of the realm of phenomena, conceiving of all phenomena as being of the nature of the field of space, absence of individual supports, transcendence of the sphere of marks, and transcendence of the logicians’ sphere of engagement. Noble son, bodhisattvas possessing ten such qualities are similar to space.
He rose from his seat, prostrated at the feet of the Bodhisattva, and spoke this verse:
“What is the natural result of good qualities? It is being near to the highest, complete enlightenment.
Prostrations to the category of special accounts;
They are volition, feeling, and the element of dharmas.
Some ate human flesh and drank blood, chewing on human arms, legs, heads, and livers, and slurping entrails, feces, and vomit.
By the union of vajra and lotus,
Compared to the merit he would produce, the production of merit in the first instance would not even amount to a hundredth part.
Śāradvatī­putra, just as [the notion of] the eyes of a tathāgata, arhat, and completely perfect buddha is without foundation
forty-two eons after the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya entered the path
We supplicate you to explain to us, the nāga kings, our purpose.”
exclusively dispense generosity at all times.
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who give away all their possessions will be born in his buddhafield.
feeling, volition, and the element of dharmas are all transferred and migrate there, too.
They crush pride by thinking, ‘Like the lowliest outcast, I move humbly, in pursuit of alms.’
If there is any being among the infinite numbers, Counted one by one,
at the monk’s feet and asked,
Some had ugly hollow eyes, like wells.
to the youth Candraprabha
To all those shaken buddha realms
Likewise, in the north, the bhagavān buddhas of the north, such as the Tathāgata Mahārciskandha, the Tathāgata Vaiśvānara­nirghoṣa, the Tathāgata Duṣpradharṣa, the Tathāgata Āditya­saṃbhava, the Tathāgata Jālinīprabha, the Tathāgata Prabhākara,
They should also encourage others to acquire those [fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
“Within that pore the ground is silver and the mountains are gold with silver peaks adorned by rubies.
Tell me, O Spiritual Hero!
“They also take refuge in the elements, such as earth, water, fire, wind, and space.
I will teach extensively The Dharma that liberates from suffering.”
“Young man, what is being skilled in the wisdom of the nonexistent nature of all phenomena?
The youth was their leader In this vast holding of the supreme sūtra. {39}
In order to behold, honor, venerate, and serve the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni, and also to hear his Dharma teaching, let us travel to the Sahā world.
and they do not make assumptions about dreams, and so on.
But once you are in that realm, be careful.
This holy being is arriving here accompanied by one hundred sextillion other bodhisattvas, and what you perceive are the signs of their arrival.”
Since they are without false imaginations, they are without erroneous views.
So, bhikṣus, have no fear in these circumstances.
Venerable Lord, if the notion of the eyes as with signs is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of the eyes as signless become a bodhisattva?
Likewise, in the nadir, the bhagavān buddhas of the nadir, such as the Tathāgata Siṃha, the Tathāgata Yaśas, the Tathāgata Yaśaḥprabhāsa, the Tathāgata Dharma, the Tathāgata Dharmadhara, the Tathāgata Dharmadhvaja,
disciplining body, speech, and mind, thus maintaining constant spiritual progress;
Who live in solitude, dwelling at the foot of trees, And who are heirs of the sugatas focused upon liberation. {9}
I am an obstacle and I am an accomplishment,
They know the absorptions and associated spheres that the hearers engage in,
“ ‘Eye’ and ‘form’ are dualistic.
The first is made of gold. The second is made of silver. “The third is made of beryl. The fourth is made of pure crystal. The fifth is made of red pearl. The sixth is made of emerald. The seventh is made of ruby. The eighth is made of all seven precious substances.
these all constitute the fourth root transgression.
in harmony with relativity;
“Such are they who teach the supreme nature of phenomena. They will before long reach the highest enlightenment.
Your Majesty, I will not act immorally.
’“The yakṣas and rākṣasas bowed down at the feet of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara and returned.
Mañjuśrī, likewise, through this Dharma discourse, all the bodhisattva’s afflictions will be dispelled and
He has praised those who have gone forth and greeted them respectfully, shaved their hair, and anointed their heads with scented oils.
Sūkṣmā dropped like a felled tree at the pratyekabuddha’s feet and said,
Bodhisattvas are not patient for the sake of certain purposes,
In the presence of the Lord of the World, I will pronounce their punishment:
They should engage in conduct related to anger, and be free of anger.
This refrain should be extensively applied to the sense fields, just as it has been juxtaposed here in the context of the psycho-physical aggregates.
“No one is able to know The nature of their strengths, Liberations, fearlessnesses, Or the nature of the buddhas’ other dharmas. {2}
foreign traders who have settled there sing the praises of the young head merchant Bhadrapāla, and speak well of him.
In order to benefit those women Who don’t know me as present In the body of every woman.”
If it bursts into flames, one will become a vidyādhara by applying it as a tilaka on one’s forehead or an ointment.
“In the same way, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha does not move.
visiting the city,
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is a consistent basis.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds are familiar with defilement by means of roots of virtue.
“Blessed One, when a noble child comprehends the Dharma with the understanding that comes from receiving the teachings, or from reflecting upon them, is that not a personal understanding?” asked the bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkam­bhin.
Everything taught above Should also be understood as four-fold. Each one, moreover, is four-fold;
As the Bhagavān had given him the opportunity,
He wept and cried, “Oh no, my only son!”
syād yathedam khaṅge khaṅge khaṅgeghoṣe uṣodhane sārathi prabhede vipulaprabhe saṃkarṭhaṇi vikarṭhaṇi viśagravate śuddhasādhani varuṇavate vāsa vibhūṣeṇe vesaṃgame paśupati puspagarbhe
As was natural given their junior status, they were always expected to perform errands,
“They will promulgate this sūtra And will guard the treasure of the buddhas.
Then the Blessed One instructed the venerable Aśvajit,
He gave up all of the four continents. He abandoned pleasures and left his home. {33}
Now, monks, what is this extensive discourse on the Dharma known as The Play in Full?
Sentient beings are not born miraculously.
who searches for a spiritual friend should possess these four qualities:
A mother, a sister, a wife,
This sacred doctrine is compatible with omniscience.
“If you ask what are the ‘thirty-two major marks of a superior man that the tathāgatas possess,’ they are as follows:
“If you ask what are the ‘four immeasurable aspirations,’
In that time the wise one proclaimed enlightenment
Even should he go into the states of the animals, he remains free of darkness and ignorance.
who was always by his side, instructed the king in a dream,
The great ocean, the nāga king’s abode, would never bow down to a puddle;
He keeps a count of it all And keeps all that wealth in mind.
promulgate it, and make it widely known to others.
Similarly, the sensory element of sights is also free from contaminants and not included within the three world systems,
They have emerged victorious in battle over their foes. This is a fitting place for the Bodhisattva to be conceived.”
Such is the bodhisattvas’ excellent patience that is not temporary.
This is some sign that has appeared in this world. We must seek well for the meaning of this.
Venerable Lord! Similarly, the transcendent perfection of generosity is empty of the transcendent perfection of generosity,
inseparably hear the sacred doctrine from the tathāgatas.
How are physical forms without limits?
With joy and inspiration toward the infinite Dharma they have no concern for material things,
The sum total of the merit of all those beings with as much merit as a solitary buddha would then match the merit of a bodhisattva, a bodhisattva who achieves this absorption that encapsulates all merit.
The road was shaded with silk canopies in many colors,
Lord Vajrasattva spoke this tantra, and
Like an elephant, he was gentle.
Rūpavatī (Beautiful One)
Thus free from any outer marks and free from the marks of the body, they practice to give up inner marks, finding great joy in their practice.
Similarly, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are neither fettered nor liberated.
they destroy their boat of faith and part from the vital force of wisdom when they lie out of jealousy.
(5) correct livelihood,
It is the dhāraṇī entranceway that has the characteristic of irreversibility. Does the Jina teach this samādhi? {69}
the thus-gone ones would still hear and fully understand each of them individually.
Therefore, Nakṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña, I entrust you with this chapter on the history of the bodhisattva mahāsattva Sarva­sattva­priya­darśana so that in the future, in the later times, during the final five hundred years, it will be practiced in Jambudvīpa and will not vanish; so that Māra, the evil one, will find no opportunity to attack it; and so that the devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, and mahoragas who belong to the class of māras will find no opportunity to attack it.
One should place that on top of seven leaves from the bodhi tree and
He has attested that he is utterly free of impediments.
Similarly, owing to their utter purity, they do consider the non-arising of all the meditative stabilities and all the gateways of mnemonic incantation.
“How many qualities must a bodhisattva have, to go safe and sound to a pure buddhafield after he transmigrates at death away from this Sahā universe?” Vimalakīrti replied,
studded with the seven types of precious substances
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then engendered great compassion, starting with the sentient beings situated in the undetermined group.
The realm will be level, delightful, made of crystal, adorned by jewel trees,
Among the gods who had faith in Śāradvatīputra and the gods who had faith in the factions of the māras, there were thirty-two thousand beings who aroused the mind set upon unexcelled and perfect awakening.
Oh no, son!
So it is that they perceive the arising of physical forms.
causes one to transcend all lower existence and be freed from all illness.
Monks, once the god Santuṣita and his entourage had praised the Thus-Gone One, with palms joined
I belong to the Solitary Sage Vehicle when I teach the twelve links of dependent origination to those who need them.
‘We are bringing the jeweled structure that delighted the Bodhisattva and we are taking it into the presence of the Blessed One. Those among you who would like to see it should come quickly!’ ”
But when the inner sense source, the eye, is not deficient, and likewise, when form, light, space, and appropriate attention are not deficient, then from the coming together of all these factors, the eye consciousness arises.
“On the other hand, Su­bhūti, you should have conviction in the transcendent perfection of wisdom because physical forms are non-apprehensible.
Prostrations to the tathāgata Ratnākara, buddha of the east
the knowledge of the cessation of suffering,
They do not preoccupy themselves with talk of diverse matters.
the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Candra­sūrya­vimala­prabhāsa­śrī having thus instructed the bodhisattva mahāsattva Sarva­sattva­priya­darśana,
In time the brahmin Tiṣya went to see King Bimbisāra.
“Boys, where are your parents?”
it is because when their own minds are purified, they [also] purify the worthy recipients of the bodhisattvas’ generosity.
“What are you?” He replied, “I’m a hermaphrodite.”
at the same time will be reborn in this buddhafield.
When Prasenajit, the King of Kosala, heard this debtor had gone forth and attained a store of qualities,
He is the great Dharma king who shines the bright light of knowledge.
a gentleman since he had eradicated afflictions,
In this way, noble son, bodhisattvas are involved in endless activities.
Many marvelous phenomena such as these occurred in the world.
and as all sentient beings are at peace, understand that all phenomena are at peace;
The Tathāgata has inconceivable qualities so that in this way the Tathāgata’s body is within the kūṭāgāra and is resplendent, beautiful, and has the perfect color.’
If they develop their perceptions in that manner,
one-pointedness of mind based on the aspects of emptiness
and in the same way, since a ‘genuinely perfect buddha’ is non-apprehensible, it is nothing but a mere name or conventional term.
The beings in my care are of good character, have good understanding, are easily guided, and are easily purified.
All the while, although they are pained by the excruciating, fierce, and burning suffering of beings,
Great fortunate one! As soon as you have risen in this world, enfold me in your compassion.
How should they train in the second, the third, and in [all the other settings of their mind on enlightenment], up to and including the tenth setting of their mind on enlightenment?
They cannot describe it Through using profound words. {36}
Bondage is broken by the mind,
Or has a powerful rākṣasa been born who rivals great Rāvaṇa?
“In this billion-world universe there is not to be found Any being superior to them, Or who is their equal in the accumulation of merit And unrivaled, inconceivable wisdom. {11}
This earth supports all beings; She is impartial and unbiased toward all, whether moving or still.
“The airborne palaces of the Brahmās who were in the fifty hundred thousand quintillion worlds in the east became very beautiful, bright, radiant, glorious, and majestic.
Venerable Lord! How do great bodhisattva beings, after abiding in the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, acquire the transcendent perfection of generosity?
Thoroughly understanding that the mind is empty,
On the relative level, tranquility is a gateway to peace.
Noble son, imagine if all beings had become bodhisattvas dwelling on the tenth level.
the inconceivably numerous appellations for kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous appellations for purification.
they may become equipoised in and arise from the eight aspects of liberation, either sequentially or in reverse order.
Then, concerning the recitation, or meditation,
“Bhagavān, these dhāraṇī-mantra words
This is due to the meritorious actions Of this great sage.”
when there is no consciousness arising that apprehends feelings, that apprehends perceptions, that apprehends formative predispositions, and that apprehends consciousness.
Oṁ, Prajvala! Hūṁ, phaṭ!
I am the creator, the destroyer, a powerful lord full of bliss.
They should praise the eight aspects of liberation and the nine serial steps of meditative equipoise.
he will obtain grass,
That which is the characteristic of those words Is the characteristic that all phenomena have. {26}
But, King and Lord of Humans, you are remaining silent, As if to say, “It is not yet time for me to teach the Dharma.”
“This monk’s verses express the real meaning of ‘brahmin.’ ”
If he falls, then all fall,
“Children of noble family, to find out where you are being led to, and from where you are being led, look with your equipoise!”
His mind is calm and free from anger. Come, let’s pay him homage!
“And you, my Lord, are still young. You are in the prime of your life.
It fondly believes that the painful is pleasant.
“Bhagavat, did Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara leave?”
And whatever eloquence, wisdom, and qualities I may have,
All the way to the hell of Ultimate Torment, The hell beings presented a horrible sight.
One should incant a cake of rice and
Now let a rain of nectar fall To soothe the thirst of those who for so long have had no protector.
not causing such beings to lose faith;
that some pass beyond suffering by means of the Hearers’ Vehicle,
and it was at that time that the youth Candraprabha attained this king of samādhis, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.
and experience the suffering of the hell realms all over again.
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings who are irreversible dispense the gift of the sacred doctrine, comprising the [various] scriptural categories,
vyava­rāja | mantakṣāya | jinajaya | jananimamunihara | anayaphala | guṇa­garbha | niyamasurināya | bupaśa | śataśapa | śamaśana | tathakama | śamaṅgu | mātuśiṣa | śama­cetanāya | kleṣāntasaṃśoṣaṇe svāhā |
Endowed with divine knowledge,
in this way arises this whole great heap of suffering.
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess ten such qualities are specialists in the discipline.
There are no changes and there are no conceptual notions regarding any [phenomena], up to and including all formative predispositions,
Bodhisattvas should seek out the wisdom of awakening and the knowledge of correct discrimination, and live without holding onto deceit, conceit, ideas, or concepts.
” After the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya had thus spoken,
the ḍākinīs Gaurī, Caurī, and so forth, drawn with potash of burnt pravāla fish ;
they are not stable in the transcendent perfection of generosity. They are not stable in the other transcendent perfections, up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Then, while still on his chariot, the prince extended one foot to the ground, and with his big toe he took hold of the elephant and hurled it a mile outside the city, over seven walls and seven moats.
Next, a petition is made to the preceptor in the following way.
they each go to walk in their own walkways.
“He always teaches the Dharma fearlessly
thronging with hundreds of honest women and filled with upstanding men,
The first Dharma gate that he manifested is called pure accomplishment. It refers to the four means of attracting disciples: generosity, kind talk, meaningful actions, and practicing what one preaches.
Well, Maitreya, such bodhisattva mahāsattvas correctly train
“Blessed One, were there no women in that buddha realm?”
Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings practice the transcendent perfection of tolerance accordingly they will swiftly perfect the transcendent perfection of tolerance.
“They all stood respectfully with palms together. I contemplated my goal and how to accomplish it:
“What is the elimination of pride? It is not objectifying or depending upon a self.
They emanate many other bodhisattvas Who have wisdom. {21}
those that cause illness for a day, for two days, for three days, for four days, or permanently;
Those among his sons who were the most diligent, powerful, glorious, and intelligent prostrated to the Bodhisattva, who was sitting at the supremely sacred seat of awakening.
clean, without stones, pebbles, or gravel, without chasms or cliffs, without drains or cesspools.
The same goes for the eyes and [the other non-existent sense organs], up to and including the mental faculty. The same goes for sights and [the other non-existent sense objects], up to and including mental phenomena.
It is not dishonoring your family.
If you ask why, it is because they do not consider the nature of sights.
full of lush leaves and clusters of blossoms,
These parasites have both beaks and mouths.
“If you think of a tathāgata who has passed into nirvāṇa, His image will appear in your mind.
will be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon by them!
“Whoever lives in these divine palaces
It has 1,800 ślokas in six fascicles,
and cannot comprehend even a single cause of the inconceivable liberation.
with regard to the inner body, continue to observe the physical body. Furthermore, they should do so without apprehending anything.
Being diligent in their undertakings, joyful, mentally supple,
When you have earnestly applied it,
“And moreover: All the powerful ones in the sky, the earth, and the waters,
moved by the power of the Dharma, and became receptive to the unborn nature of phenomena.
Are all standing here with hands in homage. They will have faith in this Dharma. {36}
After that protector has passed into nirvāṇa His Dharma will remain for twice as long.
They teach the Dharma for the sake of weariness, freedom from desire, and cessation, yet they observe no weariness, freedom from desire, or cessation.
They will swiftly awaken entirely and perfectly to unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.
Monks, the great Brahmā, who presides over the trichiliocosm, then made, in a single moment, all the worlds in the great trichiliocosm the same.
Now the mahārāja Virūḍhaka,
“Reverend, if a person who has fallen by committing any of the four actions leading to defeat during a previous ordination career
without syllables,
having definitive understanding of the teaching of emptiness,
Su­bhūti, it is because all phenomena are gathered in the expanse of reality.”
nor will they be able to quarrel with him!
That rainfall of flowers continued to fall until the nirvāṇa of that bhagavān,
When they have trained therein, they will attain omniscience.
the knot was untied,
the bodhisattva mahāsattva Gadgadasvara having attained hundreds of thousands of quintillions of samādhis, as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges River.
As a way to venerate the Bodhisattva, he manifested a cloud of gum benjamin and aloeswood above the sacred area and caused a rain of sandalwood dust to fall.
“Blessed One, with an altruistic motivation I have decided to give up any jealousy and stinginess,
Oṁ, Pādacalanā, svāhā!
They will not delight in those who recite poetry.
“At that time, Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, I was Bodhisattva Dānaśūra,
Make us turn in the direction of all collections of merits,
Shall we collect them or not?”
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, experience many facets of miraculous ability.
No person in the world is comparable to him. [127]
But there is no pride when the truth is seen. The Jina taught the truth that is without pride. {31}
‘Do not abandon the mind of compassion! O lord, do not become void, Lest my suffering body Becomes devoid of life!’
There is no way that I could attain unsurpassed and complete awakening without his knowledge.
“Su­bhūti, if the voice of the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas, endowed with its sixty aspects, were an entity and
‘May we too, by taking you, our preceptor, as our spiritual guide,
“There they will place their hands together in homage And they will praise the Muni, the supreme human.
He teaches them how to generate roots of virtue toward the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha, or else the meritorious character of the essence of giving, of ethical discipline, or meditation, whichever might be appropriate.
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, means to be ungraspable and to have no abode.
Senior Pūrṇa, in this regard, the transcendent perfection of generosity possessed by great bodhisattva beings is neither fettered nor liberated.
(3) perception of non-self,
Śāradvatī­putra, what is the mind of great bodhisattva beings, which is equal to the unequaled,
There is the meditative stability named Taintless Light of the Full Moon.
constrained by craving,
with his miraculous power, showed them thus the universe Abhirati and the Tathāgata Akṣobhya,
“Their patience being for the selfless nature of phenomena, Those who perceive selflessness have no kleśas.
Then the bodhisattvas and gods throughout the ten directions uttered an expression of joy:
When those tathāgatas have passed into nirvāṇa,
He or she will become a pure mass of wisdom.
The preceptor, [preceptor’s name], speaking on my, [ordinand’s name], behalf, seeks consent from the saṅgha for ordination.
Thereafter the Śākyas and King Śuddhodana placed five hundred young men by the eastern city gate to guard the Bodhisattva. All the men were armed, trained in combat, skilled in archery and javelin throwing, and were as strong as powerful wrestlers.
A multicolored lotus with eight petals,
It makes no difference whether it is delicious or has little taste.
Then the youth Candraprabha rose from his seat,
So the deva Maheśvara went and bowed down to the feet of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara and
Then, through the Blessed One’s doing, Brahmā, lord of the Sahā World, disappeared from the Brahma Realm together with six million eight hundred thousand gods of that same realm.
It teaches the definitive understanding of phenomena and is a gateway to the comprehension of all phenomena.
They will see the great river filled with pus and blood.
His merit will be great, and exceed the former.
The Blessed One is endowed with delicate, soft, and lustrous skin.
Similarly, it reveals the world comprising the twelve sense fields to be empty.
He is blessed by all thus-gone ones.
They shook, shook strongly, shook intensely;
once the element of consciousness abandons the body,
Homage to you, who sets free all pain!
Their palms are even.
Devoid of compassion, they drink blood.
But the earth is not moving or shaking. Know that all phenomena are like that. {8}
“Their ornaments are the auspicious signs And the eighty marks;
When Māra, the evil one, witnessed the Bodhisattva’s power and the displays that he performed, his mind was disturbed with jealousy and avarice.
“In the realm of the conditioned, there are no allies, No friends, no relatives, and no retinue.
with holdings both vast and extensive, with riches to rival Vaiśravaṇa.
Benefit many millions of beings. They kindly teach the Dharma to assemblies
“With their knowledge of phenomena actualized, they observe phenomena. At that point they are free from mindfulness and contemplation, and so they understand the intrinsic nature.
The gods and humans who heard this were delighted and thought, “Soon he shall become the god of humans and gods!”
He shows the way,
in relation to the knowledge of phenomena.”
“For those lacking in such particulars, who are immature, dense,
Inasmuch as we also wish to hear this very teaching on the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
Then, when he sees that they have become old, Covered in wrinkles, and their hair has turned white
And is, in accordance with the ritual, To be granted the secrets.
They have no desire for material gain through their reputation.
Are all not difficult to attain for someone Who has trained in this restraint of the body.’ {39}
And will have attained the state of pacification.
Camphor is the flesh-eating ḍākinī,
He is a place of rest for the persecuted,
“Divine being, moreover, when bodhisattvas understand the teaching of disengagement from all contemplation and are free of superimpositions, their diligence will have equanimity and they will truly observe that whatever exertion they might undertake is itself disengagement.
“They know that all phenomena have but a single meaning, And that is solely emptiness.
Encouraged even more by these verses, which emerged out of the sounds of the instruments through the blessings of the buddhas in the ten directions,
and the same goes for [all the other links of dependent origination] up to and including aging and death.
“Śāriputra, know them to be arrogant.
From a long way off, Kolita saw Upatiṣya approaching.
By calling them by their names, one will become the lord of the gods.
“Other than Devī, who is endowed with the most supreme of qualities And has the strength of ten thousand elephants,
Their hearers are boundless.
I then told him, ‘Benefactor of Beings, go wherever you please.’
the one who shines in all directions, the one who lights up the world all around, the one who faces all directions, the universal sun, the universal moon, the one beautiful in every way,
“Lord, what is this perfume, the likes of which I have never smelled before?”
Five hundred great śrāvakas will be next after Kauṇḍinya to attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood and
At that time, Mañjuśrī,
and who commit it to writing and have it committed to writing?
‘There is no possibility and no chance that
I shall helplessly go to Avīci, to Yama’s realm.
Therefore, they are all called ‘saṃyaksaṃbuddhas,’ ‘tathāgatas,’ and ‘buddhas.’
“Those bhikṣus and bhikṣunīs, Upāsakas and upāsikās
Threads of various colors should be tied to the passageways.
That, noble son, is how Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara completely ripens beings and teaches them the Dharma of nirvāṇa.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of action concerning the kleśas,
“I then pondered what was needed for contact to occur and what conditions contribute to the occurrence of contact.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of recitation. What are the four kinds of recitation?
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of pertinent speech. What are the four kinds of pertinent speech?
I have fulfilled my duties. I will not experience other rebirths apart from this one.’
Because he has realized equality in relation to dependent origination, he is the one who abides in emptiness.
These childish beings are swallowed, like ships by huge sea monsters.
training in the transcendent perfection of generosity?
All her ornaments fall off and are scattered about and carried off by water;
“They were disturbed by my words, and asked, ‘Great head merchant, is it true that they are the rākṣasīs who live on Siṃhala Island?’
Bhagavat, how did Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara enter the great Avīci hell?”
She has little attachment, anger, and ignorance;
Such is the bodhisattvas’ expertise concerning the conditioned.
“ ‘I shall manifest ponds and rivers
If you ask why, it is because there is nothing at all that could arise or cease, nothing that could be afflicted or purified, and nothing that could be retained or forsaken.
He will be honored by the world and its devas.
The postulant repeats this a second and a third time, but in the third recitation, says “instructor.”
“ ‘Then I, lord of the asuras, said to him,
With no root seen, they are at peace from the first;
I myself will never [speak about anyone in a defamatory way,] order someone to speak so, [or rejoice in anyone being so spoken about!’]
bodhisattva mahāsattavas as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges River attained the power of mental retention called a trillion convergences.
Compassionate one, you have the voice of Brahmā. For what reason did you smile? {92}
The king touches his head to the Bodhisattva’s feet. As they discuss many issues, the king says, “I will give you half my kingdom. Enjoy the sense pleasures here; I will give you all you need.”
“They are carried along on a river of actions, And their actions will have no end.
“ ‘While they prepared their very precious chariots and weapons,
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designation of physical forms as afflicted or purified constitutes a bodhisattva?”
From the sky above there has resounded The beautiful sound of drums without their being beaten.
The strength of ten bodhisattvas who have been definitively emerged for one thousand eons is the same as the strength of one bodhisattva who has been definitively emerged for ten thousand eons.
hand gestures, turbans, offering praise, and salutations;
“Those who wish to teach in some way The endless millions of sūtras
It neither bestows nor withholds the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline.
So too are feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness.
He taught the Dharma without seeking rewards.
“In the truth of suchness, It is the final end, yet it is without an end, This nondual teaching of the Dharma— That is what we call the wheel of Dharma.
They have eliminated without remainder Every conception of cessation and noncessation. {4}
“Reverend Saṅgharakṣita,” they replied, “the people of Jambudvīpa are skeptical, so you will not believe us.”
Thus, my name is Precious Mind, And he is Perfect Wealth.’
through their purposeful activity, and through their harmony.
These are the attributes of genuinely perfect buddhas?
The way he wore his robes and his offering bowl was delightful to see.
How is transcendent perfection of wisdom to be actualized due to the non-actualization [of all these other attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience?”
And give counsel to those without guide.
the piśāca Pīlupāla made of the wood of toothbrush tree;
The bodhisattva is empty of the bodhisattva.
or rivaling the brilliance of his wisdom.’
do you think, Su­bhūti, that this illusionist or this apprentice of an illusionist would have established any sentient beings on the path of the ten virtuous actions,
Before the Blessed One, millions of nāga girls burst out with their nāga cries.
some of them become bowls that hold ghee, and some of them become bowls that hold curds or milk, some of them become bowls that hold bad and impure substances.
that you have accepted to undergo such hardship in searching for food and clothing!
“Śāradvatī­putra, in this regard, there are some persons whose minds are without omniscience,
Since those who have been taught in this way, those who have been instructed in this way, and those who have been trained in this way have not attained omniscience,
Moreover, Venerable Lord, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom should investigate:
Because mind, mentality, and consciousness are not perceived. “Mañjuśrī, there is no dharma whatsoever that could be thoroughly cognized, dispelled, cultivated, or directly realized.
He is not a conventional expression;
‘This is my physical frame,’ and is aware of it.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ aspiration free of weariness.
Nīlakroṇṇa flower, as has been explained, Is known as the blue citraka.
“Noble sons, the Tathāgata’s intention is to send down a great Dharma rain,
“And those who with delight make stūpas of jinas From bricks or build them from clay,
Ānanda, I applied ardent diligence, and so I quickly realized supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
“Countless hundreds of thousands of musical instruments
He will not teach the sacred doctrine according to the notions that physical forms are a self and that they are not a self.
I, replete with the ten powers and emboldened by the four types of fearlessness, will perfectly roar out a great lion’s roar like the leader of the pack amid the assembly.
He walked with the stride of someone whose feet level off the terrain, be it sloping up or sloping down,
The completion of the millionfold universe can be aligned with the perfections of the bodhisattvas.
The Bodhisattva answered Māra, the evil one, with words that were firm, profound, vast, gentle, and sweet:
‘Conditioned states are impermanent,’ ‘Conditioned states are miserable,’ ‘Conditioned states are burning,’
What are these thirty-two ways? They are as follows:
It is so insubstantial, perishable, short-lived, painful, filled with diseases, and subject to changes.
They will all avoid rebirth as an asura,
neither living in the world nor abiding in liberation.
or the physical pains that are intolerable, oppressive, intense, dreadful, and life-threatening.
And thus they are established in the qualities of a buddha. Those are the benefits of being devoted to wisdom. {33}
King Prasenajit and the others, by means of many, great, more and more powerful supernatural powers, made an offering to the Tathāgata of five hundred divine garments.
and all the eldest of elder monks then also dismissed him with the snap of their fingers.
At that time, the Bhagavān then taught that topic in detail by speaking these verses:
The threefold practice is said to be essentially mantra, appearance, and reality.
saying, “Bhikṣus, in the past, in a time gone by,
they would become dedicated to maintaining the Dharma taught by the bhagavān tathāgata Raśmiprabhāsa.
With bountiful harvests, it is both delightful and populous. Indeed it is filled with people.
Perceiving the three realms to be ablaze with the shortcomings of existence, his wish was to free himself from them,
Since these people are brahmins, I should recite a verse the brahmins themselves take to be true.”
Those who have committed the fault of defaming the sacred doctrine
Why? Because the Tathāgata Jewel Moon Performing Enlightened Actions was the monk Vīradatta at that time. .
the love that is enlightenment because it is unity of experience;
great compassion because of never tiring of ripening all sentient beings.
Brahmā responded, “Blessed One, it is in the Brahma realm.”
One should steep bitter cucumber in goat’s urine for seven days.
this transcendent perfection of wisdom is the great transcendent perfection, possessed by great bodhisattva beings.”
May you erect the great sacrificial post of the Dharma!
At that time, too, the Blessed One’s complexion shone like a blossoming lotus garden,
(16) There is the meditative stability named Definitive Engagement in Precise Etymology. (17–18) There are the meditative stabilities named Entry into Designations and Observation of Spatial Directions.
performed a miraculous feat such that the Lord Tathāgata Meru­pradīpa­rāja, in the universe Merudhvaja, sent to this universe thirty-two hundred thousand thrones.
There were also eight thousand goddesses, who were adorned with loose hanging jewelry and carried bhadraṃkara gems. They went ahead of the Bodhisattva, cleansing his way.
“ ‘Therefore we are employing skill in methods Through a compilation of causes.
“ ‘The beauty of this bhikṣu Is like a painting in gold
He is not involved in the three worlds,
Even the names of the six outer sense fields do not exist internally, nor do they exist externally, and nor do they abide between these two.
“Bhagavān, therefore our thoughts were of nirvāṇa, the level of the arhat.
"དེ་མེ་ཏོག་དང་། མེ་ཏོག་ཕྲེང་གི་སྦྱིན་པ་དེ་སྦྱིན་<tWhen practicing generosity by offering flowers and flower garlands,
Because of their discernment, their generosity is free of flaws, stains, or obstacles.
Then the Thus-Gone One announced to venerable Mahākāśyapa, venerable Ānanda, and the bodhisattva great being Maitreya:
Therefore, Bhagavān, Tathāgata, Arhat, perfectly enlightened Buddha,
And because those friends of the Thus-Gone One speak genuinely and tell no lies,
“As neighboring armies present no imminent danger, tomorrow we shall know more.”
So instead, I went on to think that the prince Sundarananda would conquer and become king of the world.
For those who have overcome the kleśas, Enlightenment is not hard to attain. {44}
“Father, for one who is set in the midst of a great army, What is the use of excessive fear?
“Su­bhūti, these constitute the eighty minor marks.
and, kneeling on their right knees, with palms placed together recited these verses to the bhikṣu:
“Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have completely pure physical conduct
leading a following of a hundred thousand quintillion kumbhāṇḍas,
Padmaśrīgarbha, King Glorious Splendor also had seventy-six thousand pleasure groves for his enjoyment, while each of his sons had ten thousand pleasure groves.”
the bhikṣus rejoiced and
The Blessed One replied to Senior Ānanda as follows: “Ānanda, it is so! It is just as you have said.
Similarly, the transcendence of the sensory element of the eyes, the sensory element of sights, and the sensory element of visual consciousness is always without fear.
They are a light for beings And they are not afraid of the lower existences. {37}
‘I will give a large dowry and take her as my bride,’ said the brahmin. “
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will attain extraordinary vision
“Always place your hands together in homage, As you would for the Lord of Jinas, the Self-Arisen One,
the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha named Siṃhadhvaja.
ontinually teaching sentient beings in this world about the elixir of the gods, praising its sweet fragrance, purity, excellence, exquisite taste, attractive feel, and so on.
The strength of ten clever maned lions is the same as the strength of one strongman.
Once I have attained final nirvāṇa, should I bring to final nirvāṇa those sentient beings who have not attained final nirvāṇa?
The Blessed One replied, “Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom do not dream dreams and they are not dreamers of dreams
They should not form concepts about things being meritorious or unmeritorious, whether they are immoral or moral, conditioned or unconditioned, mundane or supramundane.
When he had accepted it he divided it into two.
The Hayagrīva chakra destroys the aggregates.
A crowd of bystanders saw the two and asked,
By the touch of the vajra their bodies released the juice
and is able to allay unhappiness or enlist others to do so wherever he is, should wards or apprentices feel sad.
Similarly, the transcendence of sights is not sights,
Thus, knowing the value, they serve spiritual teachers, attend to them, venerate them, and listen to their teachings.
do not see anything apart from the expanse of reality.
Of a hundred and sixty million bhikṣus with higher cognitions, Who had completely attained the power of the discernments,
One made a footrest.
They give the levels of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas a wide berth, and approach unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
He is known as the fire-like one because he burns away all disturbing emotions, having given up all pretense.
and sat down in order of seniority.
Without harming any living creature and always with pure feelings,
So is he Rāhu, an image of the vajra holder, the sun, or the moon?
Great King, the five aggregates are “painted” by one’s own karma. As an analogy, O Great King, there is no painter who paints the peacock’s five-colored tail, and neither is there any paint involved.
[How can] they be without enmity toward any being and thus become free of anger?
Finally one becomes a thus-gone one, a worthy one, a perfectly awakened one, free from all unvirtuous dharmas and endowed with all the virtuous ones.
When the people of Rājagṛha saw me, they were amazed and
“Resorting to the true utterance of the Three Jewels, Give an oblation to the bhūtas.
Noble son, although we know of the various areas of Jambu­dvīpa by different names, still they are all included within Jambu­dvīpa.
the gods of the Catur­mahā­rāja­kāyika realm, along with the gods of the Trayas­triṃśa realm,
Even if you could destroy Mount Meru with your stare,
This is the expanse devoid of accepting and rejecting.
It will be filled there with many devas and humans, beautified by many hundred thousands of śrāvakas, and adorned by many hundred thousands of bodhisattvas.
‘Come, son of enlightened heritage or daughter of enlightened heritage!
Whether walking, standing, or sitting, Whether seated on a cushion, or lying on a bed, I never give rise to weariness.
We grew up together playing in the dirt with our peer, the noble Saṅgharakṣita.
Just so, the element of consciousness carries that volition to one or another kind of sentient being
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is the genuinely perfect buddha.”
There you will rest and attain relief from misery.
Having annihilated all bodies, they crush incorrect thinking and bring about the inconceivable, complete transcendence of the world and the excellent merit without form.
If it does not begin to rain, they should be washed with wine and tormented with the fire of khadira wood.
Even though they may have maintained ethical discipline, they have not conceptualized it.
When the six sources of perception cease, contact ceases.
Because this supreme, highest enlightenment is not attained.
To those who recite in this way, Ākāśagarbha grants mindfulness and entrance into meditative concentration.
{1} “Lord of humans, speaker of the truth, preeminent among humans,
It is distinguished by an understanding of the non-duality of Dharma and non-Dharma.
displaying the form of Māra to sentient beings who are to be trained by the form of Māra;
Rejecting my care for the body I will accomplish benefit for beings. {9}
mastery of birth, as one displays birth in all realms of the world;
If you ask why, it is because they do not consider the nature of the truth of the path.
then at that time, young man, those bodhisattva mahāsattvas have become skilled in the wisdom of the nonexistent nature of all phenomena.
Abiding in the three realms, one becomes The husband of all women, the supreme lord.
Buddhas riding in various vehicles— These are seen by the ones who are compassionate by nature.
It blocks the orifice of the one with the bell.
eclipsing even the sun and the moon—so well known for their great miraculous ability, great strength, and great power—to the point of invisibility.
“Bhagavān, if the evil Māra deliberately tries to make this Dharma discourse decline,
that involve reference points.
When the Jina placed his foot on the gateway’s threshold, Hundreds of bulls lowed with joy.
And that sound of Dharma occurs to pacify all misfortunes, troubles, and afflictions of all sentient beings.
“In that way, for many endless eons I held the Dharma of the jinas.
They went to King Mahāpadma and said,
and offer sweet-smelling flowers in the three periods of the day.
Thinking that he should set out to gather many goods, he rounds up many people and, without fear or panic,
“Śāradvatī­putra,” he replied, “it is just as you have said!
a Prajñāpāramitā text,
I shall forsake the kingdom and practice celibacy.
When he said the letter ū, out came the statement: ‘The world is of little substance (ūnasattvaṃ jagat).’
in the same way, Venerable Lord, although great bodhisattva beings practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom, they do not think, ‘I am near or far from the level of the śrāvakas or the level of the pratyekabuddhas and I am approaching unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment!’
This entire realm shook terrifyingly In six different ways. {3}
The four ways of attracting students are gateways to the light of the Dharma,
do not impose a narrow path upon those who aspire to a great path;
Whoever’s name one recites while facing the sun, one will bring that person into one’s presence.
some goddesses were holding vessels of powdered black aloeswood and sandalwood;
and then instantaneously traveled to this Sahā world, arriving as quickly as it takes a strong person to extend and retract his arm.
“He is the chief king, the lord of the world. The world makes offerings to him, the source of the bhikṣus’ Dharma.
I would not be able to fully awaken to unexcelled and complete buddhahood.’
“This will be the supreme offering to the buddhas. During the future dreadful times
he understands how their minds have to be trained.
Then the Bhagavān, knowing Brother Śāriputra had made this request for the third time,
Thereupon the Bhagavān taught extensively in verse what he had previously said about the samādhi doorway taught by many buddhas.
Therefore, if beginner bodhisattvas who have gained this hard-to-achieve human birth live with a spiritual friend and wish to enter the Mahāyāna, yet
He then said to them, ‘You have just conceived the spirit of enlightenment.
Where he establishes a residence And possesses the five sensory pleasures.
they will increase, enrich, and expand those virtuous factors that are conducive to the transcendence of suffering, the accumulations on the path of awakening, and the perfection of the aspects of awakening.
freedom from unexamined neutrality;
They have also come to venerate Mañjuśrī and rejoice in this Dharma teaching.
“Why is it the subjugation of adversaries by those who have the Dharma?
Natural joy
When the Tathāgata teaches the Dharma there
Many merchants come to see him, And through many activities pay him service.
“Great King, you are so fortunate to have a son whose eloquent self-confidence is so swift, nimble, subtle, and potent in the face of questions.”
and in the same vein, the transcendence of [all the other links of dependent origination], up to and including aging and death, is not aging and death [and the rest].
Things smeared with this mixture will glow at night.
Examining things by means of their own insight,
They will always have great, unshakable strength And a majesty that outshines that of kings. {41}
Rather, bodhisattvas are born in civilized lands, among people of sharp and clear faculties.
This completes “The Sūtra of the Wheel of Dharma.”
But turning them away from such [indulgence], the bodhisattvas then commit them to ethical discipline.
will become wise in the teaching of the inconceivable Dharma of the Buddha.
Previously, during the time of the Thus-Gone One Dīpaṃkara, there was no virtuous practice I had not already performed.
in the same way, they will have fewer ideas about food.
Mañjuśrī Kumārabhuta and the bodhisattva great beings each sat down on their own miraculously emanated seat.
They have crossed over to the other side. They have reached dry land.
Those who do not know that way, Those focused on perceptions, will perish. {77}
which uproots saṃsāra and the five existences; which brings the hells and afflictions to an end;
With excellent lights and incense, Always make excellent offerings to the unequaled one. {i}
The Blessed One is endowed with a crown protuberance.
“ ‘They are harmless and empty.
“Venerable Lord! This transcendent perfection of wisdom is profound and it is hard to aspire to it.”
With their sweet and fragrant aromas. Protect yourself, and do not leave. {9}
There were in all those worlds the unfortunate existences in between worlds where there was complete darkness.
like a wish-fulfilling tree for those who have achieved the meditative concentration of brave progression.
He is skilled in teaching the Dharma with its infinite modalities within the uniform ultimate.
“Blessed One,” the bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkam­bhin inquired, “to which sentient beings do the buddhas and bodhisattvas then teach the Dharma?”
This vehicle is equal to space.
Grasping at matter, immature ones dissect and construct.
at that time, in that era, in the Vinirbhoga eon, in the world realm Mahāsaṃbhavā,
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities follow the Dharma.
and will also attain non-obscuration with regard to all phenomena.
In the past, I had little wisdom and little insight.
his mind must have been impure.
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess these seven qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
This completes “The Practice Manual of Noble Tārā‌ Kurukullā.”
proceeded to teach the Dharma he needed to hear in order to fully realize each of the Noble Ones’ four truths.
One should serve to a woman the root of vernonia together with the five impurities.
Similarly, although virtue and non-virtue reside in the body, neither is visible in the body.
‘Oṁ, enemy of snakes! Destroyer of Vāmana, phaṭ!’
The Blessed One replied, “Su­bhūti, it is so. It is so!
The Blessed One replied, “It is so, Śāradvatī­putra! It is just as you have said.
Whoever is unmistaken in terms of the ultimate does not form concepts or thoughts.
Just as were the perfect bodhisattvas and the perfect environment belonging to the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, perfect Buddha Samanta­raśmyabhyudgata­śrī­kūta­rāja,
However, Su­bhūti, the gods of the Catur­mahā­rāja­kāyika realm do not reciprocally perceive the divine clairvoyance of the bodhisattvas, nor do the gods up to and including those of the Akaniṣṭha realm perceive it.
The world with its gods, humans, and demigods will only bring them pain.
Frying these in sesame oil will make one the enthraller of people.
There were no longer any villages, towns, market towns, districts, countries, or capitals.
and his inspired speech would still continue.
Should train in this kind of restraint of the body And become a shrine for the entire world. {32}
would the expanse of reality not be disrupted?”
“Monks, I will lay out the appropriate conduct of a monk ward or apprentice.
The intrinsic nature of all such actions is voidness,
you will be afflicted and futile in your efforts to attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment,
Then, Brahmā, master of the world, asked the Blessed One,
Through this skill in means, though they may traverse all the world systems in the ten directions, numerous as the sands of the River Ganges,
Noble son, the light rays came from Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara, who is in the palace of Bali, the lord of the asuras.
So it is that the bodhisattvas who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom should not appropriate or become fixated on physical forms;
In the same vein, the cultivation of the transcendent perfection of wisdom is the non-cultivation of [the fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
and yet we do not understand these explanations, statements, teachings, interpretations, elucidations, instructions, and expressions of the transcendent perfection of wisdom, which Senior Su­bhūti has just given.”
It has not been revealed so that the sensory element of the nose, the sensory element of odors, and the sensory element of olfactory consciousness might be grasped or not grasped.
i.e., ones such as ignorance, craving, karma and consciousness.
Just as the buddhas of the three times rejoiced in unsurpassable merit, I whose name is…. also rejoice in all worldly and beyond-worldly merit
At another time when he was reciting the Vedas with his father, he asked,
beating, threatening, severing, impaling,
“ ‘It is seeking the ten strengths, It is the omen of the coming of buddha wisdom,
There he will be born upon a lion throne in the center of a lotus where the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Amitāyus, encircled by an assembly of bodhisattvas, lives, is present, and remains.
It is a wheel that is unconfused regarding the realm of phenomena, a wheel that is undisturbed concerning authentic limit.
with the light of wisdom they dispel all darkness;
Homage to Tathāgata Indra­ketu­dhvaja­rāja­śrī.
If one plays dice, one will win.
Before him were assembled devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans who were gazing upon him, and
In that way the dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣus Cannot be shaken by any opponent. {31}
For those drowning in the pitch black darkness of ignorance and those tormented by their negative views, he is like the sun.
These childish beings are carried away, like wooden logs taken off by the river.
How do they have knowledge of themselves? What does their knowledge of the world consist of?
The escort can turn back now.”
I wish to praise him and offer him worship.”
and with a gentle and pleasing voice, a uniquely superior vocabulary, and a continuity of words and letters,
In reply to the bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkam­bhin, the Blessed One said,
Just as the Tathāgata sees the various beings of an impure nature who are to be converted by means of parinirvāṇa or by relics, who have no faith in the Tathāgata, and who are irreverent toward the master, so in each such case the Tathāgata displays his parinirvāṇa.
fear of evil,
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is non-departing.”
he is the One with Pure White Teeth.
They destroy the embryos of children In the first week, or the first trimester. They cause miscarriage, And ensure that no placenta grows.
Then, the venerable Śāriputra said to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
Friends, all co-producing factors are without self!
they become inclined toward the Dharma,
From their camps, they sacked merchant caravans traveling between Magadha and Kosala.
They had been consecrated with the anointment of the peerless gnosis of the Buddha.
When practicing generosity by offering residences,
None of these constructions exist.
Bhikṣus, the guide who has skill in methods, knowing that the people wish to turn back, thinks,
Come now, tell me quick, what did you hear or witness?
Other bodhi trees were made of all sorts of jewels and were one trillion leagues high.
When contact ceases, feeling ceases.
Ānanda, as soon as the man drank it, his illness was cured.
In fact the bodhisattva great beings all thought that they had arrived in the Jewel World.
Who with the strength of knowledge has the higher cognitions of the sages, And who has skill in methods of speech and knows the definitions of words. {31}
Similarly, the transcendence of the sensory element of the ears, the sensory element of sounds, and the sensory element of auditory consciousness; the sensory element of the nose, the sensory element of odors, and the sensory element of olfactory consciousness;
“Śāriputra, the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas are endowed with the wonderful dharmas of the strength of the unimpeded, unobstructed vision of wisdom,
don the saffron-colored robes, and with true faith leave their homes and become homeless.
for those who have mistaken the precepts, like the opening of their eyes;
They teach various kinds of Dharma, continually teaching the humans who live in Jambudvīpa.
Still far greater than this is the quantity of merit gathered when the seven steps are taken by a bodhisattva who is immersed in altruism, without hypocrisy or pretense, striving to liberate beings, engrossed in great compassion, and established in great love.
Head in hands, he sat and sat, absorbed in thought.
Truly knows the enlightenment Of the bhagavāns, of the buddhas.
I do desire it, Bhagavat;
We pay homage to you with palms joined! Homage to you, king of Dharma!
It should ooze fragrant fluids from its temples and have a glorious body.
If one consumes it for just one month
Devas and humans never tire of gazing In that way upon this dharmabhāṇaka. {26}
These are called unconditioned phenomena.
At that time, Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta, who was seated upon a lotus that had a thousand petals and was the size of a cartwheel,
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities ensure that the mind of awakening is not lost.
Similarly, they will hear the analysis of the meaning of [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
This heart mantra of Locanā will remove all fear.
“When I had heard this sublime samādhi I experienced a noble, nonworldly joy.
I possess all forms, there is no doubt.
Ānanda, one should never attempt to measure the thus-gone ones.
You burn up all bad karma like a fire burns a forest, just through being seen.
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Mahā­sthāma­prāpta;
“ ‘I will give beings who are veiled by the darkness of delusion and ignorance A vision of many hundred doors to the Dharma.
Alas, my refuse rags are infested with lice!
Conclusion of the twenty-fourth chapter, “The Inconceivable Tathāgata.”
Misled by demons, this priest developed immense pride, and so he did not make visits to the Thus-Gone One. On top of this, so overcome was he with pride, he would stay around spiritual teachers, both priests and laypeople, to fight, quarrel, and dispute with them.
You, the Guide, practiced for millions of eons As numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges.
Do not go anywhere else.
When he saw this monk, the Bodhisattva turned to the charioteer and asked him the following,
he and the gods all settled down on the seats that had been arranged for them.
while the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas also originated from them,
Moreover, it might cause those non-Buddhist carakas and parivrājakas,
He remembered the former lives of himself and others in the greatest detail,
It is hard to live the holy life. It is hard to live in solitude.
“Bhagavān, how does the bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara move around in this Sahā world realm?
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ excellent wisdom that is not temporary consist in?
If I were to engage in that, there would be no benefit to me or to others, And I delight in being useful to both myself and to others.
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, how is it without outflows, and how is it without clinging?
then the seconds, minutes, hours, days, nights, seasons, and years will be imperceptible as well.
What are those ten? They have full knowledge of the discipline, full knowledge of the way of discipline, full knowledge of the profound discipline, full knowledge of the detailed discipline, full knowledge of what is right and wrong, full knowledge of natural evils, full knowledge of prohibited evils, full knowledge of the circumstances that led to the regulations for individual liberation, full knowledge of the discipline of the hearers, and full knowledge of the discipline of the bodhisattvas.
"བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔས་ནི་སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ་འདུད་པས་ང་རྒྱལ་<tBodhisattvas should bow before all beings and overcome their pride.
Divine One, know first that our place of work is completely destroyed.
‘This is the ripening of actions I did in the past. I created this karma, so now it ripens on me.
Mātṛnandā is in the form of a cat.
Cast your gaze upon the great family with whom you will live. Observe the precious, exalted family among whom you will take birth, For this is where you will manifest the conduct of a bodhisattva.
Even the names of the formless meditative absorptions do not exist internally, nor do they exist externally, and nor do they abide between these two.
Then at that time the daughter of Sāgara, the king of the nāgas, appeared before them.
they serve all sentient beings with physical acts of loving kindness.
When it is in that condition, It means the water is not far.
They do not inspire beings to an enlightenment that is other than consciousness.
“ ‘Be my refuge, holder of beautiful lotuses. “
Has no attachment to saṃsāra.
‘You should place your trust in this Dharma discourse called “Complete Embrace by all Buddhas,” which praises inconceivable qualities.
They obtain from all the buddhas the higher cognitions of the buddhas
Venerable Lord, if the notion of the sensory element of the eyes as a self is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of the sensory element of the eyes as a non-self become a bodhisattva?
Was not thrilled, and did not trust these words.
where you will find the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa taking his meal.
All these they dedicate, making common cause with all sentient beings, toward unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
“The king of nāgas can see your splendor, Since it illumines even his abode.
Then when my body was destroyed I fell into the terrible Avīci Hell.
Thus concludes “The Chapter on Going Forth.”
not focusing on the transcendence of suffering although the mind has gone beyond suffering, but instead pursuing, reaching, and merging with awakening.
For she has abstained from sexual activity for thirty-two months.
Have for a long time been teaching this highest meaning. {18}
One gains power over everything within the whole of the three worlds
Of apprehended objects and apprehending subjects,
to a person who first escapes his own threatened execution and then returns to the place where execution was threatened, telling the executioners, ‘Don’t kill anyone else! Kill me instead!’
“Senior Su­bhūti, as I understand the meaning of your words, physical forms are non-arising. Similarly, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are non-arising.
There is no greater deception, And no greater delusion,
who does not distinguish between the phenomena of distraction and the phenomena of meditation,
If you ask why, Su­bhūti, it is because they will lack certain circumstances and lack certain opportunities—that is to say, there are no circumstances in which great bodhisattva beings who do not lack the transcendent perfection of wisdom will turn away from omniscience.
Who hear them becomes irreversible. {256}
training in the transcendent perfection of tolerance
The Great Bodhisattva was followed by a fourfold retinue, like the moon by the four continents, and he was endowed with the jewels of the seven branches of awakening.
Having mastered all the roots of virtue,
die among gods only to be reborn among hell realm beings,
They should always avoid bhikṣunīs Whose behavior is talking and laughing.
Should any bud float against the stream,
There we dwell, surrounded by hundreds of thousands of girls, fully embroiled in the five sense pleasures.
What is their investigation?”
Upon that which is infused with the sun of sulfur One should recite the mantra,
It does not dwell on physical forms.
“Since hundreds of buddha realms are filled with beautiful golden light,
By offering medicine, one will be affected by few illnesses.
At that time, even though great bodhisattva beings become equipoised in the meditative stability of emptiness as a gateway to liberation, as far as the realization of the finality of existence is concerned,
I will now explain about The purities that purify everything.
form aspiration prayers,
As they exert themselves in diligence, they praise themselves and disparage others.
Nārāyaṇa, bodhisattvas who practice in this way are carrying out the bodhisattva practices.
“Why would I not believe what I have seen with my own eyes?”
When consciousness ceases, there is the cessation of name and form.
reveals and cleanses all negative actions and all stains.
He attained the knowledge of the joy and happiness that is described by the noble ones,
a yogin Should visualize my form, With one-pointed mind, day and night.
And so destroy the enemies, the afflictions; rend asunder the net of views;
The cymbals and musical instruments of gods and humans sounded without being played by anyone.
I will give away my flesh to those who want flesh, my blood to those who want blood, my marrow to those who want marrow, all parts of my body to those who want them, and even my head to those who want a head.
His fellow student then also rejoiced, as did the saṅgha,
Also, while they lack understanding and perception, they will hear talk about the path of enlightenment, regarding the nature of things that is emptiness, signlessness, and aspirationlessness.
“Moreover, Mañjuśrī, that great Brahmā, without falling down from that Brahmā Palace,
Then the bodhisattva mahāsattva Pradānaśūra said to the Bhagavān,
“Su­bhūti, is the fruit of entering the stream,
“So too function the twelve links of dependent origination.
They are the inconceivably numerous mantra words concerning the composite,
When not involved in stinginess, they are irreproachable.
Joy is the action ḍākinī,
but the reflection in the mirror possesses no form.
one should know that they are endowed with skillful means. If you were to ask why,
“Come here, brahmin.
and they will burn therein for many hundreds of years, for many thousands of years, for many hundreds of thousands of years, and for many hundreds of billion trillion years.
some goddesses were holding vessels of powdered flowers of māndārava, mahāmāndārava, pāruṣaka, mahāpāruṣaka, mañjuṣaka, mahāmañjuṣaka, roca, mahāroca, cakra, mahācakra, sarvacakra, atyartha­śobhati­cakra, candra, mahācandra, atyartha­śobhati­candra, paramacandra, sthāla, and mahāsthāla
To see you once in a thousand lives is rare— Today, sage, seeing you has proved fruitful.
The arhat ward wondered, “If my preceptor was ethical, learned, and attracted a following with the Dharma,
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva might establish the sentient beings of all the world spheres in the ten directions in the state of one who follows the Dharma.
Even while frightened of existence, Due to craving after existence, beings continue to pursue existence.”
“What happened?” “We were sacked by bandits.”
“He taught this samādhi of peace In which there is no human, soul, or person:
“Just as an illusionist, in order to trick others, Will produce many illusory manifestations,
If one pierces its feet, one will stop him moving.
“Gentlemen, though I have done much for this king, he has not taken care of me.
through skill in means they dispense their generosity toward sentient beings, having acquired the five desirable attributes of the senses for the sake of sentient beings.
“Mañjuśrī, when some water is taken as a point of reference for an unreal cloud
Are you not a eunuch? Are you not a paṇḍaka?
Monks, this is how you should train.”
That makes you remain cross-legged For seven days at the king of trees?
“You should all be stable and mindful. You should all remain in a state of concentration.
‘Residing at the seat of awakening, I shall fully awaken to true and complete buddhahood’;
The entire world having been satiated,
nor do they apprehend the world system of form and nor do they apprehend the world system of formlessness.
He perceived that he had, in that very life, actualized the unsurpassed aim of the holy life
It is accurate knowledge, the complete knowledge of the three realms. Is the Jina teaching this samādhi? {110}
“Monks, at that time the monk Śāriputra was the brahmin’s daughter Sūkṣmā.
“When one stays alone, Living in the forest,
Having heard on this day such a Dharma Being imparted directly from the Sugata, Thousands of millions of beings, The Guide of the World’s own progeny, are filled with joy.
They no longer feel any pleasure in talking, and give up thoughts of craving, ill will, and malice, and thoughts about gods.
“Śāradvatī­putra, the ‘five psycho-physical aggregates’ comprise
If the ordinand says his parents are deceased, he is asked: “Are you not a bondsman?
Then the Licchavi Vimalakīrti said to the venerable elder Śāriputra,
The strength of ten ordinary elephants is the same as the strength of one fearsome elephant.
Likewise, while the Bodhisattva was residing in the womb of his mother, the glory, brilliance, and color of the Bodhisattva illuminated the south, the west, and the north, below and above. In fact all the ten directions were bathed in light for several miles in each direction.
Noble son, through genuine insight bodhisattvas examine and abandon the unvirtuous and negative qualities that pertain to the body.
You are the protector, the refuge, the only resort of beings here!”
they do not preoccupy themselves with indolence.
“Chanda, the time has come.”
they transform from one to many, from many to one,
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess these ten qualities recollect their former lives.
Maudgalyāyana replied,
Your gait is like the walk of an elephant in rut—may we walk like you!”
A monk then went to where the Blessed One was, pressed his palms together and bowed, appealing to him in these words:
and do so without apprehending anything.
“Protect against epidemics with the kuśa grass pock.
“All phenomena are by nature Exactly the same as nirvāṇa.
Su­bhūti, because the applications of mindfulness are not entities,
Close the gates to the three lower realms,
There is no clear realization either, and there are no [realized beings], up to and including genuinely perfect buddhas.”
“Śāradvatī­putra! These great bodhisattva beings have venerated five hundred buddhas,
People move out of his way, only to follow behind him.
he thought, “As far as culinary pleasures are concerned, these ascetic sons of the Śākya have it good.
those intimidated by fear of the world are in the power of forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and textures, which do not disturb those who are free from fear of the passions inherent in the constructive world.
The ten powers, the unique qualities, the distinct realizations,
Bodhisattvas recognize this correctly.
“For you will not be able to accomplish the auspicious teachings By the mere sound of your voice and speech. Please adopt the right conduct
“Su­bhūti, if you ask how this transcendent perfection of wisdom is established by means of inconceivable deeds,
I am telling the truth.
Colophon. Translated, revised, and finalized by the Indian Upādhyāya Surendrabodhi and the chief editor Lotsawa Bandé Nanam Yeshé Dé.
The eighth great merit results in becoming Brahmā from the Mahā-Brahmā Heaven.
it is a different matter when even one single bodhisattva is prophesied for unexcelled and perfect awakening.
“Śāriputra, this buddhafield is always thus pure,
One thousand bows is considered one earshot in Magadha.
“They will sit upon a seat, with a footstool, That is covered with various pieces of calico.
The god Lord of Peace and Calm said to the Blessed One,
I am given food mixed with poison.
Alternatively, one should engrave the mantra with a chisel on a stone tablet and bury it.
[17] It is not accumulating karma. [18] It is not paying attention to the internal āyatanas.
They never perceive as frightening
Su­bhūti, there is nothing at all in which great bodhisattva beings should not train.
It was sparkling with the light of many gems and jewels.
Having spoken these words, the goddess scattered divine flowers over the Bodhisattva and disappeared.
At that time, the Blessed One recounted the following to the bodhisattva great being Delighted by Victory:
It does not have such thoughts as, ‘You can take from my roots but not my trunk,’ or ‘
The wishes of the king, too, became fulfilled.
“Monks, life is appealing, singled out, considered valuable, pleasant, and highly appreciated by everyone.
and likewise, when they engage in union with the emptiness of feelings, the emptiness of perceptions, the emptiness of formative predispositions, and the emptiness of consciousness, they are said to engage in union with the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
oils to those who wanted ointments,
Venerable Lord, if the notion of the sensory element of the eyes as arising is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of the sensory element of the eyes as ceasing become a bodhisattva?
in the same vein as before, down to, ‘[they will] also approach omniscience.
“You with noble marks who benefits others, here is your horse of virtuous pedigree.
Noble son, in the world Flower Origin dwelled the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Arisen from Flowers.
You may proudly assume That you can crush with your hands All gods, demigods, and gandharvas, Along with the earth, the mountains, and the oceans.
to heed what he reveres, and told him:
“During that time, they practiced appropriately And then they became buddhas in many worlds.
“Blessed One, is there no difference between the intrinsic nature of a thus-gone one’s body and that of a bodhisattva?” inquired the bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkam­bhin.
My friend, I have given you that precious jewel.
He embraced suffering And therefore shines like gold.
and those who have entered the stream will all rejoice in [the qualities of] those [sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage].
This family should be steadfast in its friendships and safeguard the lives of all the beings throughout the animal kingdom.
But a person who has done wrong finds no serenity,
The bodhisattva Puṣya declared,
some mansions were made of danuskari flowers; some mansions were made of māndārava and mahāmāndārava flowers;
This is merely an example, for in reality nothing could compare to it.
“Lord, it is wonderful that this food accomplishes the work of the Buddha!”
The monks asked the Blessed One about it, and he said to the monks,
Likewise, it applies to the sensory element of the eyes, and, in the same vein, to [all the other sensory elements], up to and including the sensory element of mental consciousness.
With swollen bellies and vase-shaped ears, With hanging ears, or no ears, With long arms and long ears, Long noses and long hands,
“Why bother pulling off the branches, petals, and leaves while leaving the root?
Then take barley grains and white mustard seeds, Combined with clarified butter, And pour them into the fire.
Similarly, the emptiness of the sensory element of the ears, the sensory element of sounds, and the sensory element of auditory consciousness is not the sensory element of auditory consciousness [and the aforementioned sensory elements].
If they were thinking of Avalokiteśvara Not even a pore would be harmed.
They will smell the scents of the bodies of men and of women.
and the defining characteristic of [the truth of] the path is emancipation.
The Buddha’s voice reaches the noble-born.
all those sentient beings in the world systems of the great trichiliocosm, as many as they are, who have become followers through faith,
They abide in the characteristics of the essential nature of all views.
And with that, he sat down at the base of a tree, his legs crossed, his body erect, and rested in mindfulness.
‘I have become a sentient being of the hell realms.
And sees all this multitude of bodhisattvas And this fourfold assembly,
“Divine son, relatively, bodhisattva great beings do fear disturbing emotions.
Who have served him well and been praised by the Sugata, Whose defilements have ceased and who are in their last bodies. {8}
Then at that time Brother Ānanda rose from his seat, removed his robe from one shoulder, and, kneeling on his right knee,
“Mañjuśrī, so what does that Thus-gone One wish to see abandoned through his teaching the Dharma?”
I have been before other beings And taught them this highest enlightenment.
What is the transcendent perfection of wisdom?
Victorious One, your wisdom is infinite—please explain why.
for it leads to the attainment of the eye of Dharma.
Subdues the fox and all other ordinary animals,
The monk will think, ‘I am disparaging the discipline!
Neither you nor I know even the names Of the scripts and letters That this moon among men knows.
perfect the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline which is without defining characteristics.
the arising of anything [which has no limits] is utterly non-apprehensible because it does not endure and does not disintegrate.
Attained the patience that corresponded to those words, And were established in irreversible progress toward buddha wisdom. {130}
undertake training while observing production and disintegration with respect to the five psycho-physical aggregates,
there are two reasons:
meditate on the singular nature of forms.
Any sentient being who holds this Dharma teaching in their hands or hears it, and subsequently feels devotion for it, will give rise to roots of virtue before ten thousand buddhas.”
They who possess this supreme, stainless samādhi Would voice sounds that were even more numerous. {10}
“One of the eight hundred students yearned for gain, yearned for honor, yearned for prestige, and desired fame,
He becomes sick when they are sick and is cured when they are cured.
“And if they were in unison to contemplate Just a fraction of my superior Dharma
Whoever desires the mother of the sugatas Will attain this mother of the jinas.
“After Ghoṣeśvara there was a buddha, A jina who was named Ghoṣānana.
Manifestly perfect buddhahood has not been attained from any quarter.
The domain of the cultivation of the aptitude for mental quiescence and transcendental analysis, where one does not fall into extreme quietism, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
All formative predispositions are illusion-like.
or, in the same vein, [concepts of other postulated subjects], up to and including the concept of a knower;
“Young man, that is what the teaching of samādhi is said to be.
Monks, as he started to move, the Bodhisattva’s body began to shine with a brilliant and dazzling light that surpassed any other celestial light. This unprecedented light illuminated all the vast and enormous realms of the great trichiliocosm.
They are based on and belong to Jambu­dvīpa.
Kāmadeva as Vajrānaṅga.
When this queen of incantations called Destroyer of the Great Trichiliocosm was being expounded, this great trichiliocosm shook, rumbled, trembled, and quaked in six ways.
with his two heels pressed to a grass mat on bricks so as to relieve pressure on the nerves.
The bodhisattva Apratihatacakṣu declared,
Their gait is that of a lion.
“ ‘My sons will not save me, nor my family, Nor my ministers, nor the slaves at my feet.
This concludes “Facing Everywhere: The Teaching of the Miracles of Avalokiteśvara,” the twenty-fourth chapter of the Dharma teaching of “The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.”
Rather, having understood all the deeds of Māra, they overwhelm and disperse them.
“Even if someone knew how to reduce All the worlds into their smallest particles,
Then Senior Śāradvatī­putra, Senior Mahā­maudgalyāyana, Senior Mahākauṣṭhila, Senior Mahākātyāyana, Senior Pūrṇa­maitrāyaṇī­putra, and Senior Mahākāśyapa, along with many hundreds of thousands of bodhisattvas, addressed Senior Su­bhūti as follows:
Great King, (70) Prince Sarvārthasiddha has a perfect tuft of hair between his brows.
“Beings are blind in the darkness of their stupor And bound by the web of wrong views.
those who lack omniscience do not understand its nature.
is how a tathāgata sees:
of introspective meditation, consummated by attainment of the buddha-gnosis;
“Asking themselves, ‘Who is my Teacher?’ they will think,
“Bhagavān, it is as if there were a young man, a lad of twenty-five years of age, with black hair, in the first phase of his adulthood, who revealed that he has sons that are a hundred years old.
The bodhisattvas will know by their aromas
Śāriputra, I do not claim that there is something called phenomena , or that anything whatsoever is born or ceases.
splendor and freedom from weariness;
is the non-cultivation of the sensory element of the mental faculty, the sensory element of mental phenomena, and the sensory element of mental consciousness.
Likewise, he can place all living beings in the palm of his right hand and
pūtanas, kaṭapūtanas, and pāṃśukūla piśācas.
sat to one side and with his hands placed together in homage gazed unblinking upon the Bhagavān.
“For the sake of enlightenment I gave away my body, head, and hands, My sons, my wives, my eyes, and my flesh.
They sincerely consider all the
or from any other opening,
There he folded his hands and, recalling all the buddhas, he bowed to them.
Others wore on their heads bones, hands, and skulls, which they had strung into garlands, and some had their bodies covered in poisonous snakes.
He is free of a position for himself and a position for others.
“I have dispelled all my pride, Heard your words, and today I have attained nirvāṇa.
ndeed attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment and passed into final nirvāṇa, in the expanse beyond sorrow, where there is no residue of the psycho-physical aggregates, having trained in this very transcendent perfection of wisdom.
and similarly those who have become followers of the sacred doctrine, who have reached the eighth level,
and in the same vein, nothing is designated as [the causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighty minor marks.
They are: [1] they do not create kleśas; [2] they do not develop malice;
and they are said to be ‘fixated.’
nor are [the other transcendent perfections], down to and including the transcendent perfection of generosity, discerned.
In that respect there is no mental construct by which one may place the mind improperly.
Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom are questioned by other great bodhisattva beings in that manner,
“The born-blind man who gains sight should be seen as those who follow the Śrāvakayāna and the Pratyeka­buddha­yāna.
They attain the lineage of samādhis, And they do not become ill.
Thus, they are not hurt, harmed, or wounded by those types of suffering.
On account of the emptiness of their inherent existence, the non-appropriation of the gateways of mnemonic incantation or the gateways of meditative stability is not the gateways of mnemonic incantation or the gateways of meditative stability.
A victorious tamer of enemies. Not without cause Do you flash a smile white like a conch or lotus root.
“You associate with living beings by frequenting their migrations,
in that case, Ānanda, do you think that those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage would accrue much merit on that basis?
He is immovable and unshakable like the great central mountain.
’“Likewise, in the south, the bhagavān buddhas of the south, such as the Tathāgata Candra­sūrya­pradīpa, the Tathāgata Renown, the Tathāgata Yaśaḥprabha,
transcended doubt, could not be swayed by others, and was not reliant on others.
After twelve thousand years had passed he attained the samādhi called manifestation of all forms.
discipline must be observed with respect,
and with her second right hand holds an arrow that she draws to the tip of her ear.
do not lack the modes of attention to perfect enlightenment, for which reason
He maintained concentration, mindfulness, and meditation in order to sustain the mentally troubled.
“They do not examine the faults of saṃsāra; They pay no attention to the ripening of karma;
“He who teaches a wrong and ruinous path Is known to be an inferior teacher.
For the purpose of liberating all beings without exception, May I swiftly reach perfect enlightenment.
(47) They are endowed with sharp eye-teeth. (48) Their nose is prominent. (49) Their tongue is red.
But one cannot count the number of sūtras That are uninterruptedly taught by them. {25}
had planted the roots of merit with many hundred thousands of buddhas;
“The bhikṣus collected A droṇa of his burned bones.
Also, when any great bodhisattva beings, through their attention endowed with omniscience, maintain their indefatigability and relentlessness in order to abandon non-virtuous actions and adopt virtuous actions,
If you ask what constitute the five faculties,
"As they cause the scales and weights of karma to move,<tei:note xml:id=""UT22084-061-006-231""/> their behavior will follow upon pleasure and attachment, so that"
Son of noble family, bodhisattva great beings should humble their pride before their preceptors and instructors, and compliantly engender a mindset of revering, respecting, admiring, and cherishing the teacher.
and the saṅgha of bhikṣus with faultless, proper clothing, alms, medicine if they were ill, and monastic utensils for their use.
Of food and drink—both hard food and soft food— And medicine for illness, not a little but a great amount,
“Young man, this is the samādhi called the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.”
in the same vein,
‘Perhaps a buddha, a king who is lord of humans, Has appeared in some world today And, as a sign of that, these splendors Have shone in the ten directions today.’
one should hang it by the door. This will protect newborn babies.
“He gave him much excellent medicine, But the sick man didn’t take the healing medicine.
“What is abandoning that which is harmful? It is transcending existence and causing others to transcend existence.
owing to the non-apprehension of the arising of physical forms,
a dharmakāya, a saṃbhogakāya and a nirmāṇakāya
Lord of Men, this is your time for renouncing your home.
Similarly, they neither associate the truth of the path with omniscience, nor do they disassociate it therefrom.
“I declare that even greater bad karma will be created By those who speak unpleasantly and abusively
“For so long he has showed respect to parents, monks, priests, spiritual teachers, and worthy ones by rising for them, welcoming them, and addressing them honestly.
And that which is nonexistent, unreal, and non-occurring
“Noble sons, wherever this Dharma teaching is explained and given, that location is to be seen as the seat of awakening, and the event is to be understood as the turning of the wheel of Dharma.
as well as through the condition of appropriating rules and observances to be paramount.
No harmful influences from kṛtyās, kākhordas, spell-casters, or vetālas will injure their body.
“Then, there might be some men, women, boys, or girls with the disposition of the wise, who were knowledgeable and endowed with ideation and scrutiny, who would think,
The learned ones realize that these objects emerge from conceptualization.
and similarly, maintaining the five acquisitive psycho-physical aggregates which are like an echo, like an optical aberration, like a mirage, like a magical display, and like a phantom.
This is the rite for perfecting liberation, for consecration, And for the maturing of students.”
“During the short eons of famine, They become food and drink. Having first alleviated thirst and hunger, They teach the Dharma to living beings.
“Venerable, as you have been ordained, you must be conscientious.”
“Bhagavat, I pray that you teach us the vows of training.”
They will hear the millions of voices of humans, Whatever they say and wherever they say it.
The Bodhisattva looked at the retinue of consorts, who were lying there on the floor looking utterly revolting, and he had the impression that he was indeed in a cemetery.
When a child is seized by Jāmika, There is no interest in breastfeeding.
“Monks, do you see Saṅgharakṣita coming from off in the distance?” “We do, reverend.”
“If you ask, Su­bhūti, how great bodhisattva beings are an island unto the worlds,
was snatched shortly after his birth by the garūḍa Suparṇi. We do not know where to look for him.’“
and then encouraged, secured and established sentient beings, one hundred billion trillion in number, in the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration,
Ten billion other gods suspended in the sky Also cooled his self-arisen body with streams of delightful scented water.
A person who has the appropriate faith Should possess this supreme, stainless samādhi. {7}
he is the One Who Lets Wisdom Inform All His Physical, Verbal, and Mental Actions, and Who Possesses the Wisdom That Is Guided by Wisdom.
being faultless in all activities in order to conform to all people;
“Blessed One, why do you give prophecies to bodhisattvas instead of to listeners?”
These dedications are made without engaging at all in the dualistic attitude that differentiates the subject who makes the dedication and the object to whom the dedication is made.
and a modality that lacks aspirations, a modality that is calm and a modality that is void, a modality that is afflicted and a modality that is purified,
for it leads to the absence of karma and the absence of ripening.
then withdraws it when they part company,
Then there will be a benefit for many beings, happiness for many beings, compassion for the world, and welfare, benefit, and happiness for a great multitude of beings, devas, and humans.
his great buddha manifestations, and his buddha conduct he radiated many quintillions of light rays.
At that time, in the Blessed One’s presence the monks felt free of any of the physical impurities and sluggishness that derive from physical lassitude and torpor.
One should make love following the prescribed way,
In the emptiness of inherent existence, the emptiness of all intrinsic defining characteristics is not discerned.
“The vajra master, the great ascetic, Has obtained empowerment, replete with secrets.
“Alas, this world has raised the banner of pride and egotism. It is obsessed with clinging to ‘I’ and ‘mine.’ People’s minds grasp at the self, and false notions of a self distort their views. May I bring down this banner of pride that thinks ‘I am’ by showing them the noble path.”
It would leave his spiritual practice in tatters, leave him ruined, wrecked, fallen, and defeated.
Venerable Śāradvatīputra, the characteristic of past mind is that it has ceased,
another bodhisattva might establish a single sentient being in the result of attaining the stream.
He is said to be like the king of gems, the wish-fulfilling jewel, because he has genuinely fulfilled his aim of attaining nirvāṇa according to the way.
Then, the entourage, including bodhisattva Vajragarbha and others performed three circumambulations counterclockwise,
“Venerable Lord! If great bodhisattva beings will also attain omniscience,
By their mere consumption
“Su­bhūti, do you think that the tathāgatas are creatures of the animal realms?”
officiants, givers of instruction, and recitation instructors.
He is the teacher of all beings. He is the father of all bodhisattvas.
And never travel To the palace of Aḍakavatī.
“Quick, harness twenty thousand royal steeds, Fast as the wind, strong and excellent steeds, With silvery snow-colored tails, manes that are beautifully plaited,
So numerous I am unable to describe them. I will now go into the presence of the Sugata.’ {158}
As is an attribute of the thus-gone ones, when he smiled an assortment of blue, yellow, red, white, crimson, crystal, and silver-colored light rays emanated from his mouth.
so that one achieves and abides in the sense field of infinite space, thinking, ‘Space is infinite.’
I have saved with difficulty these who were in distress.
Furthermore, this precious gemstone would illuminate the night.
“Visualize, at his head, throat, and heart center, A wheel, a lotus, and a vajra Marked by the syllables oṃ āḥ hūṃ, Ornamented with the thirteen-syllable mantra.
If all sentient beings were to approach me, and even strike me with sticks, weapons, or clods of earth,
They request you turn the wheel
as I understand and ponder the meaning of the words spoken by the Lord,
Thereafter, subsequently gold And mākṣika is infused.
Approaching the Blessed One, they bowed their heads to his feet, sat to one side, then
Such beings must be ripened by the bodhisattvas’ practice of austerities.
Having had these stūpas constructed he thought,
But that is not so, for if it were, then each and every man would have a thousand sons, as do the kings of the world.
Those engaged in the meaning shun that which is not the meaning And are always firmly established in that restraint. {8}
from the non-appropriation of the applications of mindfulness up to the noble eightfold path, and, in the same vein, from the ten powers of the tathāgatas up to the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
“If youthful Mañjuśrī were to transform me into the form and appearance of a buddha, a hearer would take the form of the Teacher, which would not be appropriate. I should therefore disappear from this gathering.”
He sits there unshakable like Mount Meru, Fearless and silent.
the light from the burning body of the bodhisattva mahāsattva Sarva­sattva­priya­darśana shone throughout as many world realms as there are grains of sand in eighty Ganges Rivers.
As not permanent, as not discontinuous, as not involving transmigration, as the production of a large result from a small cause, and as a continuity of similar type.
Are bodhisattva temporary lay-vow holders, permanent lay-vow holders, Novice monks and fully-ordained monks, respectively.
great bodhisattva beings who turn away from the notion of the sense fields; the notions of desire, hatred, and delusion; the notion of the sixty-two aspects of false view; the notion of the transcendent perfection of generosity; the notions of the other transcendent perfections, up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom; the notion of the emptiness of internal phenomena; the notions of the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities; the notion of the applications of mindfulness; and similarly, the notions of [the causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, the notion of the levels of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, and the notion of the [attainments], up to and including omniscience, are all reckoned to be irreversible.
he listened as the Blessed One had advised.
“The tongue is empty of a self and what belongs to a self;
How should they train in all the gateways of meditative stability?
“I pray that you come, with your sons, to my garden. You will benefit an assembly of many beings.
entered the absorption of the heroic gait,
‘These monks are exclusively arhats, free from afflicted mental states, who have attained the cessation of contaminants.
whatever bliss is desired,
and similarly those who would separate and dissuade them from the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration,
There will be no rotten smell from their mouth, But always a pleasant scent like a blue lotus— That is the aroma that will come from their mouth.
This completes the twenty-fifth chapter from “The Transcendent Perfection of Wisdom in Ten Thousand Lines,” entitled “Skill in Means.
“Blessed One, how is it that the element of consciousness possesses form?” Bhadrapāla asked.
In the same way, since the emptiness of internal phenomena and the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, are non-apprehensible, they are nothing but mere names or conventional terms.
“Whoever upholds this sūtra, Will be a true child of the lords of the worlds. That one will be the carrier of their burden,
their attitude would not change, and
“Bhikṣus, in future times, noble men or noble women who listen to this chapter from The Sūtra of the White Lotus of the Good Dharma, and
There, in the area where the arrow pierced the ground and vanished, a crater formed, which still to this day is called Arrow Crater.
and the same goes for [the other non-existent fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
“Ānanda! Do you think that ethical discipline, tolerance, perseverance, meditative concentration, and wisdom that are undedicated toward omniscience may be styled as the transcendent perfection of wisdom [and so forth]?”
“Noble son, when great caravan leaders travel they will bring with them abundant means of livelihood in the form of gold, precious stones, pearls, beryl, conchs, crystals, coral, and so on.
“Will become glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa In this very life.”
They had laid down their burden and fulfilled their objectives.
One day, the monk received alms right away, took them, and headed home.
it is because those who have successfully set their mind on enlightenment and dedicated the merit toward unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment actually shatter the domain of demonic forces.
“ ‘Benefiting beings through the Dharma, Always giving away worldly material things,
The very basis of all their views Will quickly change.
“Venerable Ānanda, some monks are frightened by desire, anger, and delusion
Propagates it and creates copies of it, That one is a dharmabhāṇaka with wisdom.” {116}
For my part, I am your master And also your mother of royal descent.
The Blessed One’s Saṅgha is free of poisons. Poison is neutralized by the majesty of the Saṅgha!
All of them stood up from their seats, and with palms joined paid homage to the Bodhisattva. Then they addressed King Śuddhodana:
“Gentlemen, what can one do to expunge an evil act?”
Wherever a seed is sown, out of the elements of earth, water, fire, and air,
Immediately a god left and manifested in front of the Bodhisattva in the form of a hunter wearing saffron-colored cloth.
They should also abstain from killing living creatures
Bodhisattvas thus endeavor to give up that misconception,
and proceeded toward Gṛdhrakūṭa, the king of mountains.
In the same vein, they should determine that the world system of desire, the world system of form, and the world system of formlessness are empty.
By censing oneself with a pleasant-smelling incense,
“Kauśika,” he replied, “It is so! It is just as you have spoken.
Vaiśravaṇa and his retinue were thus inspired and gathered around him.
All of them could now also vividly see the world of Sukhāvatī and the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha, who was shining like the king of mountains, surrounded by the assembly of bodhisattvas and attended upon by the saṅgha of hearers. They saw the entire buddha realm in this way.
“Sir, what did I do for you?” he asked.
The teaching of bodhisattvas is equal. Teaching the Dharma equally to everyone, they bring joy to sentient beings.
“Then, noble ones, those two boys said to King Śubhavyūha,
But the charioteer went to King Śuddhodana and told him,
When they give gifts they do not think, ‘I am giving gifts! I should give these gifts!
“It is the Śākya prince, descendant of the best of kings, who shines like the dawn;
“Maintaining the aspect of conduct, They should become very learned.
“Son, a single life’s suffering is easy to bear, that of many lifetimes is not.
And the way you realized the wheel of the Dharma, And the way that you established the teaching of the Dharma. {19}
regardless of whether the causes, conditions, and bases for such disturbances unfold or not.
“They teach the Dharma with veneration For the inconceivable enlightenment of buddhahood
tremendous training in the way of noble beings,
“So be it, Blessed One,” said the bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkam­bhin, and he listened as the Blessed One had instructed.
“One should place the soles of her feet Evenly in the middle of one’s chest,
He is called ocean-like because his profundity and depth are hard to fathom.
are those who have gone afar,
Explain the teachings of the sūtras, and abide by them.
“If they gain wealth it does not make them happy; If they do not gain wealth it does not make them unhappy.
they rejoice in and speak in praise of others who cultivate generosity, ethical discipline, tolerance, perseverance, meditative concentration, and wisdom.
His appearance is never disagreeable.
incant seven double-handfuls of water and throw them into the fire.
officiating over ritual sacrifices,
“There are many who declare, ‘I have seen the guide of the world.
Enjoin him to acquire what is needed:
They will not be emancipated into the doctrines of the genuinely perfect buddhas.
Thus, throughout all the infinite worlds of the ten directions, bodhisattvas move until the end of time to secure the well-being of sentient beings.
these are the marks found on the body of a bodhisattva.
“All the merit from the latter Will come not even to a sixteenth part
Just as a sesame seed is with sesame butter.
He has incalculable wealth and treasures and innumerable precious jewels.
Brahmaśrava, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of eighteen thousand years. {14}
“These beings, who in their previous lives You constantly ripened over a very long time,
The innumerable tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas who are alive at present, residing in the innumerable, countless, and limitless worlds of the ten directions, also,
“At that time, Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin, I was a rishi who taught patience and lived in a cliff among the mountains where people did not go.
They abide in love when they think, ‘I shall liberate all beings.’
“Mañjuśrī, in all phenomena there is indeed no obscuration.
“Those who are fearful of the view of the transitory collection and relish the taste of the one path to be traveled should be viewed as excessively proud.
and with such faith left home for homelessness.
The four branches of the armed forces were then called up
Of what are they an abridgement?
Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom in that manner,
In this regard, the expression ‘delicate, soft, and lustrous skin’ means that
“Moreover, Mañjuśrī, when the Tathāgata has passed into nirvāṇa,
“Noble son, you may wonder how bodhisattvas pacify the dust of affliction.
“My prayer and my aspiration are vast. Śākya lion, you know my conduct.
Enlightenment is the annihilation of all convictions.
Lust is no living creature, nor sentient person;
with palms placed together bowed toward the Bhagavān and said,
“Noble son, the water of the ocean does not become exhausted even if all sentient beings partake of it.
He commissioned bracelets, anklets, crowns, necklaces, rings, earrings, armbands, golden belts, golden threads, nets of bells, nets of gems, shoes bedecked with jewels, garlands adorned with various gems, jeweled bangles, chokers, and diadems.
“With a one-pointed mind, always in meditation, As completely stable as Mount Sumeru,
I will bring them happiness. I will cause them to avoid punishment, and I will neutralize poison.
Similarly, the non-arising of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness is without foundation.
for travelers to nirvāṇa, like a footbridge;
They will be under the power of desire and have strong attachment. They will be under the power of ignorance and be ignorant fools,
“Su­bhūti, beginner bodhisattvas who wish to train in the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
“I master all phenomena, And so I am the Victorious One, the master of Dharma.
Great bodhisattva beings who undertake this training will attain emancipation in omniscience.
I was so hunched over that I fell whenever I tried to stand.
They speak in praise of wisdom, [and so forth], and
And my own beloved sons and women, Without ever experiencing any unhappiness. {61}
“Well done,” said the emanated monk.
On him indeed should the follower of Mantra meditate.
“As Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara approached the Jetavana monastery,
At that point all the trees in this world of the great trichiliocosm bent their crowns toward the seat of awakening.
It also sees youthful gods and cheerful goddesses seated on thrones.
The Blessed One answered this request by saying: “Vajrapāṇi, terrifying one, It is excellent that you consider the welfare of others so diligently.
is also perfectly intelligent.
“Physician, please cure me.” “Sir,” replied the physician, “your condition is hard to cure.
the world, including venerable Ānanda, Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, and all gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas rejoiced and praised what the Blessed One had said.
They will be overcome by fearsome desire, and
Divine son, according to that method,
At that point, the bodhisattva noble Avaloki­teśvara exclaimed,
“I teach through prose and likewise verse, Histories, my previous lifetimes, accounts of miracles,
We will ensure that we give mindfulness, power, and inspiration.”
Virtuous and non-virtuous actions performed and accumulated come to ripen upon the aggregates,
Attain pure, easeful examination And the peace of being devoid of examination. {63}
or that ‘I, as a great bodhisattva being, having indeed heard this sacred doctrine, should emanate similar fields to those fields of the buddhas.’
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is calm.”
Young man, the qualities of a buddha are infinite, inconceivable, beyond thought.
Moreover, Kauśika, great bodhisattva beings should delight others, they should discern the sameness of all things, and, empathizing with all situations that arise in all ways, they should cause others to rejoice in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
“Bhikṣus, when they went to the west
When the monks asked the Blessed One, “Who was this being? A god, a nāga, a yakṣa?”
Temporary lay-vow holders, permanent lay-vow holders, novice monks, And fully-ordained monks, respectively, are those of individual liberation.
Has there come here today A deva who is endowed with merit?
“Mañjuśrī, just as the praises of the ocean are boundless, so you should view the vinaya of the bodhisattvas on the relative level.”
“Similarly, things are not apprehended because non-arising is non-apprehensible.
what is the cause of your smile, and what are the conditions for it?”
it had no effect upon his body. As he approached the Avīci hell, it cooled.
here is also the amount of merit generated by the fiftieth person who heard and rejoiced in just one verse from this Dharma teaching, or rejoiced in just one line, after it had been passed from one to another.
and he also said, “Dwell happily,” to that tathāgata, arhat, perfectly enlightened buddha.
Enlightened mind is the gnosis ḍākinī.
there is no doubt that those great bodhisattva beings who, from the time when they first began to set their mind on enlightenment, have not been without the transcendent perfection of wisdom and skill in means, will attain unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
having them proclaim, ‘Impermanent! Miserable! Empty! Selfless!’
He is the king who holds the great banner. He is limitless and boundless light.
I will then demonstrate to these people, who disregard karmic actions, the inescapability of the fruits of actions.
Then the gods from the Brahma realm, led by the son of gods, Subrahman,
Ultimately, they are not following the Dharma; indeed, ultimately they do not observe any Dharma at all.
“Come, Kolita. As we have faith in only what is perfect, we shall go forth from home into homelessness.”
offering them flowers, incense, perfumes, flower garlands, ointments, powders, clothes, parasols, victory banners, and flags.
“Whoever wishes to construct such a diagram Should go to pleasant and solitary places And perform the practice of Vajrapāṇi.
Free from mental elaboration and undistracted.
has declared four observances to constitute spiritual practice.
Through the mere thought of the queen of the accomplished, knowledge itself
divine princes, it is because there are no syllables in the enlightenment of the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas.
It is worthy of reverence throughout the three worlds.
yet you should proceed through it in order to develop men and women.
Because it is with insight that one sees phenomena in accord with reality.
Bhagavān, I have directly heard from the Bhagavān the prophecy of my attaining the highest, complete enlightenment
Do you accept not to engage in such things?” The newly ordained monk responds: “I will not engage in such things.”
the Brahmakāyika devas sent down a rain of flowers up to ten yojanas around the Bodhimaṇḍa,
The causes dissolve into the fruitions,
They do not consider whether the tongue is connected with the body.
They will not be stable in the community of pratyekabuddhas, but,
“The activity ritual is the same.
In those buddha realms
He will not teach the sacred doctrine according to the notions that physical forms are with signs or that they are signless.
These beings conducted themselves well with their bodies, conducted themselves well with their speech,
He was accompanied and revered by an immeasurably great saṅgha of bodhisattvas.
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, the emptiness [of these aggregates] is not consciousness [and so forth], and
collect the great harvest together; and
“Very well, my lady,” answered Uttarā, who then did as she was told.
I have gone to many worlds in search of the six-syllable mahāvidyā, Bhagavat, just like a thirsty person seeks water.
would not equal a hundredth part, not a thousandth, not a hundred thousandth, not a ten millionth, not a thousand millionth, not ten thousand millionth, not a million millionth, and not even a hundred thousand quintillionth part. The merit could not be calculated; even a fraction of it could not be calculated—
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ continuous diligence consist in?
“In what region?” “In a region near the borderlands.”
He shaved off his hair and beard, put on the orange robes, and with faith left home for homelessness.
For as many eons as there are sand grains in the Ganges
Most of them are reborn as hell beings.
So, carrying the honey, gruel, and stripped sugar cane,
In space, the emptiness of internal phenomena is not discerned;
The bodhisattva without any lack of confidence will teach before the fourfold assembly, which is a gathering of bodhisattvas who have entered the Bodhisattva­yāna.
And in order to attain enlightenment They cast down coral tree flowers. {236}
In the same vein, they will never develop thoughts of the transcendent perfection of generosity, thoughts of the other transcendent perfections, up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom, and thoughts of the applications of mindfulness.
and some go to the sides of the mountains, which are made of precious ruby jewels.
There were no Kāla mountain ranges.
“With your mighty, unblemished gaze, have you not observed The buddhas throughout the ten directions of the world,
The gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three collected the hair for worship.
Then, imagining oneself as having the form of her husband,
They profess that which is not the doctrine to be the doctrine, and they abandon the sacred doctrine.
and having arrived he descended from the kūṭāgāra and, holding a string of pearls worth a hundred thousand silver coins,
One would not have spoken of even a fraction of them. It would be like taking a drop of water from the ocean.” {15}
Alighting on and cooling those in the hot hells and alighting on and
“Whoever that may be, it is he that should grant ordination.”
They all became meditators possessed of the three insights, the six higher knowledges, and the eight liberations.
“Bhagavān, those beings who write out this sūtra and who uphold it will please me.
“Their food is the ambrosia of the teachings, And their drink is the juice of liberation.
Śāriputra, consider this analogy:
Thereupon, Senior Śāradvatī­putra, who was present within the assembly,
and finger rings;
The Tathāgata has reached the extreme of detachment in regard to all things,
They also realize the means of investigation to be empty.
Su­bhūti, in things which neither arise nor cease,
It is not due to one’s own skill. It is not due to another’s skill.
Then the fruit of his merit exceeds the former.
“The Thus-Gone One has declared, ‘Son of noble family, rely on the true meaning, do not rely on the words.’
Such beings will then worship the proceeding bodhisattvas each in their own way.
“Bhaiṣajyarāja, know that those noble men or noble women will have taken birth as humans in this Jambudvīpa out of compassion for beings.
Pleasing in appearance, constantly delightful, And
, and thereby perfected their roots of virtue and rendered irreversible their progress to unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.
no pursuit, and excessive attachment will disappear.
It further entails the completion of the four unhindered discernments by knowing, without making assumptions, that the vehicles of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas have been rejected.
“Mañjuśrī, when the demigods battle against the gods,
One should visualize the temple-palace
“As their aspirations are fulfilled And they have purity of conduct,
they do not consider anything through which they should attach importance, or with respect to which they should attach importance.
Senior Su­bhūti replied,
Through miraculous powers there is the perfection of the accomplishment of aspirations and success.
the one who has perfected generosity, the most sublime through discipline,
Then the incarnated bodhisattva said to those disciples,
But the thought did not arise in my mind Of gaining renown through giving the gift of the Dharma. {6}
Some practiced meditation on the seven golden mountains,
What is void has no sign.
One should write the mantra with the pigment of bovine gallstones or red lac.
the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, and [similarly], the emptiness of the psycho-physical aggregates,
He rubbed ghee and oil into his skin and took refreshing baths in warm water.
Also present were some five hundred fully ordained nuns, laymen, and laywomen, all of whom had seen the truth.
and assign the disputants their roles.”
“In a clean vessel, such as a cup, Place such things as medicine and silk.
Who are powerful and smart,
quickly reach the level of the buddhas.
You showed these people the ten virtues and established them on the path of Brahmā;
He is the one who is respected by the lord of the gods.
One constantly looks upward, As though chasing the stars.
venerable Mahāpāraṇika,
and become skilled in the various ways of dedicating merit, thus gaining skill in method.
Here there is no death and disease, “No grief and no poverty.
It is skillfulness in answers. It is defeating opposition.
“Guide, we shall go to the towns And go to the villages
for once its time is up, the body’s solid structures recede into earth,
Father, even if one could draw pictures in the empty sky,
’“Then Bodhisattva Ratnapāṇi said to Bhagavat Śikhin,
and the bodhisattvas returned to their own buddha realms.”
he sat on the Bodhimaṇḍa at the foot of the Bodhi tree for an entire intermediate eon.
‘Those who, longing for enlightenment, Disillusioned with the composite, and for the benefit of beings,
What must be prevented to eliminate old age and death?”
They do not have even a single moment of indecision with regard to that doctrine.
and they will have faith in the teaching of the Bhagavān, will have conviction in it, and will uphold it.”
Kauśika, anyone thinking to guard, protect and offer sanctuary to great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom would actually be thinking to guard, protect, and offer sanctuary to space.
the five psycho-physical aggregates which are encompassed in the three world systems,
Red Acala vajra yogin,
in the same way, Su­bhūti, an illusory person is neither enhanced when eulogized,
That lord of men taught the samādhi of peace. Listen to these words and their meaning. {16}
which is neither afflicted nor purified,
“They had the confident eloquence of unceasing speech. They were skilled in the meaning of the words and the teaching of definitions.
“There is no one but you, O Protector, Moon among Men,
He blissfully relinquishes the formative predispositions of this life.
This completes the third instruction on the method of practice and ancillary activities, the supreme secret of secrets, that are the intent of the great vajraḍākinīs.
It would be too great to be contained within these many worlds. {13}
“They do not become ruined By any concept of desire.
to manifest the roots of virtue, to maintain the primal purity and the lack of craving, and thus to always strive to become the king of healers, who can cure all sicknesses.
“ ‘Distraction’ and ‘attention’ are two.
Ānanda, if you wonder whether Prince Giver of All Wealth was then, at that time, someone else, or you are of two minds about it, or doubtful, do not see him so.
Why do we use the phrase penetrate flawless reality ?
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is the emptiness of external phenomena.”
in a single tune and a single voice, praised the Blessed One with these verses:
“King, please listen to our reason for coming here.
Likewise, reverend Śāriputra, as all things neither die nor are reborn, why do you ask, “Where did you die to reincarnate here?”
thoughts of something high, thoughts of something low,
Rather, the sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who do so should cause others to rejoice in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
Will never be without that knowledge. It is the summit of nothingness. {22}
And it goes without saying that it will be so For those who also have patience, self-control, Concentration, correct conduct, meditation, And practice solitary contemplation.
Could something non-existent exist anywhere?
All these things should not be done.
For these reasons, they have diverse perceptions and different modes of conduct
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities are beings who wear refuse rags.
Mañjuśrī, bodhisattvas as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges would be there;
“ ‘They make possible the attainment of the seat of enlightenment and set in motion the wheel of the Dharma.
The non-affliction and so on of what is without foundation?
Shows the path to higher rebirths,
One should then make as many offerings to Lord Vāgīśvara as one can, and
Of all the beings in the world, Those in the past, the future, and the present.
Because ultimately all phenomena are unarisen.”
“Venerable Lord! If great bodhisattva beings who have newly entered the [Great] Vehicle,
They lead toward enlightenment Countless millions of beings. {67}
“Bringing an end to birth is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
“The thus-gone ones feel great compassion for sentient beings since all phenomena are devoid of transference and emergence and yet sentient beings think they are subject to death and birth.
They can be divided according to the five colors,
He does not reincarnate through involvement with such views but reincarnates with his mind free of involvement.
It is the joy of acquiring liberative arts and of the conscious cultivation of the aids to enlightenment.
Śāradvatī­putra, for these reasons bodhisattvas do not train in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, and
He bared the fangs of the four communions with Brahmā and gathered others through the four ways of attraction with his head.
she speaks with sincerity, her words measured and pleasing to the ear.
And for the sake of the wisdom of buddhahood He will practice appropriate conduct during that time.
It is profound. It is immeasurable. It is an immeasurable phenomenon. It has the nature of the absence of attributes.
Teach this sūtra To those children of the buddhas Whom you see serving kalyāṇamitras, And who have given up sinful friends.
I say that they talk even though they do not know,
He did so through knowledge that consists of one-pointed insight into everything that might be known, understood, attained, realized, and actualized via the wisdom of the noble ones.
Where did these bodhisattva mahāsattvas come from?”
Then place the fourth of the fifth. Next place the second in the last. “Then place the fourth of the fourth, And the second in the last.
Finally, enjoin him in how he must practice:
Forbearance in one’s engagement with the selflessness of dharmas is a cause of purification.
someone endearing, beautiful, captivating, and stunning
Then hear what are the results of that action:
What is the supportive maṇḍala like? And how are the sessions and breaks?
Seeking the true, one genuinely pursues that truth.
In the same vein, it does not strengthen [all those other attributes], up to and including buddhahood; nor does it weaken them.”
All around the walkways there are wish-fulfilling trees that have red trunks and leaves made of silver and gold,
They will accomplish patience, possess correct conduct, and will delight in the company of those with virtuous qualities; they will be patient, self-controlled, without envy, free of anger, without malicious intentions, mindful, strong, diligent,
one billion realms of the High Priests of Brahmā,
“How is it that the universal monarch appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class comes to possess the precious wife?
Yama’s guardians will then take them to King Yama,
If, when it is taught that all things are void, great bodhisattva beings are not discouraged, not terrified, not fearful, not afraid, and will not be afraid,
This transcendent perfection of wisdom is established by means of great deeds.
Like the sky, the deeds of the Teacher are impossible to measure;
gave this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma uninterruptedly for a hundred thousand eons.
but they have all been reborn among these denizens of the hells.
whose budding roots of virtue will blossom;
embraced by the noble ones, and causes the defeat of all māras.
Blissful One, it is amazing.
And gardens and walkways are given, Beautified by delightful flowers.
The wise must, starting from Indra’s quarter, Write the syllable oṃ and so forth.
Jambudvīpa was adorned by many flowers. It was identical to a paradise, with no difference. {12}
and one billion Heavens of Making Use of Others’ Emanations.
“Bhikṣus, the Mahābrahmā named Sarva­sattva­trātā
fled back to his own house and laid his knife at the doorstep
or it is red, or is colored red, or is like red, or shines with red light;
it is the right time and the mother is ovulating;
If you ask why, Su­bhūti, it is because [in this modality] a self never exists, and it is non-apprehensible; similarly, this [modality] is free from sentient beings, living creatures, living organisms, lives, individuals, humankind, human beings, petitioners, instigators, actors, agents, knowers, and viewers, and these are non-apprehensible.
Steady as a mountain or the salty sea, Lord buddhas do not smile accidentally.
It is due to having been established in these defining characteristics that the tathāgatas have attained manifestly perfect buddhahood with regard to this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, whose defining characteristics transcend all attachments.
Noble son, all minds that contain afflictions are polluted, and when the mind is polluted it will not be in equipoise.
Homage to Tathāgata Sarva­dharma­prabhāsa­vyūha­śrī.
Some eat only once a day, some eat once every twenty-four hours, while others eat every four or five or six days.
[bodhisattvas who are] imbued with renunciation, dwelling in solitude, maintaining detachment, and remaining in a state of cessation
“Dṛḍhabala was his father’s name. And his mother’s name was Mahāmatī.
“Young man, in that way bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this Dharma teaching of entering great compassion
“Pure Being, your mind is firm; Like the earth, you sustain all beings.
it is because, excellently abiding in emptiness, they do not consider anything at all as inferior or superior.
The Blessed One is endowed with a girth like the banyan tree.
The length of the seasons are then described:
Oh! Oh! Teach to the bhikṣus The retention that is beyond words.
In this way, Nārāyaṇa, the one who relies on the true meaning relies on all phenomena.”
It satiates the parched earth And the plants, bushes, and forest trees,
"བདག་གི་ལུས་འདི་འཁོར་བ་ཐོག་མ་མེད་པ་ནས་<tSince time immemorial in cyclic existence, for hundreds of thousands of eons, this body of mine has committed faults one rebirth after the next, taking all kinds of birth.
Similarly, you should not misconstrue unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment as the applications of mindfulness, the correct exertions, the supports for miraculous ability, the faculties, the powers, the branches of enlightenment, and the paths!
Indeed, it is because they are acquired by means of the transcendent perfection of wisdom that these five transcendent perfections are designated as transcendent perfections.”
there are, Su­bhūti, some individual followers of the vehicle of the bodhisattvas who, from the very beginning, dispense gifts while they lack skill in means,
The Sugata does not speak words that are false. The compassionate Jina always speaks the truth. {71}
(4) Their body is clean. (5) Their body is soft. (6) Their body is supple. (7) Their body is lustrous.
I saw many other bodhisattvas Being praised by the Guide of the World. {9}
In this way one with consistent devotion
“ ‘Divine one why do you continue with this illusion? This is not a beautiful bodhisattva illusion.
I will remember the kindness of the Thus-Gone One.”
Who surround the bed of this pure being,
he burned his own body as an offering to the Tathāgata and to this Dharma teaching, The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.
‘In accordance with the aspirations that are known, explained, and clarified by the thus-gone ones, may this offering of gold, silver, jewels, pearls, beryls, conch shells, moonstones, coral, and other precious substances enable me to illuminate infinite myriad buddha realms with blue, yellow, red, white, crimson, crystalline, and silvery light rays!’
those who have entered the stream are discerned in the world,
‘You are skilled in means and courageous, A master of great compassion.
and granting methods for the entire Dharma in the pursuit of buddha qualities, without ever turning away from the teaching so that they can become anointed.
I answer him by saying, ‘There is no afterlife.’
The ground will be smooth like the palm of a hand and covered with three precious substances: beryl, crystal, and the gold of the Jambū River.
and similarly, who practice in order that they might grasp or reject the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty;
The Dharma that is taught has but one taste But beings contemplate it according to their abilities.
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, the Great Vehicle of great bodhisattva beings entails the six transcendent perfections.
thereby establishing them in meditative concentration, in the dhāraṇīs, in the various states of tolerance, and up to the tenth ground.
and one will succeed in it.
‘I should give a gift,
Now that the trichiliocosm is a basis for worship, how much more so is your body?
and similarly by apprehending phantoms and the viewers of phantoms, and so forth,
One’s face turns red, And one lies curled up on the ground.
They do not even, with that wish, perceive the Tathāgata as the dharmakāya, let alone perceiving him as the rūpakāya.
The airborne palaces of the devas will be close so that
One can become entirely invisible and manifest a thousandfold at once.
noble son, I could count each one of those grains,
bowed their heads at his feet,
to strive for what is unvirtuous; not to strive for what is virtuous;
Monks, this was because for so long the Bodhisattva had paid his respects to the Dharma and to those who teach the Dharma.
forty-two thousand sons of gods gave rise to the mind set on unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment.
in a world realm named Devasopānāyā be the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Devarāja.
Arhatship is empty of arhatship.
The causes are absorbed within seven And the fruitions are absorbed within three.
How does he teach the Dharma to beings?
Then that man takes a second smallest particle of dust, and
That which is not born and does not cease, does not in any way have a nature that can be blessed.
You must train yourselves in this liberation.
That completes the supportive maṇḍala Conjoined with its intended meaning.
who frightens yakṣas, rākṣasas, bhūtas, pretas, and piśācas, vetālas, ḍākinīs, kūṣmāṇḍas, and apasmāras;
“One should first fashion a cloth crown that resembles a crown with many gems.
If you ask why, Su­bhūti,
Bodhisattvas should live in emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness, and not live falling into the certainty of śrāvakas and solitary buddhas.
Su­bhūti, this is because the transcendent perfection of wisdom has not been seen, heard, or cognized by anyone at all.
This is what is known as greater dullness.
Whichever body parts one seizes and pierces with a splinter of human shinbone or an iron nail, his equivalent body parts will decay.
the eastern direction is empty of the eastern direction because it does not endure and does not disintegrate.
They do not engage with the notion that physical forms are a self, or the notion that these are not a self.
Moreover, when melted butter, or oil, or water is poured onto a mound of sand, it cannot be said whether the mound is open or closed.
“Bhikṣus, those Brahmās wondered,
“How about seven days?”
He obtains an alluring form, becomes omniscient and just like the lord Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.
Similarly, they train in the six transcendent perfections.
I should give gifts to them!’
number names, calculation, counting by hand, how to exclude, to add, and to leave, and to parse until he had mastered reading.
has succumbed to some illness due to wind, bile, or phlegm disorder, or to a combination of these,
I possess tolerance!
emerges through formative predispositions, and is also generated through the conditions of formative predispositions,
“During the time of the teaching of Tathāgata Jala­dhara­garjita­ghoṣa­susvarana­kṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña­, there was a King Śubhavyūha.
There the Blessed One sat,
and venerable Ānanda.
“You, Dharma king, know the true nature That is the nature of the jinas of the three times.
“He asked three times, ‘Who is going to cross over to the far shore? Who is going to cross over to the far shore? Who is going to cross over to the far shore?’
they would propel living creatures who have fallen into erroneous views toward non-erroneous views and establish them therein.
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
They do not remember the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha.
Moreover, the tathāgatas definitively know that through their extrasensory powers they have actualized, achieved, and maintained in this very lifetime the liberation of mind and the liberation of wisdom in the state that is free from contaminants because all contaminants have ceased,
Similarly, they do not engage with the notion that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are imbued with happiness, or the notion that these are imbued with suffering.
There is the meditative stability named Crest of Pristine Cognition.
And drink the saliva produced in her mouth.
the full refrain should also be applied to the eyes, exactly as indicated in the context of the psycho-physical aggregates, and it should also be applied to [to the other sense organs], up to and including the mental faculty.
‘Noble son, in this Siṃhala Island there are pleasing gardens of all kinds that are completely filled with flowers, and there are many hundreds of bathing pools.’
Similarly, Venerable Lord, this doctrine has not been revealed so that the fruit of entering the stream, the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth, the fruit of no longer being subject to rebirth, arhatship, individual enlightenment, and omniscience might be grasped or not grasped.
they will vanquish negative and hostile influences;
comprehends it, and teaches it elaborately to his congregation, then their merit shall also be boundless.”
That noble man or noble woman who possesses this Dharma teaching, and reads it, teaches it, writes it, or has someone write it, accumulates an infinite, countless, innumerable aggregation of merit for the wisdom of buddhahood.
and is overcome by intense hatred for one’s future father.
“for the sake of even half a verse of Dharma I have thrown my body from rocky peaks, and have endured countless hardships.
That is why it is called the element of consciousness.
One should incant mustard seeds seven times and strike a person with them;
[I myself] will never [rob, order someone to rob, or] rejoice in anyone being robbed!’
He manifested the mountain as a divine, vast place With excellent, beautiful jewel flagstones—
It is taught that in the inner and secret channels The types of worms also correspond in number.
“Having obtained this sūtra, Which is the domain of all the buddhas,
then for a second, and for a third until the sixth day.
It is the skillful method of the guides. “It is subtle and difficult to know for those without dedication.
They do not relinquish doing so until they have attained omniscient wisdom endowed with the supreme of all aspects and pass into complete nirvāṇa.
One should make a beeswax effigy, four fingers long, and insert this mantra, written along with the name of the person targeted, into its heart.
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who are irreversible
the fruit of no longer being subject to rebirth, arhatship, individual enlightenment, or unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
He has the power to know all contemplations, liberations, concentrations, and absorptions, as well as the way of purifying and stopping the disturbing emotions. Therefore
Cut off his ears and nose With a sharp knife
Now, O bodhisattvas, what do you think? Does the one who is the Buddha exist, or not exist?
“They will know the truth that is taught In thousands of millions of sūtras.
He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of all things!”
One will become able, within six months, to remember what one hears.
Nor did he consider that understanding to be due to the attainment of clear realization of external phenomena, or due to the attainment of clear realization of both external and internal phenomena.
As for the things which are uncontaminated, comprising the four applications of mindfulness,
skillfully teaching by means of the supreme vehicle in which the conduct of all beings is mastered;
In a place where there are no people, one should one-pointedly incant one’s eyes seven times and stand with a one-pointedly focused mind.
Always know that everything is dependent, And in that way become such a teacher. {100}
(2) recollection of the Dharma,
They may also recollect one month, or from that up to a hundred months, up to a thousand months, or even up to a hundred thousand months.
the bodhisattva great being Nityodyukta, the bodhisattva great being Sama­tā­vihā­rin,
As an analogy, think of a vessel that has been filled to the brim with butter or oil, so that in the end not even the most infinitesimal drop can be added.
Nor does the water element think, ‘I provide cohesion for the body.’
Reverend Śāriputra, eight strange and wonderful things manifest themselves constantly in this house.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of [all the sensory elements], starting from the sensory element of the eyes, the sensory element of sights, and the sensory element of visual consciousness,
They always produce causes of fear and are the root of suffering;
Similarly, if they engage with the notion that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are void, or that these are not void, then they are merely engaging with mental images.
I myself will never [speak covetously to anyone, order others to speak so, or] rejoice in someone so speaking to anyone!’
and the eighty excellent minor marks.
the five faculties, the five powers, the seven aspects of enlightenment,
On the ground grows fresh green grass, so soft and thick;
Pleasure, pain, and that which is neither pleasant nor painful.
They approached, circumambulated him three times, and
There they benefit beings Though there is no body to be found. {20}
Relatively they embrace cyclic existence,
The sixth aspect of liberation ensues when
Bhikṣus, the three yānas that the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas teach are their skillful method.
“Noble son, all the buddhas and bodhisattvas will always grant you this opportunity.
These are called the five faculties.
“Noble son, when bodhisattvas see suffering beings whose roots of virtue are lesser and insignificant,
Receive then, Ānanda, this expression of the teaching of the Dharma.
All his musical instruments—such as his drum, conch, clay drum, hand drum, tambour, lute, harp, cymbals, and tambourines—broke, fell into pieces, then into shreds, and fell on the ground.
“Bhagavān, no, it could not.” The Bhagavān asked, “Monk, what do you think? Could something non-existent arise?” Stainless Light replied,
‘Homage to the Three Jewels, oṁ ṭaḥ! When one is delirious, svāhā!’
came to meet the Bodhisattva and to offer him their respect and veneration, and also to listen to the Dharma and correctly proclaim that Dharma.
Their acquisition of understanding and insight occurs randomly and by chance.
and on that spot a lotus pond appeared.
I had committed cruel actions out of desire And therefore I experienced many sufferings.
I should also connect all sentient beings with the transcendent perfection of generosity.
They had entered the foremost vehicle—the best, the finest, and the highest vehicle. The vehicle they had entered was higher than the highest: the unsurpassed vehicle.
is designated as the ‘support for the supramundane doctrine.
I had prepared divine food with supreme flavors.
Blessed One, why is that? Are those actions things that possess form?
Reverend Śāriputra, he who is interested in the Dharma has no interest in matter, sensation, intellect, motivation, or consciousness.
As they accept them in that way, bodhisattvas do not regard such things to be their own, nor do they develop any attachment to them.
One should meditate on White Acala,
the samādhi named Completely Defeating,
“Venerable Ānanda, nothing can be observed to which any such prophecy could apply.
At the center of this assembly was the lion throne of the Blessed One.
Illusion itself is feelings conditioned by sensory contact that is mentally compounded, and feelings conditioned by sensory contact that is mentally compounded are themselves illusion.
become free from doubt, free from hesitation, and free from delusion, and
Śāradvatī­putra! The purity of phenomena is not subject to rebirth in the world system of desire due to absolute purity.
and, while engaging in the conduct of a bodhisattva,
The seventh sense field of mastery ensues when the perceptions of physical forms have been completely transcended in all respects, when the perceptions of obstructed, material phenomena have subsided, and the mind does not engage with diverse perceptions, so that one achieves and abides in the sense field of infinite space, thinking, ‘Space is infinite.’
they do consider the non-arising of the attributes of those who have entered the stream, as well as those individuals who have entered the stream, the attributes of those tied to one further rebirth, those individuals who are tied to one further rebirth, the attributes of those who are no longer subject to rebirth, those individuals who are no longer subject to rebirth, the attributes of the arhats, the arhats themselves, the attributes of the pratyekabuddhas, the pratyekabuddhas themselves, the attributes of the bodhisattvas, the bodhisattvas themselves, the attributes of the buddhas, and the buddhas themselves.
What are those ten? They are being impervious to desire, anger, and dullness;
He revered, venerated, worshiped, made offerings to, and praised many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of buddhas.
Likewise, the Buddha does not teach That the sixth appears from anything but the fifth.
Desiring him, they came to him and said,
When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra was in the samādhi named Sprinkling, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara was in the samādhi named Treasury of Space.
‘Good man, the supreme worship is Dharma-worship.’“
and will quickly attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
unobserved,
Charioteer! Who is that decrepit man? He is so weak, emaciated, and wrinkled;
These are called the six outer sense fields.
There will be countless hundred thousand quintillions of śrāvakas there.
out of their love for beings remain in the three realms, must indeed have great compassion.
From their sporting, lovemaking, and the indulging all of their desires,
by worshiping this Dharma teaching, writing it down, reading it aloud, commissioning it to be written, worshiping
Ultimately, things are not as they are described.”
each and every bodhisattva great being arrived with exceptional feats beyond imagination.
For human beings, tormented by the hundred diseases of disturbing emotions, Victorious Physician, please turn the supreme wheel of Dharma and liberate beings.
this man delights these folk with phenomena which are non-existent, deluding the eye and the mental faculty, and
the enacting of any one of the five deeds with immediate consequences, or an act of relinquishing the Dharma.
This is the sūtra that delivers from all grahas, the buddha seal of as many perfectly awakened, thus-gone arhats as there are grains of sand in the river Ganges.
“You will conquer the evil hordes of extremists with mistaken views, Who are caught up in worldly desire and who remain on the peak of existence.
Bhaiṣajyarāja, one should build a great caitya of the Tathāgata that is made from precious materials.
in a meritorious manner,
It was a speech that delighted both the body and the mind and cleared away all attachment, anger, delusion, strife, and quarrels.
That are as innumerable as the Ganges sands {15}
“When that happens, the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha will manifest his birth and appear in an uncivilized land or another place,
In this way, Su­bhūti, do great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, acquire the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
We shall become renunciants under the Bhagavān.
While [the Blessed One] was delivering this chapter concerning the attributes of the tathāgatas which are inconceivable, unappraisable, innumerable, and equal to the unequaled,
They thought,
Although the rudiments of mantra should be recited in the manner those young brahmins recite them,
All of these luminous offspring of mine Are teaching the Dharma fearlessly.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of elucidation. What are the four kinds of elucidation?
Have you not maliciously drawn blood from a tathāgata?
Acceptance of the concordant Dharma is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Its vital points do not break down,
Though I were for many billions of eons To praise those who are the offspring of the Sugata,
benefiting the outcast just as much as they benefit the king.
to show those suffering from the eight adversities how to rise above them;
“ ‘Delusion, lust, and hatred do not exist.
not form,
The locations of the initiations and the chakras Should be learned from a master’s oral instructions.
they replied, ‘Do you not see we are washing the bowls? The drinks have already been drunk.’“
‘Offering vehicles represents the gathering of all joy and the bases of miraculous power. I must therefore practice generosity by offering vehicles;
venerate, revere, and worship them for one hundred thousand years with divine garlands, salves, flowers, lamps, precious umbrellas, cymbals, royal banners, and flags—
“Ānanda, it was also by means of a further ten qualities that I quickly accomplished supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
In the later times, say so In the presence of the Tathāgata. {36} “If someone upholds, even for a moment, This sūtra which is so difficult to uphold, They will have completely brought Great pleasure to all the lords of the world.
“When Reṇu entered the city, you scattered a handful of fragrant powder at him;
and further adorned with numerous flowers from the realms of both humans and gods.
He goes to the seat of awakening to demonstrate the fulfillment of his previous vows and to gain a ruler’s complete mastery over all phenomena.
the fully ordained monks, the fully ordained nuns, laymen, and laywomen—along with great bodhisattva beings, the gods of the Catur­mahā­rāja­kāyika realm,
“Oh no, how sad that Rudraka, the son of Rāma, died before hearing this well-prepared teaching!
“They are deceived by acquisitions through reputation And wander far from my teaching.
villages belonging to certain Licchavi people of Vaiśālī were afflicted with elemental spirits
“Whoever it is that dwells here, be they gods, nāgas, yakṣas, or gandharvas, may they tell us what they desire!”
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom accordingly, and who have set their mind on enlightenment and these roots of virtuous action, do not, in the interim, actualize the finality of existence.
They are just like salty water from the ocean.
So may you experience the result of your actions!”
Son of noble family, during the lifetime of Samanta­raśmyabhyudgata­śrī­kūta­rāja,
have been taught by buddha bhagavāns as numerous as the grains of sand in sixty Ganges Rivers.
No sounds of pain or pleasure spring from the reflection of a person visible in water.
A tathāgata, arhat, perfectly enlightened buddha comes into this world in order that beings will enter the vision of the tathāgatas’ wisdom.
No verbal teaching can express him.
A hundred thousand realms trembled and were suffused with light.
You wholly perfected the diligence of a buddha.
the gateways of mnemonic incantation are indications.
If she should give birth to a boy, I will offer him as an ascetic attendant to the noble one.”
these attributes actualize the fruit of entering the stream,
“Kāśyapa, there will be five hundred tathāgatas who have that same name.
What has produced their arising?’
while some engage in the immeasurable aspirations, some in the formless absorptions, and some in the extrasensory powers,
She replied, “Son of a lord, do as you wish.”
(20) The Blessed One is endowed with lion-like cheeks.
Ajita, I say that if someone possesses this Dharma teaching after the Tathāgata has passed into nirvāṇa, and reads it, teaches it, writes it, or has someone write it,
Whatever food they eat They will comfortably digest completely. {15}
“Previously this renowned being Dwelt in a delightful palace When he was in the Heaven of Joy.
“With great wisdom I am the skillful doctor,
and had the following thought:
“I was at that time King Śūradatta. My sons were subsequently protectors of the Dharma.
if the Thus-Gone One produces an emanation, is that emanation connected with something?
“After Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara had ripened those beings,
accompanied by thought and analysis,
the end of all sensations,
“He may establish tall and beautiful stūpas, Beautified with fine gems to the summit of existence;
They do not think about their parents, spouse, sons, or daughters.
Or else is it that, having heard the sūtras explained by antigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas, too,
In the presence of all those jinas He asked about this supreme samādhi of peace. {2}
They should praise and rejoice in others who comprehend the noble truth of suffering, abandon the noble truth of the origin of suffering, actualize the noble truth of the cessation of suffering, and cultivate the noble truth of the path that leads to the cessation of suffering.
“In that place I had this name, this surname, this family, this caste, this diet,
Conclusion of the thirty-seventh chapter, “Teaching the Aspect of Correct Conduct.”
No one who heard these sounds would ever turn away from attaining complete and perfect enlightenment.
You set forth the Dharma and are a source of all qualities. “
how does this consciousness undergo transfer from the body, and what type of form does it have?
In that pure environment lotus flowers the size of chariot wheels grew,
The tathāgatas are called tathāgatas because they have genuinely attained manifestly perfect buddhahood.
Outside the double vajra, one should write eight laṁ syllables,
On the relative level, the branches of awakening are a gateway to realizing omniscience.
“Why is it freedom from misery? Because it is the realization that harm and suffering are meaningless and that suffering has no self.
In this case, too, the Elder Su­bhūti is undifferentiated and therefore he is the emulator of the Tathā­gata.
“When speaking of the four truths, The foolish say that they see the truth.
Some of the women had unpleasant features, such as arms that were too long.
And have built countless thousands of stūpas That are made of jewels, gold, and silver, {78}
Nārāyaṇa took two steps and said, “Give me my third step!”
“The crown of his head I cannot see, nor can the others here in the Brahmā realm;
But he will only recover quickly if you noble ones nurse him.” The physician then treated the invalid and he was cured.
They are those who have no envy, And they have a happiness higher than that of humans. {45}
The eyes resemble the placenta of a jenny, a sow, or a bitch.
the element of consciousness feels joy and its desire is inflamed when it achieves contact with the body.
These are good verbal actions.
They retain what they have heard so that they themselves will comprehend the unsurpassable wisdom, not out of an aspiration toward the Lesser Vehicle.
the monks found themselves in a quandary, for they did not know how to do that.
“There are those who travel alone, Who find peace on their own.
However, the prince’s maternal aunt Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī would be able to raise the prince so that he is happy and well.
Reverend Śāriputra, the expression “the buddhas of the past, present, and future” is a conventional expression made up of a certain number of syllables.
the samādhi named Established in the Entry to Liberation,
They will not abandon the power of love for all beings. They will perceive all the tathāgatas as their father.
the Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇa­rata, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin realms;
And they say, ‘You are a fool! Do not think, “I am wise!”
But when those roots of virtuous action have been brought to maturity in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, then they do actualize the authentic finality of existence.
Then the Lord Śākyamuni said to the bodhisattva Maitreya, the great spiritual hero,
Remove the ornaments! Do not disturb the One Who Makes the Foolish Wise—
“At that time, also, with these words of praise Focus your mind one-pointedly and offer praise:
“They will venerate and respect their instructors, thinking, ‘By relying on instructors I shall perfect the factors of awakening that have not yet been perfected, and I shall eliminate the afflictions that have not yet been eliminated.’
And further I accurately understood the precise identity of formations, the source of formations, the cessation of formations, and the path leading to their cessation.
being tossed down upon that bhagavān.
then they are engaging in the conditioning of physical forms,
Thus, similar to how the realms of the world emerge with Mount Sumeru, the oceans, the four great continents, the Mucilinda Mountains, the Mahā­muci­linda Mountains, the snow mountains, the circular mountains, the great circular mountains, the gandha­mādana Mountains, and the towns, streams, forests, and palaces,
Someone who has no correct conduct Is the one who is lacking a limb. {12}
“The ultimate truth, divine son, cannot be taught.
Śāradvatī­putra, the transcendent perfection of generosity is both mundane and supramundane.
The tathāgatas are sublime and they are without contaminants.”
disqualify himself as a spiritual practitioner, disqualify himself as an heir of the Śākya,
There is no echo or a hearer of echoes.
We will build a stūpa of divine gold in Tamondhakāra.
They listen, without listening, to the instructions on how all phenomena are ultimately utterly unborn.
When you saw Candana’s house, you brought your grass torch and held it up.
who is the lord of knowledge; who brings freedom from all afflictions;
Oṁ, homage to the seven buddhas whose teachings are inviolable! As here follows: Oṁ, show yourself in the form of the Youthful One, show! Manifest your power! Send me a dream to reveal the way things are! Hūṁ, hūṁ! Phaṭ, phaṭ! Svāhā!
In the world system called Possessed of Power abides the Tathāgata called Powerful Intelligence.
ill will,
nor has anyone ever attained nirvāṇa with reference to it, nor has anyone ever been worthy of offerings on account of this revelation of the sacred doctrine.”
He went to Jetavana and, after some time,
He then said to that assembly of fortunate gods:
“Bhagavat, ‘non-arising’ and ‘non-cessation’ have been spoken of.
In this way, one attains the basis for benefiting all beings
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, should cultivate this samādhi.
Ritually cleansed and well adorned, She should scatter mustard seeds on the ground, And decorate the ground with flowers and fragrances.
It does not transcend the world system of formlessness, nor is it established in the world system of formlessness.
he is liable, at the least, to wind up amongst those born as animals.
They do not practice in order to go beyond cyclic existence, nor in order to perfect the state of transcendence of suffering.
make such offerings, He will surely become a buddha!
“This insult is all due to my lack of learning.”
After finding them, some he gives after grinding them with his teeth,
Monks, whenever I thought I should stand up, I tried to do so, but my body was so hunched over that I fell every time.
Likewise, based on the elaborate fifth, The simple sixth emerges.
“Ānanda! So it is that the transcendent perfection of wisdom is in the vanguard of these five [other] transcendent perfections, and
In that way, the Bhagavān, with the fingers of his right hand, opened the center of the great precious stūpa and revealed its interior.
will teach ten thousand million beings.
making common cause with all sentient beings, they dedicate them to unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
Death does not exist for him.
The Four Great Kings should be present on the left and right sides, in postures of worship.
Then, with palms joined, Great Brahmā said to the Lord of the World:
Here we have arrived at this most excellent mountain To worship the one who masters supreme qualities.
Know the locations of the chakras, the chakras themselves, And their related practices.
will certainly put an opposing army to flight.
I teach with this method so that they will approach The supreme gift that is wisdom. {49}
then are physical forms not one thing and the expanse of reality another,
Those who are born in alkaline rivers develop white, leprous flesh.
emptiness is indeed the applications of mindfulness.
How so?
Ratnakūṭa, Ratnacūḍa, Daśa­śata­raśmihutārci, Jyotirasa, Candrabhānu,
In that way a rain of flowers fell and fell continuously on the Bhagavān sitting on the Bodhimaṇḍa.
Through the faith they felt in the emanation,
and has been dedicated to ripening beings.
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, the applications of mindfulness are non-existent and non-apprehensible.
Noble son, bodhisattva great beings practice generosity,
This is called sattvaparyaṅka posture;
He is known to possess a nonclinging intellect because his mind is nonclinging, unfettered, and liberated.
Some great bodhisattva beings, when they practice this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, will not be separated from the transcendent perfection of generosity,
‘Thus should I swiftly attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, and, having attained manifestly perfect buddhahood, I should also lead forth those sentient beings who have fallen into the three inferior realms!’
Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Sadāparibhūta proclaimed this Dharma teaching, which had been taught by the Bhagavān, to many hundreds of bhikṣus, bhikṣunīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās, saying,
It is amazing to see so many blessed buddhas making prophecies regarding these two holy beings!”
radiant with the eighty minor marks,
As long as the transcendent perfection of wisdom is active in the world, so long will the Precious Jewel of the Buddha not vanish from the world,
also no [other] details or distinctions are apprehensible.
Until the baby is born, she experiences the suffering of the hell beings,
It is to be obsessed with perceiving things as being born and as ceasing, and perceiving things as having a self, as not having a self, or as being the self.
They will enjoy śamatha and reach the bliss of dhyāna. With a peaceful voice they will speak of peace. {91}
where they prostrated at the feet of the Blessed One and circled him three times.
or with the emptiness of the sensory element of the ears, the sensory element of sounds, and the sensory element of auditory consciousness;
“Venerable Lord! Is the fruit then attained when one has cultivated the path,
and Mañjuśrī Kumārabhuta is there now.”
“In this way, those who possess great learning will have the power to satisfy the minds of their listeners,
“Blessed One,” he said, “the hearers actualize all unconditioned phenomena while,
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Have no doubts or uncertainties On hearing in detail the supreme Dharma of the Buddha,
Who will abide in the real nature and
numerous excellent foods, with hundreds of flavors to savor as they chewed, licked, sucked, and drank
Since the Bhagavān had granted the youth Candraprabha this opportunity,
‘Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, let the fever seize such and such! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
When washed and pure, Perform the practice of the deity of activity.
Even being in the womb produces similar regrets as those produced by the experience in the hells.
and omniscience is consciousness [and the other aggregates].
that they are equal to space.
The amount of merit of all those beings would still be far less than the quantity of merit made by a bodhisattva who first aroused the mind of awakening, and then, embracing an attitude of altruism, strove to liberate all beings, while practicing great love and great compassion without hypocrisy or pretense.
He also teaches them expertise in skillful means, the profound conduct of the unsurpassable Mahāyāna.
“Son of a self-immolator, in holding that all selves endure, attachment will arise
similarly, how is the transcendent perfection of wisdom absolutely pure owing to the absolute purity of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness?
Then the gods situated throughout this world system of the great trichiliocosm, that is to say
The young god then actualized the fruit of a stream-enterer
I obtained it, asked questions about it, preserved it, recited it to others,
So it is, Su­bhūti, that great bodhisattva beings should never lack the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
they could not through their enumeration know the number of the hundred thousands of quintillion of eons that have passed since the bhagavān tathāgata Mahābhijñā­jñānābhi­bhū passed into nirvāṇa.
Venerable Blessed One, I request you to guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the realms of the trichiliocosm!
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Samantabhadra;
They are never apart from beholding the true nature and buddhahood.
this is the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, originating from the skillful means of great bodhisattva beings who abide in the meditative concentrations, the immeasurable aspirations, and the formless absorptions.
All the buddhas offered congratulations to the Thus-Gone One for reaching perfect and complete awakening and conferred upon him religious gifts.
They will not yet have the divine hearing; Their ordinary hearing faculty will be like this.
Aging does not come from anywhere.
Or spinning the unexcelled wheel of Dharma in its twelve aspects?
They who are established in enlightenment
They will never be conscious of unpleasant mental phenomena.
Those sixteen young princes who as youths were mendicants who taught the Dharma in the Bhagavān’s teaching all attained the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, and
Illusion is itself the applications of mindfulness, and applications of mindfulness are themselves illusion.
I declare that henceforth any servant who should wish to go forth shall not be prevented from doing so.”
Also the Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin devas, And the pure beings who dwell in Nirmāṇaratin,
the bhikṣus and bodhisattvas rejoiced and greatly praised the teachings of the Bhagavān.
Having all circumambulated him three times, they took their place in the gathering to one side.
Lord, formerly I have heard from the Tathāgata and from Mañjuśrī, the crown prince of wisdom, many hundreds of thousands of teachings of the Dharma, but
even with just his toe, touches
conquering devils and foes and overwhelming all critics.
Immediately after hearing those languages, sounds, terms, explanations, and statements they retain them and do not squander them.
and upon holding, mastering, honoring, retaining, venerating, respecting, and making offerings to it.
Venerable Lord! How should those great bodhisattva beings who are beginners train in the transcendent perfection of wisdom?
Rejoice, for I have seen to it that the Four Āgamas have taken root in the land of nāgas!”
Will they also attain the excellence of the pratyekabuddhas?
venerable Subāhu,
‘Great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom
Just as what is mixed with the five impure foods Is eaten without being adulterated— Just like the burned cord— May this truth manifest!
As soon as the Bodhisattva stepped foot on the palace floor, the entire palace became illuminated with light.
“Attaining the result that is the liberation of hearers and solitary buddhas is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
malicious nonhuman beings may be attracted.
“Vimalatejā, what is truly meant by the qualities of the buddhas?”
less still the mindsets of ordinary people
Monks, afterward the Bodhisattva proceeded through Magadha and eventually arrived at Gaya.
Yellow is earth,
“A monk caretaker lives there
buried at a crossroads, will stop all coming and going. It will interrupt all daily activities.
You should know that so long will the tathāgatas teach the sacred doctrine to sentient beings in the world.
His steps always make beautiful circles to the right.
And who are patient, peaceful, and self-controlled: They will all of them attain enlightenment. {77}
The fifth, which resembles space, Should be understood as the empty sign For the intermediate state, non-duality.
circumambulated the Bhagavān many hundreds of thousands of times, and
Avadhūtī is in the central area— It conducts prāṇa in the moment of innate joy.
“They who possess this samādhi Will have understanding and memory,
“Therefore, young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I will practice completely pure physical conduct in that way.’
Bhagavān, for the sake of showing compassion to us, accept these airborne palaces of the Brahmās.
But they all sit subservient At the doorstep of the rich.
Having annihilated the conceptualization of phenomena They do not become proud in the Buddha’s Dharma. {44}
“Go, king, look upon all that is yours! Lord of shining merit!
Venerable Lord! What skill in means do great bodhisattva beings possess when
“If all phenomena are without attributes, without indications, and without signs,
they do not apprehend the notion that [the fruitional attributes], up to and including omniscience, are empty, or the notion that they are not empty.
The Sugata gave them all this prophecy: “You will in the future become buddhas.” {20}
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Always delight, gladden, and enchant Devas, nāgas, and likewise the yakṣas,
Homage to Tathāgata Gambhīra­dharma­prabhā­rāja­śrī.
the two Should gaze at each other intensely. “Then, focusing on the pleasure of gazing,
nose-consciousness,
Does a phenomenon engage in pure acts with respect to another phenomenon?
They are adorned with the thirty-two major marks of a great being, and are replete with all the faculties.
Once they have been greatly honored and venerated by the kṣatriyas and their retinues and have received their offerings,
“Senior Śāradvatī­putra, it is so! It is just as you have said.
Look at glorious Śakra, Śacī’s husband, who is at the gates with his army. Look at the gods, demigods, and kiṃnaras who are here making offerings!
“Always pacify desire through contemplating ugliness, Overcome anger with the power of patience,
They perceive minds afflicted with delusion correctly, as minds that are afflicted with delusion; and they perceive minds free from delusion correctly, as minds that are free from delusion.
Where one sees relativity without entertaining any convictions, there is the domain of the bodhisattva.
that is called the deluded mind which great bodhisattva beings might have with respect to all things.
“Consider, noble son, how a lion moves without bringing along anything.
and the emptiness of inherent existence would indeed disintegrate.
Up to a distance of eighty leagues, They adorned the seat of awakening.
While saying, ‘O wind, this is beautiful.’
Once born, they also have to age and die,
“Therefore, Virtuous One, quickly leave this fine city And practice the conduct of previous sages.
“ ‘That which arises from the mind is the goodness of the mind; There is wisdom’s discrimination, and thus realization,
Now, if that father has many friends,
One’s lifespan will without doubt Be equal to that of the priests of Brahma.
“These fools use many different methods, Trying to purify their bodies.
Monks, at the time of the constellation of Citrā, after the constellation of Hastā had passed, the chief priest of the king, who was called Udayana, the father of Udāyin, went before King Śuddhodana surrounded by some five hundred priests and said,
Then, whatever place or direction Those birds travel, Bhūtas will not dwell there, Nor will any other harm doers.
With fangs showing between the lips, angry,
“Listen, Chanda!
Noble son, that is the kind of blessing that Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara has.”
It is free of all attributes. It is unwavering. It has no location. It completely has the nature of space.
“Blessed One, we will have faith in this sūtra.
When he had spoken these verses, the god honored the Bodhisattva with celestial flowers and immediately thereafter disappeared.
They will see the great trees that blaze with fire, blaze strongly, and blaze fiercely.
One should drink barley potash with curds.
whose minds will not be averted from the unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, and who additionally will hold and be attentive in the appropriate manner, and so forth, to this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom?
With its magical powers,
Similarly, they discern that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are pure, and do not focus on them.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ skill in accepting.
the understanding of omniscience,
“O Prince Sarvārthasiddha, you have won, you have won!”
"ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དངོས་པོ་འདི་ལྟ་སྟེ། ནོར་དང་། <tOf course the same thing goes for physical possessions such as my wealth, grain, gold, silver, gems, jewelry, horses, elephants, chariots, riding mounts, villages, cities, towns, countries, kingdoms, palaces, marketplaces, mountain hamlets, male and female servants, employees, sons, daughters, wives, or retinue.
In this precious transcendent perfection, there is nothing at all that arises or ceases, nothing that is afflicted or purified, and nothing that is to be retained or forsaken.
“There are gods and humans Who delight in the distorted discipline of extremists.
Śāriputra, eyes, too, ought to be described like that.
“Whatever is the same as affliction on the ultimate level is also ultimately the same as purification.
promote it, proclaim it, chant it,
Thereupon, the goddess employed her magical power to cause the elder Śāriputra to appear in her form and to cause herself to appear in his form.
Oh! Oh! Compassionate Supuṣpacandra, Generous guide, I pray that you arise.
Then the Bhagavān taught the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
When he saw the resident monks, finely dressed and well trained, living peacefully in this glorious and heavenly abode,
in the same vein, just as the utter purity [of all other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, is without foundation
Devas and humans will be in suffering.
“Similarly, emptiness is not something other than the sensory element of the eyes; nor is the sensory element of the eyes something other than emptiness.
in the great ocean there is a great, precious jewel called Fulfilling All Wishes.
In the same vein, from the limits of past time, they have not grasped [any other attribute or attainment], up to and including omniscience.
they encourage those sentient beings to acquire unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, and establish them therein.
To enthrall an important person,
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with excellent wisdom possess ten qualities.
“Excellent, excellent, Śāriputra! It is so, Śāriputra! It is exactly as you have said!
He knows the scope of the faculties of beings
During the middle part of the night, he gave an eloquent talk.
They had completed all the aspirations of the bodhisattvas,
The man should do the deity-identification in the following way:
All the victorious ones of the three times
This concludes “The Past,” the seventh chapter of the Dharma teaching of “The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.”
They would not escape from the three realms, which are like a house with a dilapidated roof and rafters that are on fire, and in which they will be burned, roasted, pained, and tormented.
As soon these holy beings were approaching, a net of jewels appeared, bedecking the entire trichiliocosm,
The ripened fruits of wholly negative actions are wholly negative,
When the king heard these words, he felt extremely sad.
This army of yakṣas and other beings, Which extends for eighty leagues,
“The people who have faith, are wise, and know the practice, Are always joyful when they hear The way that is correct and profound, And do not become frightened or terrified. {79}
It is the birth of knowledge. It is the elimination of ignorance.
It is having a pure livelihood. It is not forsaking the solitary life.
turned the irreversible wheel of the Dharma; had attended many hundred thousands of buddhas;
Alternatively, bathed and dressed in clean clothes,
Nārāyaṇa, bodhisattvas who practice in this way are carrying out the bodhisattva practices.”
Once the Blessed One had spoken, the bodhisattva great being Delighted by Victory, the other bodhisattvas, the monks, and the rest of the assembly, along with the world with its gods, humans, demigods, and gandharvas, all rejoiced and praised what the Blessed One had said.
Noble son, it is the thus-gone, worthy, perfect buddha Amitābha who was known at that time as the thus-gone Arisen from Flowers and who taught the Dharma in that world.
“Those with correct behavior, who have modesty and self-respect, Who delight in the Dharma and the buddhas,
They are endowed with the certainty of understanding,
the bodhisattva will then sever the life-force of their parents and, as the parents are slain, the bodhisattva will display miracles.
“They had miraculous powers and had attained the four dhyānas, They were very learned and skilled in composing poetry and texts,
(3) They achieve and maintain the third meditative concentration where joy is absent, abiding in equanimity due to the absence of attachment to joy, while both mindfulness and alertness are present and bliss is experienced by the body. This is what sublime beings describe as ‘mindful, blissful, abiding in bliss, and equanimous.’
When those beings witness the death of a bodhisattva who is superior to, above, and greater than the entire world—someone unequaled, who is unstained by and unattached to the pleasures of the senses—
and will always conquer all devils.
“The devas of the Trāyastriṃśa paradise also gather there.
Sublime Captain, please come here!
I see him as not born from the past,
The yogin will succeed in every way; No other action needs to be performed.
Have you not violated a nun? Are you not an impostor?
“King, please ornament the prince.”
then the lord buddhas, great bodhisattva beings, the pratyekabuddhas, the other classes of sublime individuals apart from them, and the worlds of gods, humans, and antigods could indeed reproach them with the words,
he even gave him a pair of shoes.
The tathāgatas remain for immeasurable millions of eons, for utterly inexpressible eons.
“For example, Su­bhūti, space is endowed neither with the level of the śrāvakas,
Being insatiable in accumulating the roots of virtue,
And likewise myself upon a lion throne Teaching many kinds of Dharma.
The court scribe replied, “There are two factors in honing one’s intelligence.
“Tantra” means continuum;
This, Mahauṣadhi, is how you should view actions.
then they have been prophesied and inspired by the thus-gone ones,
“Su­bhūti, the transcendent perfection of generosity, too, is neither fettered nor liberated.
just like those of Śarabha Aiṇeya, the king of ungulates.
“ ‘If, from today on, Without attaining stainless awakening,
Great sage! There are yakṣas and rākṣasas here That crave wombs, But kings can neither see them, Nor even describe them.
The Śākya lion, the Buddha, Was on Vulture Peak Mountain.
Just as, after applying compost, The tree will bear more fruit,
they are not at all fixated on those phenomena.”
Having completed these activities,
Engulfed by fire, they burn with great flames.
“Noble sons, be seated upon your thrones!”
and are never separated from the mind that knows all things,
having become a god, saw the truth in the Blessed One’s presence before returning to remain among the gods.
If he is in the forest, I will emanate as many devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas to listen to the Dharma.
“Venerable Lord! How do great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom observe and study production and disintegration with respect to the five psycho-physical aggregates, while training in these three gateways to liberation?”
Would great bodhisattva beings who newly embark on the [Great] Vehicle, having heard this teaching on the transcendent perfection of wisdom, not possibly be afraid and terrified?
and the aspects [of it] through which they [become absorbed] are also empty.
and I have exempted them alone from the vinaya guidelines I laid down for my disciples,
Noble one, the merit you have created cannot be burned by fire or swept away by water.
removed his upper robe from one shoulder, knelt on his right knee,
At that time a hundred thousand gods led the Bodhisattva’s chariot.
The strength of ten bodhisattvas who have been definitively emerged for ten million eons is the same as the strength of one bodhisattva who has been definitively emerged for one hundred million eons.
“When I see that you are all Arhats who are upon this level,
Why is that? Because their perception is deluded, they did not like the color of the medicine, did not like its smell, and did not like its taste.
I will now describe him—this is the profound instruction of the Buddha
He also teaches the methods that allow beings to swiftly gain control over their own minds and abide in profound tolerance.
Even the sages who live for eons are not beyond Degeneration and the dreads of sickness, old age, and dying.”
recite it to others, promote it, proclaim it,
Then Brother Subhūti, Brother Mahākātyāyana, Mahākāśyapa, and Mahā­maudgalyāyana,
At that time the great sage Asita, who had the five extraordinary powers, was residing on the slopes of Himavat, the king of mountains, together with his sister’s son Naradatta. When the Bodhisattva was born,
Since they abide in accordance with those [aspects of emptiness], wherever they abide they do not apprehend anything at all that would attain the fruit of entering the stream, or the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth, or the fruit of no longer being subject to rebirth, or arhatship, or individual enlightenment.
No fewer than five hundred beings Are living inside In numerous narrow rooms,
and performed a very elaborate
Just as a seed establishes a flower’s color, scent, and taste,
Form and enlightenment are the same: There is no difference that can be found. {2}
However, noble ones, I attained the highest, complete enlightenment of buddhahood many hundreds of thousands of quintillions of eons ago.
The nature of the eyes is emptiness. Emptiness is the eyes.
hung with diadems, earrings, and garlands;
“Reverend, how did the youthful, shape-shifting nāga first gain faith?”
The daughter of Sāgara, king of the nāgas, said, “Venerable Śāriputra, if I have great miraculous power,
“What is the teaching of the tathāgatas?
“All that generosity cannot be even a hundredth Of the accumulation of merit that is acquired
It became adorned with strings of little bells.
she alone Has been the mother of the Bodhisattva,
Then, in the quiet of the night, he arrived at the palace together with an assembly of 32,000 gods in order to serve and venerate the Bodhisattva.
‘This is not my wife. This is my younger sister.
Please pacify their thirst with the downpour from the rain cloud of the eightfold path;
why does the Tathā­gata disclose his own past lives in the presence of the four assemblies?
they arouse excitement through the pleasure and delight that they create with their alluring, charming, and pleasant conversation.
What will you achieve through the transcendent perfection of tolerance?
That fruit is empty too
The Blessed One answered the monks,
Bodhisattvas, similarly, heal sentient beings suffering from the cold diseases of affliction by warming them up with their insight.
Emptiness is non-division.
May he explain the transcendent perfection of wisdom most profoundly!
they developed the power of love and entered into supreme and auspicious awakening.
Similarly, they discern that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are empty, and do not focus on them.
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Attain the vast, unshakable, supreme peace,
The Bhagavān was dwelling in Rājagṛha on the Vulture Peak mountain together with a great monastic assembly of 1,250 monks and a multitude of bodhisattva mahāsattvas.
“If you ask what are the ‘ten recollections,’
That is so! You have spoken correctly.
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield consists of the four means of unification.
As being without self, without a soul, unmoving,
Completely white in color,
all the way up to the lifetimes in an eon of destruction, an eon of formation,
Śāradvatī­putra, the bodhisattvas who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom in that manner
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara was Bālāha, the king of horses, and he rescued me from the fear of death.
To what end do you roam in cyclic existence for innumerable countless eons,
knowing that they were seated on their lion thrones,
Attachment to eternalism and nihilism Is utter delusion about here and there.
Mañjuśrī, a name is not placed in either a primary or an intermediate location.
Many tens of millions of buddha realms throughout the ten directions trembled.
yet, without conceptually apprehending them, they do listen to all the blessed buddhas.
Are you tired? Are you weary?
Noble ones, think of making offerings to the relics of the Bhagavān!
to do all this without any interest in material things and not for the sake of such things, and to dedicate with a heartfelt wish, saying, ‘By these roots of virtue, may all beings be born without the stains of the womb.’
Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One was dwelling on Vulture Peak Mountain in Rājgṛha
“Those who wish to free themselves Completely from both of these views Should meditate on that which is inexpressible,
Either a deva has been born here Or a buddha has appeared in this world.
Due to their disrespect, those who practice giving get angry and give rise to the fault of resentfulness.
He established countless, innumerable beings in irreversible progress toward the highest, complete enlightenment and then he passed into nirvāṇa.
that is to say, the one who at all times continues to engage inseparably in union with the transcendent perfection of wisdom
Endlessly splendid like a hoard of silver or snow,
the gods of the Catur­mahā­rāja­kāyika realm, in this world system of the great trichiliocosm,
Their joints are elegant.
yet the presence of that darkness is neither constant nor not constant.
Oh! Oh! Arise, glorious Puṣpacandra, Who has perfect discipline, generosity, and austerity. {xvii}
The bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi then asked,
let alone, Ajita, someone who while possessing this Dharma teaching accomplishes generosity, correct conduct, patience, diligence, meditation, and wisdom.
Who can answer my question as to what this means?
Because a bodhisattva is not born in outlying lands where people are as stupid as sheep, with dull faculties, ignorant, and incapable of distinguishing right from wrong.
He followed behind the compassionate Sugata And
could you count those seed fragments until you arrived at the total number?”
They had unimpeded wisdom and were unhindered in their sphere of activity.
This refrain should be extensively applied to all phenomena,
And if there were realms as numerous as the sands of the GangesThat were filled with those precious jewels, {4}
Pāpīyān, what do you have in mind when you say this?
Monks, right away the five monks bowed at the Thus-Gone One’s feet
The bandits, though, had posted a lookout who was lying in wait and
mounts, retinue, and realm, were placed in confinement, then they could not create any obstacles for the noble sons and daughters who have entered the Great Vehicle.”
Even though one is already depressed, one is further assailed by misfortunes and becomes exasperated.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ skill in providing sentient beings with a livelihood.
He may follow the ways of immorality, yet, seeing the horror of even the slightest transgressions, he lives by the ascetic practices and austerities.
And subsequently departed.
who desires knowledge should frequently practice appropriate mindfulness;
They will not end up in the intermediate eon of famine.
and I became speechless.
and go on to abandon all disturbing emotions and actualize arhatship.’“
Nor does inconceivability dedicate merits to the inconceivable.
As it understands all phenomena, it is sameness that neither raises things up nor puts them down.
“If they have few desires And maintain pure conduct,
“Many people teach the emptiness of the skandhas But have not understood that selflessness;
“Those beings who, at a time when the sugatas Have passed into nirvāṇa or are present,
they have no characteristics of conditions, they are devoid of characteristics,
from humans, non-humans, yakṣas, rākṣasas, piśācas, asuras, gandharvas, nāgas, garuḍas, guhyakas, pretas, vetālas, kākhordas, kṛtyas, pūtanas, kaṭapūtanas, unmadas, and apasmāras.
“The princes, on hearing my words, Became distressed and unhappy.
“Noble son, there are beings afflicted by pride, conceit, and arrogance.
shows reality,
This bodhisattva mahāsattva Vairocana­raśmi­prati­maṇḍita­dhvaja­rāja was at that time, on that occasion, Queen Vimaladattā,
Likewise, all dharmas are a single dharma.
“ ‘When this bhikṣu came into the capital My mind became extremely wicked.
who desires to make all beings happy should generate the mind for awakening;
“ ‘The omniscient buddhas have turned the Dharma wheel And taught the unequaled level of wisdom;
Such a kṣatriya will be deprived of any happiness of the god and human realms,
Similarly, Senior Pūrṇa, physical forms of the future are neither fettered nor liberated;
a boy or girl who is well washed, dressed in very clean clothes,
“When you taught through a quintillion Causes, reasons, and parables,
‘Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, swallow, swallow! Kha kha! Eat, eat! Make such and such wither, do! Mara mara! Kill such and such, kill! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
If one were to ask why, it is exactly as stated above.
as well as the followers of the vehicle of the śrāvakas and the followers of the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas,
invisible, formless, inconceivable, not a mental construct,
They endow them with recollection,
“Others may be covered in a thousand garments, But if their minds are revealed to lack shame and modesty And if they have no good qualities and lack truthful speech,
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ excellent power of retention consist in?
watched in amazement as they invited the venerable Saṅgharakṣita to pay homage to a set of shrines, saying,
Have come in order to accomplish service for the Dharma
Bhagavān, these hundred thousand bodhisattvas have also come to listen to this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.
“What is craving for wisdom? It is seeking wisdom.
“No, Venerable Su­bhūti!”
Illuminating everywhere And inspiring the people. {15}
Venerable, since, from now on, you should not knowingly speak falsely even in the hopes of getting a laugh,
Bhagavān, liberate beings!
“For example, Su­bhūti, space is neither darkness nor light.
“Mahauṣadhi, it resembles the nature of a person conjured up by an illusionist, the indistinct nature of the hazy shadow of a person that appears on water,
Similarly, they do not investigate the notions that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are a self; in the same vein
It is not physical, since the body is insubstantial in itself. It is not mental, since the nature of the mind is like illusion.
the transcendent perfection of wisdom has not been produced by mind,
To you whose extraordinary wisdom has directly manifested, we bow down!
Since everything that grows from the ground will wither under the sun,
when in Mūla, the root.
So I shall dispel his doubts.
do not consider anything at all that arises or ceases.
Saṅgharakṣita gazed long at the ocean until just before dawn when, fatigued, he was overcome by a deep sleep.
Smell all the divine Dharma aromas In the great billion-world universe. {i}
Just as a lotus, growing out of mud, Is not soiled by dirt or mud,
From Passion Vajrī:
Endowed with the ū and bindu
The ones who teach this samādhi Never doubt enlightenment. {9}
Then at that time, Śāriputra felt contented, delighted, elated, and joyful.
In the same vein, they do not consider whether or not they engage in union with the noble eightfold path or [with all the other causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including the ten powers of the tathāgatas.
Śakra, lord of the gods, took five hundred divine parasols and offered them to the Blessed One on his left.
There are many nonhumans everywhere And it is fouled by feces and urine.
If a monk were to do such things as these, he would immediately disqualify himself as a monk,
Although there are many kinds of forms There is no form that can be grasped. {49}
I should establish them in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.’
for one shall become the greatest of miracle workers, and the other shall become the wisest of the wise.”
yet he is not performance.
and inspires all beings with knowledge,
They thus requested the bhagavān to turn the wheel of the Dharma, and
Then the Blessed One said to those gods in the entourage of Indra,
place it in the effigy’s heart, and strike the spot with black mustard seeds or similar substances.
Bhagavat, are there no other pores?
Ānanda, among all the activities, enjoyments, and practices of the buddhas,
Some 84,000 celestial maidens followed her, as did 84,000 nāga maidens, 84,000 gandharva maidens, 84,000 kiṃnara maidens, and 84,000 female demigods. All of them were lavishly ornamented and sang her praise in melodic voices accompanied by music.
This concludes “Resolutions,” the twelfth chapter of the Dharma teaching of “The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.”
Similarly, echoes, optical aberrations, magical displays, mirages, and phantoms are uncreated, undestroyed, and unconditioned.
The four aggregates for appropriation that emerge in conjunction with consciousness, [along with the aggregate of material form], are name and form.
In that house the Thus-Gone One always resides.
“Come, let us go before a preceptor,” and led him away. When they arrived before a preceptor, the novice said,
For what reason did you show a smile? {45}
In this way, Su­bhūti, do great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, acquire the transcendent perfection of tolerance.
“Senior Su­bhūti, in this transcendent perfection of wisdom, have the three vehicles not been taught?
They are like rain in the sky, pristine and crystal clear.
“The one with infinite sight explained Ignorance as the first cause, and the suffering of death:
Having relinquished mundane activities, it keeps few things.
does ultimately not experience diversity.
but when he wakes from sleep, he can no longer see those forms.
the love that is peaceful because free of grasping;
“Yes, that is how it is. Holy Man, that is correct.
Therefore, I am reluctant to go to ask that good man about his sickness.”
‘I must benefit all living beings,
If you think that he has been a holder solely of my Dharma, bhikṣus, you should not regard him in that way.
Some dress themselves in the feathers of vultures or owls, while others wear planks, muñja grass, asana bark, darbha grass, or valvaja grass. Others don a cloak made of camel wool, goat wool, horsehair, or simply a hide. Still others only put on wet clothes.
They have no connection with flesh, blood, and veins.
They abandon all gatherings and abandon all busyness.
while the two young brahmins sat in repose.
Noble sir, one who stays in the fixed determination of the vision of the uncreated is not capable of conceiving the spirit of unexcelled perfect enlightenment.
For so long I will train on the auspicious path that leads to the city of fearlessness.”
the elephant among men,
After being presented with offerings of almsfood, he pleased his surrounding retinue with a teaching on Dharma, and encouraged, uplifted, and complimented them.
“When all conceptualization has ceased They do not relapse into conceptualization.
There is a whirl of sixty thousand of the finest horses, elephants, and chariots.
Blessed Buddha allowed the postulants’ going forth and ordained them with the words, “Come, join me, monk.”
“(5) One should abandon conceptions of existence and non-existence and be firm in the emancipation (vimokṣa) of emptiness.
As she awakens with tearful eyes, she asks her husband,
I also do not consider those [physical forms] that the transcendent perfection of wisdom could appropriate or become fixated upon.
He went to where the dharmabhāṇaka was and bowed his head to his feet.
While the King of Physicians, the remedy itself, dwelt in the womb.
Bhagavat, just like those who are not satisfied by just a taste of amṛta,
make all kinds of offerings to them, and perfectly complete these practices of the bodhisattva,
[2] they attain the state of being cared for by the buddhas; [3] they will be cared for by the devas;
With the Blessed One’s permission, the bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkam­bhin then asked,
Venerable Lord, for these reasons great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom should not abide in physical forms.
“All those who just touch that person with their clothing will become bodhisattvas in their last existence.
In that case, Su­bhūti, these great bodhisattva beings should know that they have been foreordained by The tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas of the past to attain unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
They will be saintly beings.”
“The kiṃnaras take walks along these walkways.
Please clear away my doubts!”
So why should his skills here provoke wonder?
nor is there arising of consciousness [and so forth].
Even if he were capable of standing up, Venerable Lord, he would not be able to walk for more than one, two, or three krośa.
The Bhagavat laughed and said, “Noble son, it is not yet time for Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara to come.
It would not even bear approximation of any kind.
“Noble one, when you go to the world realm Sahā and have arrived there, do not perceive it as inferior.
That eon will be named Manojña­śabdābhi­garjita.
“All phenomena are causally produced; Beyond limits and without consciousness, they are like space. There is no agent and likewise no one who feels,
it does not enter the way of mind, and it is free from coming and going.
and who are attentive to it in the correct manner and teach it extensively to others,
“What is being immovable? It is the mind not being engaged with any attribute.
“Where will the Blessed One turn the wheel of Dharma?”
They will move from buddhafield to buddhafield, and
“They will be close to the lords of sages And will be close to buddhahood’s enlightenment.
What were these three?
This completes the thirty-second chapter from “The Transcendent Perfection of Wisdom in Ten Thousand Lines,” entitled “The Attainment of Manifest Enlightenment.”
Be the eyes for those whose faculties are poor.
“Śāradvatī­putra! The purity of phenomena is not subject to affliction due to the natural luminosity of physical forms.
hey reveal the irreversible wheel of Dharma, arising from the six transcendences,
But one cannot know the extent of the sūtras they have accomplished. {24}
they think that [all the attributes and attainments], up to and including unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, are distinct things and the emptiness of inherent existence another.
gave rise to the thirty-seven qualities conducive to awakening and actualized his own awakening.
As having no coming or going,
The Blessed One is endowed with teeth whose tips are long, sharp, and white.
Noble son, know that whenever such great compassion for sentient beings endowed with these thirty-two features arises in a bodhisattva,
I ask that the loving and reverend saṅgha, in your love, allow my going forth and confer ordination on me.”
This concludes the twelfth chapter, on demonstrating skill in the arts.
and those who have regard for mothers, fathers, mendicants, and brahmins.
A person who sees dependent arising sees the Tathāgata.
They were experts in the knowledge that engages with the domain of the thus-gone ones.
Then he spoke in verse:
all gods and humans,
the samādhi named Teaching Ultimate Truth,
“ ‘My only son, the omniscient one, The protector of the world, The unsurpassed one who delights all— He is alive in the world of gods and humans.’
thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I have cultivated the path leading to the cessation of suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose
“These phenomena have no nature; They have no nature to be found.
Monk, as all phenomena are nothing to be benightedly attached to, they are not to be engaged with.
How does the world come into being?
To sentient beings who are obsessed with constructs they teach the path of suchness, and not a path of childish obsession with constructs.
They felt determined to contemplate, follow, and serve the Tathāgata.
Monks, I realized that I should henceforth live on a single juniper berry and restrain myself from eating two.
let alone bodhisattva mahāsattvas with bodhisattva followers as numerous as the grains of sand in forty Ganges Rivers,
The experience of such is called ‘the entrance into the principle of nonduality.’ ”
This was the twelfth chapter on bestowing empowerment on the students from “The Tantra of the Vajra in the Underworld.”
Now, because ordinary beings are swift to pay heed to miracles,
Conclusion of the eighteenth chapter, “The Entrustment of the Samādhi.”
They do not consider whether physical forms are afflicted or purified;
Remaining well placed in sameness.
King Ajātaśatru of Magadha, the son of Vaidehī.
‘Śrī Mahādevī, in the future
They sent forth a gentle breeze from a rain of flowers and perfumed powders that emitted beautiful scents. When Virūpākṣa arrived, he also circumambulated the city of Kapilavastu. Stopping in the west, from where he had arrived, he paid homage to the Bodhisattva.
“Just as in a completely cloudless sky In an instant a mass of clouds appears—
Have you seen the delightful gardens and the delightful bathing pools?
that the precious jewel of the Dharma emerges,
inīlaja | viṣanaduṣaja | viyavanaja | vibakṣisame | pāśalajasi | sthānaśarave | śastrakarṇṇe | humahuma | mahā­kāruṇika svāhā |
it has not been produced by [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
“Venerable Lord! What is acceptance that phenomena are non-arising? What is its extent? What is its cognition?”
The buddha bhagavāns with their one or two attendants then arrived in this Sahā world realm.
“Young man, how do bodhisattva mahāsattvas become skilled in the patience of profound Dharma?
for it leads to the pure perception of the Buddha.
” He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of the emptiness of the unlimited!”
Noble son, under the king’s rule beings had found happiness and well-being, followed the path of the ten virtuous deeds, and were satisfied with their spouses.
Illuminating Lord of the World,
They all became bhagavāns, tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas named Dṛḍhaśūra.
In the same vein, why do you say that the [remaining] designations made with respect to sights, up to and including their designation as entities or non-entities, do not constitute a bodhisattva
It is famed for its utter purity and manifested by those who are intent on worship.
and indeed perfect the transcendent perfection of tolerance.
“In the same way, these ignorant sons of Māra,
“How should he meditate,
They will smell the scents of the bodies of the devas; namely, they will smell the scent of the body of Śakra, lord of devas, and know if he is enjoying amusements and pleasures in Vaijayanta, his palace; if he is teaching the Dharma to the devas of Trāyastriṃśa in Sudharma, the assembly hall of the devas; or if he has come into the park there for pleasure.
Why is that, Śāriputra? What are the causes and conditions for speaking of eyes?
Similarly, the priestly class, standing out like a tall sāl tree;
perpetually honored by yakṣas,
Having crossed over, you liberate others who were in bondage.
is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas attain the thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment.
“Deva maidens with beautiful voices And with melodious music and songs,
It gives heavenly sexual pleasure.
During the sixth week, the Thus-Gone One proceeded from the nāga king Mucilinda’s domain to a banyan tree of a goat herder.
The sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who act in that manner will renounce all the limits of attachment.
When śevāla and black hellebore are smeared onto the penis with freshly churned buffalo butter, the penis will become healthy and strong.
He lays out his sleeping mat and strikes the wooden beam.
The Three Jewels must never be abandoned…” and so forth, just as it is extensively taught in the tantra.
You have joyfully and happily attained The unsurpassable wisdom of the buddhas.
if they abide in, cognize, and are intent on [the other sense objects], up to and including mental phenomena,
an audience of a hundred thousand devas, nāgas, yakṣas,
King Mahāpadma was troubled by this news and, head in hands, sat and sat, absorbed in thought.
In this way, just as you imagined that the nature of every single being in the worlds located in the east is that of universal emperors,
These are the secret mantra syllables That remove and counteract poison:
Having heard this Dharma of the Guide, Some, after four lives have passed,
they will be holders of this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.’
The bodhisattva Sāntendriya declared,
They should encourage others to acquire an excellent life span.
They do not apprehend the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities as the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities.
or others, or even loving kindness, being free of apprehending all phenomena in this way have supreme loving kindness.
The Bhagavān now turned to the entire assembly of bodhisattvas and announced to them,
he was endowed with the ten powers, the fourfold fearlessness, and perfect might.
Thus did the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha reply to the Bhagavan’s questions.
will purposefully declare and incant in their eulogies,
The elimination of attachment and aversion is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it eliminates judgmental thoughts.
“Well said, Su­bhūti! Well said!
They are skilled in the knowledge of the detailed categories of all the words of the Dharma.
but instead, arouses great compassion toward all living beings through striving to eliminate the incidental afflictions.
to the notions that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are not a self, that they are empty, that they are signless, that they are without aspirations, that they are void, that they are purified, that they are non-arising, that they are unceasing, and that they are non-entities,
She paid respect, worshiped him, venerated him, made offerings, and performed acts of reverence.
With a genuine and correct knowledge of all phenomena their minds turn to profound dependent origination.
They maintained unbroken the succession of the Three Jewels,
Similarly, they themselves should be equipoised in the attitude of compassion, empathetic joy, and equanimity,
Vipaśyin, Śikhin, Viśvabhū, Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni,
If the Bhagavān sees strength in our aspiration,
“Many offerings of innumerable kinds, Offered continuously to supreme beings Within the appearance of a quintillion realms,
and they set out from Rājagṛha.
This is the same as the monks and priests who are unable to separate their mind and body from the objects of their desire.
They do not consider anything to be existent or non-existent.
“ ‘Nārāyaṇa thought, “If he thinks about this, he will definitely decide against making a gift, so I will put divinely inspired speech into his mouth.” “ 
In the same vein, the gateways of mnemonic incantation and the gateways of meditative stability cannot be appropriated.
“I arrived in Jambudvīpa alone.
Up in the air they became huge and then became small; they became small and then became huge.
“Maitreya, this turning of the wheel of Dharma is merely a brief teaching that praises just a few of the qualities of the Thus-Gone One.
for it brings complete peace in others.
Hear from me what are the qualities in store For those who fearlessly teach this sūtra In the middle of an assembly, Teaching it without idleness.
“When he sees that they are all rested, He gathers them together and says to them,
he returned to his village.
O wise ones! O children of enlightened heritage! It is just as you have said!
“The monk Vīradatta therefore said to the girl’s mother,
No matter where this precious gemstone is placed, no human being seeking to intrude [and cause harm] would have a chance.
‘Until I can bring these beings to enlightenment I will not pass into the peace of nirvāṇa.’ {34}
If anyone does so, I will banish them and provide recompense from my own stores and treasury.”
Rejoicing, they prostrated with their heads toward the feet of the Blessed One and circumambulated him three times before departing from his presence.
Śāriputra, did you see that universe Abhirati, and the Tathāgata Akṣobhya?
the samādhi named Supreme Illumination by the Moon,
Similarly, the emptiness of internal phenomena is empty of the emptiness of internal phenomena.
They had given away all their possessions, Were resolute, had the power of patience, and delighted in meditation. {70}
they do not observe any emptiness, do not grasp any emptiness, do not have any view of emptiness, and they do not become fixated on emptiness.
Unable to bear it, he made a misguided
You should quickly be one who has the transmission Of this samādhi praised by the Buddha. {18}
That which is innumerable is designated as innumerable.
She can develop qualities and never lose them.
all the attributes of reality, the abiding nature, the real nature, the finality of existence, and the inconceivable expanse, also resemble this [precious gemstone].
Abiding in love, abiding in compassion, abiding in joy, and abiding in equanimity.
Listen to the extent of merit that arises When someone hears one verse of this sūtra And is the fiftieth in its transmission from one to another, And having heard it appreciates it and rejoices.
They attain those four great brahmavihāras. Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.
“If you ask what are the ‘twelve links of dependent origination,’
“When they are not engaged in any phenomenon, Whether inferior, superior, or middling, Whether composite or noncomposite, Whether existent or nonexistent,
Mañjuśrī, he attained manifest complete enlightenment
Monk, all phenomena lack a core, they are like space.
Then the earth goddess in this great trichiliocosm who is called Sthāvarā, along with her retinue of one billion earth goddesses, began to shake the entire great earth.
It entails absorption in the ten recollections, without the need for mindfulness and without the need for mentation.
Without being favored by the transcendent perfection of wisdom and without being favored by skill in means, these bodhisattvas give gifts,
When gods and humans witnessed this display, They were filled with amazement.
and, noble sons, those in which he did not deposit them,
Why should the tathāgatas attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed and genuinely perfect enlightenment?
owing to the profundity of the finality of existence,
Similarly, they discern that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are non-entities, and do not focus on them.
since she had reached the maximum extent of her lifespan.
venerable Mahānāma,
“Noble son, you may also wonder about the character of the bodhisattvas’ diligence that is free of conceit.
“Blessed One, there was such a bright light just now; who caused that sign?”
I will practice the six transcendent perfections until sentient beings have an inestimable life span and an inestimable luminosity, and there is an inestimable monastic community of śrāvakas.
“He will become a jina named Samantaprabha.
They should respectfully keep it in mind.
“Father, what is the meaning of this statement?”
“The meaningful words that they teach Will be most beautiful to the minds of the wise.
what hopes I had for becoming a king of real command were completely and utterly dashed too.
and who commit it to writing, or have it committed to writing,
Then at that time the bodhisattva mahāsattva Gadgadasvara, without departing from that buddha realm, without rising up from his seat, entered samādhi in this way.
This will bring fulfillment of wishes.
hydromechanics, beeswax crafts, sewing, wickerwork, leaf cutting, and perfume making.
he is the One Who Does Not Forget.
the discipline of the hearers and solitary buddhas, who rely on reference points, becomes an unwholesome state for bodhisattva great beings.
Just as a burning tree stump neither shines, nor gleams, nor sparkles alongside the gold of the Jambu River,
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, They will be perfect and completely skilled In poetry, treatises, comedy, music, song, and dance,
“What is condemning incorrect conduct? It is the understanding of the faults of incorrect conduct.
Friends, for no reason, with no cause, All our airborne palaces are shining.
“You may wonder how bodhisattvas dry all the mud of affliction.
This one has belief in the Hearers’ Vehicle,
those who are afraid of fire, water, weapons, toxins, curses, tigers, lions, strong poisons, thieves, and rogues,
With this mantra, dogs will flee when threatened with one’s left index finger:
“Therefore, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this samādhi, and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood,
Gatherings of gods and demigods, along with Śakra, Escorted the Bliss-Gone One as he was leaving.
He will not teach the sacred doctrine according to the notions that physical forms are empty or that they are not empty.
they were completely filled with blue lotuses, red lotuses, night lotuses, white lotuses, tiger claw flowers and great tiger claw flowers, and udumbara flowers.
Su­bhūti, it is because they consider that they themselves possess the attributes endowed with which the lord buddhas foreordain that unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment will be attained.
As Lord Buddha has explained.
The accumulation of calm abiding is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
My legs resembled the legs of a goat or a camel, and so it was for my armpits, belly, chest, and so forth.
“They will know the buddhas and see the buddhas; They will realize the nature of the buddhas.
Prostrations to the tathāgata Aśokaśrī, buddha of the south
“Maitreya was Jñānabala, the ruler of men, Who always maintained the supreme Dharma.
By passion, passion is killed; A conflagration is killed by fire.
Therefore, you must meditate on this profound Dharma in order to directly perceive it and
“Venerable Lord, if great bodhisattva beings should not cultivate fixation on all these phenomena,
they will attain the five faculties, beginning with faith.
Su­bhūti, it is because unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment is empty of intrinsic defining characteristics.
“Desire is like a sword, a spear, a trident, or a razor blade smeared with honey;
“How then,” asked Arjuna, “should one commence that calculation?”
it is that noble man or noble woman who in the future will come into the world as a tathāgata, arhat, perfectly enlightened buddha.’
And what does not burn will not be extinguished.
Some showed off their half-naked thighs.
He felt joy and elation, and simply through that he ascended into the air to the height of seven palm trees.
Śuddhodana, searching all around his quarters,
ghee Incanted seven times
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds are familiar with the three gateways of liberation.
He also knows that this is his son.
“Lord, how can you be so certain?”
“One should place a noose made of copper or the like in his left hand, which should display the threatening gesture.
‘Alas! These beings who have adopted correct conduct and
Sañjayin recorded this conversation on a board and set it down.
They will listen to the Dharma of the supreme human And
If you ask why, it is because they do not consider the nature of consciousness [and the aforementioned aggregates].
We will prepare a palace for the Bodhisattva.”
the samādhi named Summit of Mental Brilliance,
These are the four Dharma gates that the Bodhisattva manifested.
Trāyastriṃśa, Yāma, Tuṣita
The Blessed One is endowed with lion-like cheeks.
He practices non-performance but does not realize non-performance.
“Elder, why can I not make these two novices study?”
or of offering clothes and ornaments to those who teach it!
venerable Khadiravaṇika,
Even though they are not monastics, they pretend to be, and even though they do not lead a chaste life they pretend to.
raised parasols, standards, and flags, and become a hero, a supreme victor, a man, a great man, a supreme physician, and a great remover of thorns.
will actualize the level of the śrāvakas and the level of the pratyekabuddhas without reaching the maturity of the bodhisattvas.
Oṁ Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ!
This is something we have never seen and never heard of before.
after the Lord had given some brief instruction to the monks,
do not hold that physical forms are either empty or not empty, and they neither grasp nor disrupt them.
Similarly, the nāga king Kālika Came before the Tathāgata.
Setting aside all his kingly work, he lived in complete purity as if he had entered an ascetic’s grove. With great delight, he followed the Dharma.
like an insightful being,
the fruit of having entered the stream is also non-conceptual.
Whoever merely hears this blessed buddha’s name will make progress toward unexcelled and complete awakening that is irreversible.
It protects the mental activities of all beings.
There are eighty thousand present of those Who are intent upon supreme enlightenment. {31}
‘Guide, Bhagavān, teach the Dharma!
With their brilliant colors, they illuminated the entirety of Jeta Grove with a divine light.
for those who die and fall from here, to take birth here once again is difficult.
How so? Because bodhisattvas are fearless.
However you do it, it will be accomplished.
Divine son, what do you think?
How should they train to achieve rebirth among the householder class, standing out like a tall sāl tree?
the young god spoke this panegyric thrice:
and then recite this mantra 400,000 times following the procedures of the preliminary practice as already described.
They have completely pure minds and are free of thought. That is the uniqueness of this attainment of samādhi. {189}
Each approached the Buddha, bowed at his feet,
Again they will experience the sufferings of the denizens of the hells in the great hells for many hundreds of billion trillion years.
Similarly, is this mind [of the bodhisattvas] unattached to feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness?
Some knew him as Bimbisāra of the Guilds while some knew him as Bimbisāra of the Army.
“The one who comprehends all phenomena Is said to be a perfectly enlightened buddha.
“At that time I thought, ‘The fault is ours, the fault is not the Bhagavān’s.’
The strength of ten bodhisattvas who have been definitively emerged for one hundred thousand eons is the same as the strength of one bodhisattva who has been definitively emerged for one million eons.
He called out to the Bodhisattva,
Not all sentient beings can bear to put on such armor for the purpose of enlightenment.
and whose body was beautifully adorned with the thirty-two marks of a great being.
and made this special praise:
Hosts of devas move about the sky with delight As the pleasing and melodious songs of the gods resound—
when their minds are purified, they become pure. Is this not the Dharma I taught?
“Mañjuśrī, a bodhisattva may practice thinking that ‘form is not empty’ and also ‘not non-empty.’
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ excellent wisdom regarding the absence of self in phenomena consist in?
In the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena is not discerned.
They miraculously went to millions of realms And to even more, as numerous as the sands of the Ganges. {33}
Even if they were to consider those phenomena, they would not actualize them.
“The Blessed One teaches that praising oneself is not the way of a holy being.
With happiness and gladness they approached the Bhagavān,
is identical to the purity of the fruit.
those who wish to attain the genuine paths of the ten virtuous actions, and those who wish to perfect them, should all train exclusively in the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
All the other learned renunciants, śrāvakas, and pratyekabuddhas who have appeared also
“Maitreya,
Therefore, I will definitely practice generosity by offering beds and pillows!’
They give forth aspects of speech That are as numerous as the Ganges sands. {265}
And on it, the moon, born from the syllable aṁ.
And dedicate all for the sake of enlightenment.
He then brought about the cessation of thoughts and analysis and became perfectly quiet.
it is because the monastic community of the śrāvakas of the tathāgatas originated from the bodhisattvas,
will have no fear of boils, eczema, leprosy, disease, nāgas, snakes, tigers and other beasts of prey, weapons, enemies, poverty, or untimely death. None of these will occur.
He was adorned with divine ornaments, attired with divine fabrics, and his body was adorned with the excellent major and minor marks. As soon as he got down, the child asked his mother,
“My lord, now the time is right for me to leave home;
to acquire skill in methods while magnetizing beings;
One who does not become distracted does not oppose the dharmatā.
Each of the mansions was twelve leagues tall and eight leagues wide.
"དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་ནི་མི་མཉམ་པ་དང་མཉམ་<tThe thus-gone ones are incomparable. 
They obtain the essentials and choose the time of passing away. Those are the benefits of being without avarice. {6}
“We are far from these tathāgatas; may we also rise up into the air through the power of the tathāgatas!”
“Son of noble family, listen. I shall elucidate the reason why these beings will not pass into negative forms of existence. I shall state the names of the blessed ones, the tathāgatas, who will liberate them from rebirths in negative forms of existence, from rebirths as denizens of the hells and animals, and from Yama’s world, and I shall state how they are to be worshipped and venerated in their respective world systems.
the eight aspects of liberation, the nine serial steps of meditative equipoise, the ten powers of the tathāgatas,
Ānanda, the sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who hold, maintain, recite aloud, master, and are attentive to this transcendent perfection of wisdom in the right manner,
Where is the universe Sahā?
wishlessness,
(70) There is the meditative stability named Unwavering. (71) There is the meditative stability named Transcendence of the Range. (72) There is the meditative stability named Accumulation of All Attributes. (73) There is the meditative stability named Abiding Without Mentation. (74) There is the meditative stability named Blossoming and Purity of the Flowers of Virtue.
I am your mother, wife, Sister, and niece.
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings are absorbed in loving kindness,
Who has demonstrated the meditative concentration free of appearances And free of proliferations.
Thus, bodhisattvas are free from acquisition through improper avenues.
Those are the four herbs.
Awakening is characterized by the absence of marks,
‘Evil Māra, since these heavenly maidens are not suitable for this religious devotee, a son of the Śākya, give them to me.’
those who wish to comprehend the eyes,
By rinsing the eyes with water incanted with this mantra,
where the three inferior realms are conceived;
Then, magically his house became empty. Even the doorkeeper disappeared.
Their awakening consists of gnosis, Which is constant learning and meditation.
the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha named Merukalpa.
Instead, they search for the inferior vehicles of the hearers and solitary buddhas. Seeing such beings, the thus-gone ones wish to inspire them toward the vast, so that they may come to focus on the wisdom of the buddhas. Thus arises the thus-gone ones’ great compassion for sentient beings.
One should obtain four māṣakas of powder from the crushed tail, and the root, bark, leaves, flowers, and fruit of downy datura, one māṣaka of each part. One should light a lamp whose wick is made of cloth that has been dyed red with lac mixed with the above ingredients.
Then I heaped seven mountains, one on top of the other, in front of the golden door. “
Śakra, Brahmā, the demigods, the mahoragas, Sūrya, and Candra, as well as Vaiśravaṇa and Kumāra, All bowed their heads to my feet and paid homage to me.
brooms, bowls, mortars and pestles,
Śāradvatī­putra, it is in this way that when great bodhisattva beings practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom
And at that very time, from each and every one of the ten directions, gods,
You are the refuge and protection for all beings. Send down your rain of Dharma upon the world. {30}
It neither bestows nor withholds the emptiness of internal phenomena.
“They have analytic comprehension, cognize vast meaning, And they always know the conceivable and inconceivable.
the peaceful basis.
Similarly, they do not apprehend the emptiness of non-entities as the emptiness of non-entities.
Even so phenomena are designated.
in the big city with that jewel obtain all the wealth that you want!’
By keeping silent, the Blessed One assented to the physician’s request.
She who, having washed with milk, drinks the root of lakṣaṇākṣa Will obtain a fine son.
Monks, then the Bodhisattva left and went to his own residence,
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, in order to hear the Dharma, bodhisattvas are ready to cross the entire earth, even if it were covered with swords or filled with fire, with no concern for life or limb.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds work diligently to eliminate the afflictions of all sentient beings.
Is it not increasing?
Householder, of what sort is your sickness?
After that, they shine on the Cakravāḍa and Mahācakravāḍa ranges.
Any monk or nun, or any man or woman with lay vows, who in the future worships the physical relics of the Thus-Gone One, even those as small as a mustard grain,
Bodhisattvas should have the strength of patience and maintain a tolerant disposition in the face of offensive words.
Sudatta replied,
“He had an overwhelming longing for fame And wandered from town to town.
and similarly, the more they wish to teach and grant instruction in the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, and the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
as the monk who cuts his hair and beard, as the monk who oversees bathing,
The one who knows this way of the Dharma Is firmly established in this restraint. {7}
At that moment, by the power of the victorious ones in the ten directions,
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who are actually participating in the Mahāyāna will be born in his buddhafield.
‘Great brahmin, I have nothing at all.’
the allowing of this debtor’s going forth was denounced, disparaged, and criticized.
How do they pursue meritorious deeds?
making common cause with all sentient beings,
He is called Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, As his accomplishment is unflagging.
Name and form provides the causal condition for the six sense fields.
These eighteen are the thus-gone ones’ unique qualities.
Noble son, you are diligent so that all those who are not already beyond suffering can transcend suffering.
This bodhisattva’s training is like Mount Meru,
Great bodhisattva beings, after manifestly and perfectly comprehending just that alone, teach the sacred doctrine to sentient beings.
Hūṃ! For the benefit of all sentient beings,
that view too would be abandoned and other views would not be embraced.
How has this distinction come about between those who have entered the stream, those who are tied to one more rebirth, those who are no longer subject to rebirth, those who are arhats, those who are pratyekabuddhas, and those who are tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas?
How should one view the appropriation of the opinion that rules and observances are paramount?”
By satisfying bodies and minds, one’s voice will be like the voice of the cuckoo bird.
They went to him, prostrated at his feet, and said,
Similarly, they totally cultivate the emptiness of external phenomena, but always without apprehending anything.
If people don’t get what they want, their desires burn; But even if they do get what they want, it is never enough.
“The wise and fearless princess replied to him, ‘King, lord of the earth, listen!
They are liberated from all attachment. They never have any impediments. {48}
number names, calculation, counting by hand, and how to exclude,
Neither do their teachings wane.
He felt great physical pain, and he thought, ‘It is certain that when I die I will go to the hell realms.’
When the Lord of the World stood in the gateway, Some people scattered golden necklaces.
great bodhisattva beings will continue to refine the buddhafields,
‘Master, please come to our home regularly.’
“I rejoice in those who are without complication And are saddened by every rebirth into existence.
Do not quickly fall down from this abode!
“Su­bhūti, the more those roots of virtue of great bodhisattva beings increase,
then cultivate the nature of things that is emptiness, signlessness, and aspirationlessness while lacking the transcendent perfection of wisdom and lacking skill in means,
Rather, it is due to the power of the bodhisattva great being Avalokiteśvara and the bodhisattva great being Mahā­sthāmprāpta.”
They will say to ordinary beings:
With regard to things that are equal to space,
The Bhagavān was residing on Vulture Peak Mountain in Rājagṛha accompanied by a great bhikṣu saṅgha of five hundred bhikṣus, and by bodhisattva mahāsattvas such as Maitreya and Mañjuśrī.
Gods, even though one thousand years, an eon, or even ten million eons may have elapsed since the Bhagavān Buddha entered parinirvāṇa, if some beings throw a flower in the sky, after calling the Tathāgata by his name seven times and saying ‘Homage to the Buddha,’
May Brahmā and Śakra, The guardians of the world and Maheśvara, All the yakṣa generals, And Hārītī with her sons Accept from me these flowers, incense, And burnt offerings!
When you say that great bodhisattva beings who continue to engage in union with the transcendent perfection of wisdom deserve respect
“ ‘They abandon the internal and the external And remain in the nature of phenomena.
(4) emptiness of emptiness,
its elements are relinquished.
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ excellent patience granted by the Buddha consist in?
Everything compounded quickly disintegrates;
When the Guide entered the supreme city All beings rejoiced at the Jina, the Sugata. {89}
One should blend together the root of toothbrush tree and the root of belleric myrobalan,
At the end of the authentic kabaka, The four eggs and the three measures are each given two.
Su­bhūti, the six transcendent perfections constitute the path of great bodhisattva beings.
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess ten such qualities remain at the foot of a tree.
Yaśā (Renowned One), Mahāyaśā (Highly Renowned One)
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess these ten qualities practice excellent generosity.
Like a blissful park in the deva realms. {xiii}
Odors were not perceived by their noses.
“A bright light appeared, which dispelled the pitch-black darkness;
“They will have an eternally unsurpassable accumulation of merit
Sūrya­garbha,
(34) His navel is deep, (35) not crooked, and (36) tapering.
Many hundreds of thousands of celestial maidens appeared holding conch shells, drums, clay drums, and cymbals adorned with bells.
This incantation should then be recited until the cord surfaces inside the vessel.
great bodhisattva beings would not train in the six transcendent perfections.
namaḥ sarva­tathāgatānāṃ, namo ´mitābhāya tathāgatāya,
How would one know the correct maṇḍala?
Once he attains awakening, those beings would be able to understand his teachings on the Dharma. But perhaps all these suitable recipients for his teaching may be gone by then. In that case, the Bodhisattva will leave his home and awaken to unexcelled, perfect, and complete buddhahood on his own.” So they approached the Bodhisattva.
“These are taught to be the ten benefits From becoming very learned Just as they are known By the Tathāgata, the Buddha. {34}
He is called the powerful one,
“How great! What an inconceivable manifestation of meritorious ripening this is!”
Some are carrying serpent nooses; “Those with four arms carry torches, Knives, sticks, And vajra spears.
do you think it is real and established?
and those who teach the sacred doctrine to them also resemble a magical display.
They never cease wishing to teach The precious Dharma of peace.
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Vimalakīrti;
You create wisdom and not a mind of stupidity. The Buddha’s speech eliminates all stains. {89}
making him wonder, “If I have vanquished her in the past, what now has allowed her to vanquish me?”
They presented these to the bhikṣu And were joyfully established on the path to enlightenment. {33}
He does not emulate the real nature of omniscience.
Those spirits do not exist as forms.
They believe that there could not be any ripening of virtuous and unvirtuous karmic actions unless there exists a self, a being, a life-force, a creature, a soul, an individual, a person, or a human being.
Each and every one of them completely abandoned excitement, joking, pleasure, amusement, desire, anger, envy, and attachment.
They will always be talking about the hundreds of faults Of that in which they have taken refuge. {24}
and their leaves are made of jewels and gold.
So it is that they correctly perceive dependent origination.”
Running around impetuously, darting here and there with eyes like a fox, they tried to frighten the Bodhisattva.
Be a father and mother to those who do not have a father and mother!
The supreme manifestation of miraculous powers, And the attainment of the five supreme higher cognitions. {19}
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities crush pride.
was dwelling
Each ripens into its own flavor: pungent, bitter, sour, salty, astringent, and so on.
millions of living beings, who had not previously done so, gave rise to the mind of awakening.
That is why the Blessed One Śākyamuni emitted this wonderful and beautiful light as an omen of that Dharma teaching.”
One will cure urinary infections.
Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is signless.”
where he spent six years practicing austerities.
Right then a hundred thousand gods and humans cried out in amazement and delight.
Therefore, Mañjuśrī, all dharmas are realized by the Tathāgata as neither even nor uneven.
Are always attended by nāgas, asuras, and yakṣas, And are protected by those who dwell in the forest and its environs. {8}
Those rays of light that streamed upwards reached the gods of
They all look upon her as a mother or a daughter, For she follows the right conduct and is endowed with noble qualities.
Then he said to the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Candra­sūrya­vimala­prabhāsa­śrī,
whenever they do not engage with feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness.
“For so long the loving actions of his body, speech, and mind have been directed toward not harming living beings, by means of guarding his arms and legs. Therefore he is the One with Long Hands.
They are killing, taking what has not been given, and sexual misconduct.
engender diligence,
They do not make assumptions about the transcendent perfection of generosity,
Even if one were to give temples constructed from sandalwood,
Emptiness, which is the accumulation of wisdom, is an apotheosis of death.
Great Vajra Holder, I supplicate you to teach! Great Lord of All, I supplicate you to teach! Great Tamer of All Evil Forces, I supplicate you to teach! Great Dispeller of All Darkness, I supplicate you to teach!”
and The fruition should be meditated upon as two-fold.
O Lord, it is therefore fitting for us to go to the pleasure grove!
Even the names of the correct exertions do not exist internally, nor do they exist externally, and nor do they abide between these two.
The whole Śākya assembly was shocked and amazed, and they all said in unison,
those who desire good qualities,
it foretells the successful accomplishment of a task according to his wishes.
“Those who follow this sūtra In this time of destruction
liberate sentient beings from erroneous views.
Are my offspring and protectors of the Dharma in the later times. They have been entrusted by ten billion buddhas.” {280}
This purifies the negative emotions of the six classes of beings, Definitively placing them in the state of complete liberation.
His body is soft.
Bodhisattvas, similarly, are the abode of all sentient beings and all virtuous qualities.
Noble son who is united with the yoga of meditation, do you desire the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās?
He plays with the great superknowledges.
“Although all of this is without a self and is repulsive, Beings perceive it as having a self and as beautiful.
When the bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara entered the Avīci hell, lotus flowers the size of cartwheels appeared,
It teaches the pacification of all phenomena and is a gateway to connecting with the way all phenomena are.
Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, there is that kind of great benefit from the aggregation of merit acquired by those who possess and teach this Dharma teaching.
Gentlemen, I will support you!
“Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess ten qualities are great caravan leaders.
On the relative level, ripening beings is a gateway to upholding the sacred Dharma.
that has not arisen nor ceased, and is non-existent,
those who wish to comprehend sensory contact that is visually compounded,
Taking it on and performing actions with it, one will experience happiness and suffering.
agreeable sounds that do not produce fear.
“ ‘The ground is adorned by a variety of divine plants. There is a dense multitude of shining, beautiful trees.
having bathed at dawn and observed the restoration of vows ceremony, the practitioner should offer a complete pūjā
the sensory element of the tongue, the sensory element of tastes, and the sensory element of gustatory consciousness;
He should present a feast for the congregation of listeners, and next offer a feast with gifts for the community of those practicing the secret mantra of the Great Vehicle.
“Your speech is gentle, calm, and forthright;
Similarly, the emptiness of the sensory element of the tongue, the sensory element of tastes, and the sensory element of gustatory consciousness is not the sensory element of gustatory consciousness and the [aforementioned sensory elements].
After falling from there, I was born here. After falling from there, I was born here…”
Likewise the southern, western, and northern directions were taken over by other classes of gods.
How can I give away my daughter to someone who lacks such skills?”
covetousness, malice, wrong views,
“You have abandoned attachment and reached liberation. You have no attachment to existence, which is devoid of things.
Su­bhūti, because the transcendent perfection of generosity is not an entity, this supreme vehicle, the Great Vehicle, does overpower and attain emancipation from the world with its gods, humans, and antigods.
By comparison, however, a person creates much more merit
Agnīśvara, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of seventy-six thousand years. {6}
She neither experienced nor witnessed any heat, cold, hunger, thirst, gloom, uncleanliness, or fatigue.
“Roll it around in pigment and throw it away; Imagine that you throw it into a salty ocean.
from the time when they first begin to set their mind on enlightenment until they are seated at the Focal Point of Enlightenment, even if humans or non-humans should arrive and
Su­bhūti, those great bodhisattva beings should also reflect, ‘This is the time for the transcendent perfection of generosity.
Bhagavān, I wish to train as the tathāgatas have.
The body assumes the attributes of death at sunrise.
What does one not perceive?
“They know the modality of physical forms, and yet
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain the perfect voice of a buddha, which has sixty aspects.
“There is no payment required for even one of the syllables, let alone the six syllables of the mahāvidyā, nor will I take anything from you,
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the individual concerning the composite,
The buddhas in the center of the earth Will expound buddhahood and skillfulness in methods. {103}
and assiduously practices it,
Bhagavān, such innumerable, countless bodhisattvas have practiced celibacy for a long time, creating roots of merit under many hundreds of thousands of buddhas,
Alas! Right now you should reject this cultivation of the mind that is set on enlightenment and you will consequently be released from these sentient hells,
rich and powerful fools who are proud of their expertise.
His mind, trained to the work, makes manifest whatever forms he wishes despite the fact that his consciousness lacks form.
there was an untimely wind, strong hail began to fall, and a heavy rain fell from the massive cloud.
without voice.
“Also, they praise enlightenment
Then the whole thing will collapse With the violent shock of the arrival of bodhisattvas, The soles of whose feet will cause ten million realms to quake.
“In order for a concept to be known, It is taught through grasping.
“Monks, embrace your friends, bring them to the head of the assembly, let them come before you.
You should often think on impermanence and strive to utilize the essential in body, life, and wealth.’
If they did not attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment,
Those who have entered the stream are non-apprehensible, owing to their utter purity.
Bring to mind your generous deeds of times past.
“Like a skilled doctor who knows the constitutions of his patients, You dispense medicine to those who are chronically ill.
Therefore there will be many who are deeply involved in quarreling. They will explain elaborately, having rejected patience. {20}
“Noble sir, send them if you feel the time is right!”
When he attains enlightenment, even the word ‘crime’ will never be mentioned in his buddhafield.
a person’s hair, body hair, nails, teeth, sweat, secretions, skin, flesh, bone, muscles, veins, kidney, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, colon, stomach, entrails, innards, bladder, spleen, excrement, perspiration, mucus, nasal mucus, fat, lymph, marrow, grease, bile, discharge, pus, blood, brain, cerebrum, and urine.
The bodhisattva Maṇikūṭarāja declared,
There took place the first turning And here, Guide, this is the second.
clouds that rained down divine canopies.
Indeed this family must be irreproachable when it comes to any accusations of faults related to one’s birth, such as those found in this entire world with its gods, demons, and brahmās, mendicants and priests.
the people come to understand what a doctor is, and once they trust him they will follow his cure.
Similarly, the emptiness of the truth of the cessation of suffering is not [the truth of] the cessation of suffering.
“Gods and humans with little merit look for wisdom in mistaken ways;
Su­bhūti, such is the refinement of great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom, in the extrasensory power that realizes miraculous abilities.
“Lion of Speech, your time is now!
and likewise, to [all the fruitional attributes] from the ten powers of the tathāgatas, up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas—just as has been indicated here in the context of the psycho-physical aggregates.
Ah! Arise and quickly fulfill my prayer. Ah! Do not remain here in pieces.
Ajita, when the Tathāgata has passed into nirvāṇa,
rides off very fast, in the same way,
The jeweled structure that had delighted the Bodhisattva was finely shaped, exquisite and beautiful to behold.
They will continually hear the voices of the devas And their sweet and melodious songs.
banners,
and if they were to generate thoughts of degenerate morality,
complete purity is stainless;
I have had them made for you. Go out and you will be delighted!’
“Mañjuśrī, how does a bodhisattva practice within the conduct of a bodhisattva?
Wise ones, do not become disheartened. The wisdom of the tathāgatas is inconceivable.
Great Top-Knotted Brahmā once again became aware of this thought of the Thus-Gone One,
“Noble son, are you tired?
“The king, having heard this samādhi, Joyous and happy, said these words:
Because bodhisattva great beings must train in everything.”
Insofar as they physically practice the three modes of excellent conduct,
12,000 gods, without ultimately forming anything, formed the wish for unexcelled and completely perfect awakening.
the samādhi named Abode of Beings,
Those who have the ten strengths praise it. “It is the quality of the bodhisattvas.
Moon and Sun, these two gods, Came to stand to his right and left.
Just as a man, terrified by an opposing army, mounts his horse to escape,
Unfold the great victory banner of the Dharma!
comfort these beings by having them listen to the Dharma and
We will create a circumambulatory walkway of gold.
The fruits of those sublime attributes comprise the fruit of entering the stream,
separating from all forms of carelessness and being careful in their conduct;
“I then pondered what was needed for craving to occur and what conditions contribute to the occurrence of craving.
Moreover, Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings abide in the transcendent perfection of perseverance,
“Son, is he wealthier than you?”
At that time the young man, with great joy, Stood up and paid homage with his palms together.
if, in addition, they think,
Mañjuśrī, it is like this: just as when a fire takes hold, it burns away all grass and wood,
Young Candraprabha, with immense joy, Perfectly adorned the road in various ways.
and the inferno of fire was transformed into a pool.’
There were no great oceans.
His monastic companions asked,
the emptiness of the [other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, is not the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas [and the rest].
It is distinguished by a realization of all entities and nonentities.
Such was the play of the Lion among Men while he sat in his seat. The resplendent tuft of hair on his forehead Outshone the radiance of the sun, moon, jewels, fire, lightning, and gods,
The twenty-four locations and so forth Should be learned from a master’s oral instructions.
“Venerable Lord! Who will have conviction in and concur with this transcendent perfection of wisdom, which is so profound?”
As for me, I remained speechless, and therefore I am reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.”
‘We are śrāvakas with little to accomplish.’
Look at those beings that are overcome by old age and sickness, And, quick, explain how to be free of suffering!
the entire world shook in six ways:
They are gazing at the Buddha with great delight and happiness. I pray to the unconquerable Sugata that you elucidate this to them. {42}
I walked around it, but could not find a door.
I rejoiced as I attained the first level of concentration, which is free from desires and negativities, endued with good qualities, reflective, investigative, and full of joy born out of discrimination. I rejoiced as I attained the levels of concentration up to the fourth.
Our teeth are falling out and our hair turns grey, and yet we have not achieved even stillness of mind.
recollecting and keeping the Dharma in mind.
Nonoccurrence and nondestruction are the entrance into nonduality.”
“Mother, where are you taking me?” She replied,
heard this Dharma teaching, which I then taught to others.
Also, Ānanda, if all the living beings of this billion-world galactic universe were like you—the foremost of the learned and the foremost of those endowed with memory and retention—
“Coaxing sentient beings with the wealth of the noble ones,
Because such duties have been organized, the bhikṣus are harmed.
“Why did you neglect your moral conduct?” So he recounted to them exactly how it had happened.
It is inconsistent and incoherent.”
how then does the transcendent perfection of wisdom give rise to the tathāgatas, and instruct the worlds [of sentient beings]?
May this handsome and gentle prince be my husband!
They listen, without listening, to the irreversible instructions.
“When a letter is sent to another town With news of the good or bad that has been done,
Within them there are many thousands of devas Who experience bliss in divine pleasures. {6}
Even the names of the sensory elements do not exist internally, nor do they exist externally, and nor do they abide between these two.
They do not come into being from karma, kleśas, parents, and the primary elements.
In all those times he possessed this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.
These beings appear in the world only rarely, and when here they are to be held as proper objects of generosity.
Be armor for the complete stability of the mind.”
Su­bhūti, it is because the natural expression of their past limits, though without entity, is still physical form.
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, it is because when great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom do not even apprehend or consider essencelessness,
Their legs are like the legs of an antelope;
On the other hand, Blessed One, anyone who forms the resolve set on unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening will certainly manifest out of the absorption that encapsulates all merit, and become genuinely immersed in that absorption that encapsulates all merit.”
Know all aggregates to be insubstantial And quickly attain the highest wisdom. {86}
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess ten such qualities are experts on the ultimate.
The practitioner, by observing the true nature of conditioned things, Sees that these things are all empty and inert.
It was blessed, being filled by everyone, from bodhisattvas, śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas, to monks, nuns, male and female lay vow holders, kings, ministers, brahmins, and householders.
Skillful with regard to the essential nature of all things, great bodhisattva beings refine the path to enlightenment,
“Bhadrapāla, now is the time for you to put your questions,
Let’s allow to go forth the sort that these black begging bowl carriers won’t snatch away.”
Teach to me how conduct is engaged in So that from your words, I may know the conduct of beings. {10}
Ultimately, they do not possess the eight mistaken dharmas, but neither are they relatively free from them.
(6) There is the meditative stability named Surpassing All Phenomena. (7) There is the meditative stability named Unseen Pinnacle.
they should not appropriate or become fixated on [any attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience.”
“Why is it the expression of truth for those who have fearlessness?
All in each of those realms of those guides Were made visible by the light of the light ray. {68}
While passing by the Gayāśīrṣa stūpa, he instructed those one thousand monks by displaying three miracles,
If one rubs them on the penis, the ears, The breasts, and the vulva, Or rubs them on the whole body,
by wiping the eyes, one will remove blindness.
They are fixated on sights, sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena.
They intentionally become courtesans In order to win men over,
“Having performed the fire offering in that manner, Go to a dried-up river, fell a nāga tree, And make a large fire with elephant dung.
yet engages in extremely unvirtuous actions,
Some ran headlong, like gazelles pierced by poisonous arrows, all the while crying.
For the Buddha has declared,
When they are free of kleśas They attain those miraculous powers. {27}
Thereupon, in that assembly, the bodhisattvas, the great disciples, the Śakras, the Brahmās, the Lokapālas, and the gods and goddesses, all had this thought:
“He is adorned with the marks of a hundred merits and is full of a determined resolve.
“One should place the three syllables on her head And give a light blow with a fist on her chest.
Divine being, moreover, as much as one makes use of words, reflects by means of words, understands by means of words, and is attached to words—that much one is at fault.
he has taught the Dharma in the form of a bodhisattva for the beings who are to be guided by a bodhisattva.
Cut out his brains With a circular saw,
“How should one meditate
At that time, heaps of human and divine jewels were tossed toward the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Prabhūtaratna and the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Śākyamuni.
abiding thereon, they will also attain omniscience.
He says to them, ‘Do not take pleasure in the forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and physical sensations of the three realms, which are like a house on fire.
rishis, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, kumbhāṇḍas, pretas, pūtanas, humans, and nonhumans
But there is no second yāna whatsoever Other than as a skillful method of the superior beings.
and speak these words:
Killing an arhat, and missing hands.
they are born of mental construction.
Similarly, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are empty of consciousness [and the other aggregates].
“Oh wonder! Amazing is the emergence of buddhas Who see the truth!
‘In accordance with the aspirations taught by the thus-gone ones, through this gift of relinquishing sovereignty over the four continents and Jambudvīpa, as well as its kingdoms,
“They all circumambulated the wise sage And they bowed down to his feet.
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds have complete knowledge of desire, anger, bewilderment, and affliction.
It is standing up to welcome gurus and presenting them with a seat.
Repelling identification and the characteristics of things: That is the nature of the Jina’s teaching. {97}
In that way, that tathāgata, arhat, perfectly enlightened buddha will have inconceivable qualities.’
However, if these concerned gods were to grant me nourishment through the pores of my body, I would be the worst of hypocrites.”
Upāli, by that measure we may say the tīrthika has a sense of reverence.
Upatiṣya then praised and welcomed what Aśvajit had said.
nor are the fruits of no longer being subject to rebirth, arhatship, individual enlightenment, and unsurpassed genuinely perfect enlightenment discerned.
“Noble son, you may wonder what the bodhisattvas’ abundant contemplation of repulsiveness consists in.
“Moreover, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who wish for this Dharma teaching of entering great compassion
and it is why this good Ānanda will be the keeper of the Dharma treasures of the buddha bhagavāns.
Yearned for acquisitions, held the view of objective reality,
You have attained unique wisdom. I pay homage to you who speak words of wisdom. {17}
“When King Dṛdhadatta heard That the supreme human was teaching this samādhi,
will obtain the speech of Sarasvatī within one month.
“Kāśyapa,” replied the Bhagavān, “nirvāṇa is the realization of the equality of all phenomena, and therefore there is the one nirvāṇa, and there is no second or third nirvāṇa.
As the moon that is full, Or the sun high in the sky,
Master the aggregates, master the sense spheres, master the seats of the senses,
I joyfully gave away my feet and my hands, But even that did not exhaust my previous bad karma. {118}
relinquish,
It was through the blessing of my truthful resolve—my desire and devotion for the Dharma—that the blessed one, the thus-gone one Immaculately Renowned King was invoked from that buddhafield below.
“Beyond the pore named Suvarṇa, there is a pore named Kṛṣṇa, within which a trillion rishis dwell.
The four deities at the seat of awakening Adorned the seat of awakening To make it even more supreme Than the heavenly coral trees.
just as they know the lengths of time required for karmic actions to ripen.
he stood in the middle of the sky and brought down a rain of objects never before seen or heard of in any of the buddha realms in the ten directions.
” Senior Su­bhūti then said to the Blessed One,
then you should allow his going forth.
With great veneration they bowed, bowed down, bowed deeply toward the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Śākyamuni,
he arrived at the banks of the Nairañjanā River, the river of nāgas.
it is out of step with all worldly people and difficult to see.
Monks, at that point the Bodhisattva told his charioteer,
Please, Lord, explain to them the bodhisattvas’ purification of the buddhafield!”
From their mouths they shot out poisonous snakes and fire,
“Mañjuśrī, are you not coming with us?”
Mañjuka is in the form of a cow.
Similarly, it neither has all the fetters of philosophical view, nor is it without them.
skill in methods,
“Why should the devas make offerings to it? They should do so in order to attain every happiness.
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities are felt-wearers.
As for those who are prone to such circumstances and opportunities, this concerns the circumstances in which great bodhisattva beings, lacking the transcendent perfection of wisdom, might turn away from omniscience.
Forsaking all concern for life and body, Meditate on emptiness, upon perfect peace.
He has attained the superior motivation concerning all the dharmas.
“Divine being, the blessed buddhas teach the Dharma by means of the indivisible nature of the realm of phenomena.
They will hear the Dharma by listening to Tathāgata Amitābha teach.
they will not be reborn as someone with defective senses; they will not be reborn as lame, hunchbacked, with a deformed nose, a goiter, or a cleft lip, nor with leprosy.
are beautiful and attractive;
We can always leave our homes later, once we are old.”
insert the drawing into the heart of an effigy made of beeswax.
They only feel constant love for them, Wishing for those beings to be liberated. {30}
“Still, Mañjuśrī, no Brahmā is there to be found.
Their mental faculty will become pure, Clear, bright, and unobscured.
immaculate correct conduct, unwavering correct conduct, unshakable correct conduct,
flowers, and fruits of all seasons.
Is pondered by all gods.
He went to the great city of Vārāṇasī and eventually arrived there.
The pratyekabuddha began to sew with the thread and as the thread passed through the cloth unhindered,
The one who closes his eyes as he seeks to memorize the Saṃyuktāgama has noxious eyes that burn;
Prostrations to all stūpas.
Yet out of consideration for me, this brahmin Tiṣya has offered to share our prize––a most beneficial arrangement.
“When a bodhisattva considers which things constitute supramundane phenomena, they include the following:
“Always in meditative concentration,
those who seek the fruit of arhatship cultivate the path in order to abandon the five fetters associated with the higher realms?
The second robe is for when one goes to the king’s palace.
“Thus it is that such a one who lives purely is magnanimous,
“The one who has that complete knowledge Knows all states of existence.
They have no conceptualization, are free of conceptualization, And have transcended conceptualization. {29}
“ ‘If it is true that I will become a buddha, One who is revered by the world,
great bodhisattva beings should indeed train in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, and
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, They will gain skill in works and skill in the arts,
Being the voice of Dharma, it is regarded in the world as the voice of the Tathāgata.
The nature of consciousness is emptiness. Emptiness indeed is consciousness.
the nature of the eye and the sky,
He learned it, kept it, read it, understood it,
For the sake of this doctrine, I will relinquish even my life!’
Conferring initiation is the Blessed One Akṣobhya.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin,
Therefore this wisdom is secret, obscure, and unwritten.
“ ‘I had prepared many hundreds of thousands of herds of cows along with herders.
Their body is well proportioned.
And may I die with my mind undeluded by defilements, with aspirations that accord with the selfless dharmas, and with limitless thought of enlightenment.
That which produces the sprouts of name and form like reeds in a sheaf—the combination of the five collections of consciousness, together with the defiled mental consciousness—is called the consciousness element.
Should obtain this sūtra praised by the buddhas,
those who will not be disheartened but remain equipoised in this transcendent perfection of wisdom, without fear,
“My young prince must never even set foot in the palace gardens.
Would not be stained by sin
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara teaches the asuras there in the form of an asura.
and was preparing to beg alms in Śrāvastī
‘The small store of qualities this noble being has attained, he has attained with my help,’
They should be known as forms, in essence the same,
As their minds are concerned with profound dependent origination they examine inconceivable karmic action.
Reverend Śāriputra, bow down to the Tathāgata Meru­pradīpa­rāja, and you will be able to take your seat.
the inconceivably numerous sūtras concerning teaching the composite,
“In one area in the east, There are eight goddesses:
“‘O! These psycho-physical aggregates are like a dream, like a phantom, and so forth.
“Venerable Lord! How do great bodhisattva beings, after abiding in the transcendent perfection of tolerance, acquire the transcendent perfection of generosity?”
A lion throne had been arranged at the foot of each precious tree. They were five hundred yojanas in height and adorned with huge jewels.
‘The giver who makes gifts to the lowliest poor of the city, considering them as worthy of offering as the Tathāgata himself, and the giver who gives without any discrimination, impartially, with no expectation of reward, and with great love—that giver, I say, totally fulfills the Dharma-sacrifice.’
It entails absorption in the eight aspects of liberation, without mind, the mental faculty, and mental consciousness.
Feeling impatient, the monks became enraged and said,
“What is having no attachment to phenomena? It is the renunciation of all that one has affection for.
Now, where is he staying?”
The other transcendent perfections, up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom, and [the attainments], up to and including omniscience, are also neither fettered nor liberated.
is the non-cultivation of the fruit of entering the stream, the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth, the fruit of no longer being subject to rebirth, arhatship, and individual enlightenment.
And gives them towns and villages, And elephants, horses, chariots, and infantry.
and canopies.
Bodhisattvas smile and do not frown in anger.
give its consent that the going forth of such and such a monk be allowed and that he be granted ordination by remaining silent.
Also the bodhisattvas, who were his companions in past actions, Gathered there from all ten directions, saying,
that is how monks exert themselves without exerting themselves.
and having arrived, placed their ten fingers and palms together in homage, and they said to their birth mother,
The Blessed, thus-gone, worthy, perfect Buddha Śākyamuni sent out a beam of light from the ūrṇa hair on his brow,
all of that life’s feelings, every last one of them, come to a halt,
Is it because the sun and moon are impure that those blind from birth do not see them?” Śāriputra replied, “No, Lord. It is not so.
Someone who has not learned what the true nature is Teaches that which is not the Dharma as the Dharma. {4}
“Chanda, now explain to me truly, right here,
Even the names of the meditative concentrations do not exist internally, nor do they exist externally, and nor do they abide between these two.
If you touch me, I shall cut your hand off at the wrist!”
“The bodhisattvas in the dreadful time of degeneration Who protect this supreme Dharma taught by the sugatas,
When in the hermitage, the bodhisattvas will want to worship and venerate the thus-gone ones and they will then do so mentally in numerous ways.
this is the pacification of the afflictions.
This, Nārāyaṇa, was the second introduction to the absorption that encapsulates all merit.
then great bodhisattva beings would themselves have attained enlightenment,
Their true knowledge had made their minds entirely free.
Monk, as all phenomena are like grass, wood, walls, and clods of dirt, they are material substance.
establish, cognize, and become fixated on the notion that [the aggregates] from physical forms to consciousness are imbued with suffering;
Bodhisattvas should be free of clinging to material possessions as their own.
mixes it with śmathai and false daisy, and applies it to the penis, it will have the same effect.
and the same goes for [all other causal attributes], up to and including the [noble eightfold] path. Since they are all non-apprehensible, it follows that the same goes for the so-called ‘[four] correct exertions, [four] supports for miraculous ability, five faculties, five powers, seven branches of enlightenment, and the noble eightfold path.’
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities take birth in pure buddha realms.
They are highly praised by The buddhas in the ten directions. {18}
and how is it without giving anything up?
Its roots, trunk, branches, and leaves were all adorned with jewels.
“Mañjuśrī, for the Tathāgata, a consciousness chasing after names, forms, and etymological explanations does not occur.
It is being free of impatience. It is the level of knowledge.
Prostrations to the tathāgata, Buddha Vairocana;
Renunciation is totally harmless to others and is not adulterated with evil things.
“They do not waver from their vows, They maintain their practice,
They discern that this is not the time for actualization and discern that this is the time for investigation.
“He, shining with the light of confidence in knowledge, spreads the cloud of Dharma all throughout the three realms;
I have said that those of the vajra family, the ratna family, The padma family and the karma family are permitted to observe the conduct.
Turning the wheel of Dharma will be accomplished In an instant by the one who practices enthrallment.
the outflow of existence,
Knowing venerable Śāradvatīputra’s thoughts, Mañjuśrī now blessed Śāradvatīputra so that he appeared to the entire retinue in the form and appearance of a buddha seated upon a lion throne.
One should know that those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who abide in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, as it has been described, will never be separated from the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
The yakṣas, kumbhāṇḍas, and flesh eaters were terrified and ran.
and a physician for those long sick.
“I then said to the two monks,
“The retentions become apparent to them And they have no doubts concerning their appearance.
“Perfect Buddha, you act in the world,
Show yourself in my dreams that I may disclose my transgressions.
In the same vein, [the other sensory elements] up to and including the sensory element of the mental faculty do not consider the expanse of reality
Is that of bodhisattva practice. It is the adornment of the Buddha’s Dharma.
When I claim to have explained the path through which suffering will genuinely cease, having ascertained that śrāvakas will find it conducive to the attainment of sublime emancipation, if some virtuous ascetic, brāhmin, god, demon, Brahmā, or anyone else in the world should say in this respect that this path will not be conducive to emancipation, that there will be no definitive realization, and that the sufferings of those who enact it will not cease,
They are human strongmen. They are human flowers. They are human lotuses.
Thus, bodhisattvas are wide and infinite.
neither liberation nor not liberation.
the fruit of being no longer subject to rebirth, and
“ ‘This putrid body of mine
venerable Gavāṃpati,
being the guardian of those without a protector,
And violent acts, That would lead ordinary people to hell,
and do not desire those two levels—the level of the śrāvakas or the level of the pratyekabuddhas—but accept and desire only omniscience,
the sky is called sky, yet the sky cannot be expressed.
the meditation of voidness, consummated in effectiveness in the development of all living beings;
“ ‘I remember the greatest number of hardships That I practiced through numerous eons,
Young man, it is when the bodhisattva mahāsattvas know the nature of all phenomena.
if they engage in the same manner with [the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path,
He is called the supreme being because he has no disturbing emotions caused by worldly objects.
They should praise abstention from wrong views and
His lips are red like the bimba fruit.
Their bodies are clean.
one should collect lampblack from a wick made of white lotus fibers burning inside a human skull with human fat. This should be done at night on the eighth or the fourteenth day of the waning moon.
I possess such tolerance.
neither wisdom nor foolishness.
If at the time of intercourse a woman does not drip She will not respect her husband, but want to leave.
the suffering of being born in Avīci;
and the same goes for [the other sense organs], up to and including the mental faculty.
At this, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Prajñākūṭa and Sthavira Śāriputra fell silent.
He never loses his mindfulness, and therefore
“Well, venerable Śāradvatīputra, from what mind state were those monks liberated?”
Devoid of wisdom, following Māra, They are reborn in the terrible hells. {ix}
In this way, Su­bhūti, do great bodhisattva beings, after abiding in the transcendent perfection of generosity, acquire the transcendent perfection of tolerance.”
it is therefore called visual appropriation.
In this way, for all those things there is a ‘consistent basis.’
The drunk and intoxicated were freed from their intoxication.
“Bhaiṣajyarāja, that noble man will sit upon the Dharma seat of the Tathāgata.
This concludes the section of “The Questions of the Merchant Bhadrapāla,” the thirty-ninth section of The Noble Dharma Discourse, the Great Heap of Jewels, in one hundred thousand sections.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that one is liberated by perceiving the sensory element of the eyes, the sensory element of sights, and the sensory element of visual consciousness as entities?”
nor does it not cause one to know mundane phenomena,
Similarly, are feelings, from those conditioned by sensory contact that is visually compounded to those conditioned by sensory contact that is mentally compounded, also non-conceptual?
All of them will attain emancipation through the three vehicles.
to the one who is a perfectly pure being;
“What is the attainment of mental retention?
That to which, on the ultimate level, no conventions apply, divine son, is ultimate truth.
then proceeded to the Bamboo Grove, in the Kalanda­kanivāpa where the Blessed One was residing, carrying
Therefore, noble one, when you go to the Sahā world realm, do not perceive that tathāgata, those bodhisattvas, or that buddha realm as inferior.”
“If you ask what is the way of the buddhas, it is this very emptiness of inherent existence.
some with form, others formless;
You, the shining light of wisdom, the light rays of insight, May you dispel the great darkness of all beings with your gaze!
It entails the meditations on the [eight] sense fields of mastery by engaging in the cognition of a single modality, without differentiation,
He is the one who is praised by the lord of the kiṃnaras.
’“Then we all left the town.
Knowledge of extinction, and knowledge of nonarising.
If you chant an incantation against a viper’s venom, it is possible to neutralize the snake’s poison.
offer it at evening twilight in a secluded place.
Those living in poverty found wealth.
And furthermore your eyes are unblemished, So now please look with compassion upon the world with its gods.
As long as one does not go against the true meaning, it is appropriate to strive.”
(4) They achieve and maintain the fourth meditative concentration where even that sense of bliss is abandoned and former states of suffering have also been eliminated. Here, neither suffering nor bliss is present because blissful and unhappy states of mind have both subsided, while equanimity and mindfulness are utterly pure.
obtain the three yānas—the Śrāvakayāna, Pratyeka­buddha­yāna, and Bodhisattva­yāna.
They are firmly established in compassion for them. These are distinctive qualities of the first patience. {6}
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who live by receiving alms in the austerity of the disciplines of mendicancy.
the bodhisattva Satata­samitābhiyukta, the bodhisattva Dharaṇīdhara,
Since unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment is also absolutely void,
It is without establishment and rejection, without birth or destruction.
and if, on the other hand, someone were to teach, genuinely demonstrate, and so forth, this transcendent perfection of wisdom to those irreversible bodhisattvas, saying,
“Blessed One, why would bodhisattvas who have a vast mind pursue such inferior conduct?” inquired the bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkam­bhin.
“Friends, in short, even if the lifespan of the Thus-Gone One were to last for an eon,
Similarly, [they do not see and] they are not viewers of mirages, magical displays, or phantoms.
As the Bhagavān was teaching, limitless, countless beings of nine types of birth among gods and men attained various states of meditative concentration, dhāraṇīs and tolerance,
And in the presence of those jinas He cultivated this samādhi. {10}
Not brazen, nor dejected, nor self-satisfied, You have become a buddha, the best of beings,
Likewise, because of their excellent qualities, utter preeminence, mastery of the Dharma, and unerring speech, great bodhisattva leaders will be heading the gathering of the beings with whom they travel.
But the king had a cruel brother Who was persuaded by those around him. {19b–20a}
They will not acquire anything but the sacred doctrine.
and provides them with all types of pleasant provisions and services.
He is not space,
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is dreamlike.”
Nārāyaṇa, these are the four most superior, eminent, and supreme ways for bodhisattvas to live.
having offered flowers and incense to all the buddhas, also offer sandalwood incense to Śrī Mahādevī.
One should write the mantra with turmeric on birchbark and wear it on one’s arm or neck.
When anyone abides in this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, and enters into [those causal attributes], from the four applications of mindfulness up to and including the three gateways to liberation, [for only a single day], they will generate many merits, greater than those.
At that time, his son, the fool, Is always poor and wretched.
and enter into the maturity of the irreversible bodhisattvas,
“Those who had faith and trust in the Lord of sages, Those who delighted in emptiness and peace,
Those who have infinite vision demonstrate miracles For the sake of bringing joy to all beings.
With those who had spoken it so gently and pleasantly, And bowed down to their feet before departing. {10}
“Reverend Śāriputra, the Dharma is calm and peaceful.
This is called the knowledge that contaminants will not be regenerated.
They do not become angry. They are never ignorant.
These are called the faculties that acquire the knowledge of all things.
Not even someone who can split the supreme diamond mountain in a single instant.
Similarly, being unskilled, they will be without the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, and the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities.
Then, the Lord withdrew his miraculous power and at once the buddhafield was restored to its usual appearance.
The light emitted by the precious jewel will illuminate the surrounding area for an entire league, including all four divisions of the king’s army.
Are you not a convert to a tīrthika order? Are you not a patricide? Are you not a matricide?
for pratyekas, like a garland;
and the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, they will subsequently attain this omniscience.
she went to where King Śuddhodana was seated comfortably in the music hall.
The Blessed One acquiesced by remaining silent.
Śāradvatī­putra, it is in such ways that great bodhisattva beings who are diligent, alert, and mindful, after eliminating worldly covetousness and sadness without apprehending anything,
‘The seed phrase supreme pa teaches all phenomena from the ultimate perspective.
who brings freedom from the terrors of bondage in stocks and manacles;
In the same vein, they should not abide in actual reality, the expanse of reality, the maturity of all things, and the finality of existence.
Similarly, the emptiness of fundamental ignorance is not fundamental ignorance,
As the sage saw this, tears streamed down his face and he sat there sobbing.
The fifth great merit results in becoming Santuṣita.
The monks asked him, “Venerable, what motivates such diligence in you?”
He will become a bhagavān in the Maitreya family And he will guide ten billion beings. {94}
Similarly, they have a view concerning the ten powers of the tathāgatas and in the same vein, they have a view concerning [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
The Bodhisattva then indicated to the bodhisattvas to take their seat on these thrones.
where they hear this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, and immediately after hearing it, form aspirations toward it,
while the nāga host began to suffer a throbbing headache, prompting him to demand of the preceptor,
being the savior of those who have none,
These childish beings are greedy, like a dog with a bone.
“If for millions of eons one were to describe your unequaled qualities, Which are as numerous as the sands of the Ganges,
The wise ones know the entirety Of the dependence of phenomena. {223}
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of fundamental ignorance and, in the same vein, of [all the other links of dependent origination], up to and including aging and death, as afflicted or purified, constitute a bodhisattva?”
Su­bhūti, do great bodhisattva beings abide in the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
it is because they do not disrupt physical forms, and they do not disrupt feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness, claiming that,
to stretch and bend,
” Then the Blessed One prophesied their unsurpassed and perfect awakening.
when in Hasta, the leaves;
they argue for causes, and they argue for diligence.
I would decline in my practice of the unsurpassable Dharma.
They are established in the supreme retentions, And before long will become guides of the worlds. {21}
In this regard, the expression ‘arms that reach down to his knees when standing, without bending down’ means that when
The lad’s friend then led him on a long detour that took the entire day,
the Bodhisattva went to the great Dharmoccaya Palace, where he taught the Dharma to the gods in the Heaven of Joy.
Thereupon, the entire multitude experienced the desire to behold the universe Abhirati, the Tathāgata Akṣobhya, his bodhisattvas, and his great disciples.
“It is through fear and anxiety they will have abandoned their homes And held firmly to the homeless life.
‘Why, O virtuous one, should you abandon sympathetic ‌joy And enter the void? You have made a promise! The entire world rests in your heart.’
I rule over gods, demigods, humans, and animals; All of them fall under my control.
and not abiding in the present time.
In the same vein, they do not pay attention with the twofold, [over-scrupulous] attentiveness of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas
When he attains enlightenment, living beings who are destined for the ultimate will be born in his buddhafield.
“Yet even thousands of beings like you,
These [attainments] are all revealed in the manner of signlessness,
beheld in the eastern direction the forms of the thousand buddhas teaching the sacred doctrine,
There were millions of gods,
As they followed the deceased, they pulled out their hair, threw dust on their heads, beat their chests, and lamented loudly.
“Then, suddenly, Rāhu, with his body trembling and in a sweat Like a sick person,
It is not the level of śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas.
Since the Bodhisattva had long ago realized the shortcomings of desire, he now demonstrated sensual enjoyment, without himself wanting it, simply in order to ripen others.
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who practice the six transcendent perfections accordingly will swiftly perfect the six transcendent perfections and approach omniscience.
In the world system called Peace abides the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the truly perfect Buddha called Established in Peace.
Instead you will find the happiness of desire-realm gods in the vast abode of Brahmā.
and the inconceivably numerous accumulations of sūtras concerning purification. Those are the four.
many thousands of divine yak-tail whisks, parasols, shoes adorned with gold, and bejeweled gold diadems.
He is unsullied by the form realm.
In this way these impertinent beings will abandon the Buddha’s teachings. Just consider how much nonvirtue they will accumulate!”
some were made of combinations of gold and silver;
‘As I lie on my back, Intoxicated from passion,
And with the supremely fragrant breath of one with the ten powers, Please speak words of unadulterated truth, And thus bring joy to gods and humans!”
According to his or her inclinations and beliefs, a sentient being perceives a Dharma teaching issuing forth from that jewel.
“What is defeating opposition? It is the correct presentation and teaching of the Dharma
Then, bodhisattva Vajragarbha
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that one is liberated by perceiving the sensory element of the ears, the sensory element of sounds, and the sensory element of auditory consciousness as entities?”
He becomes emaciated and seeks refuge from others, His body covered by skin infections and itches.
The formations are the primary and subsidiary mental states that apprehend the particular circumstances of general things.
Likewise, the present itself is also the nature of space.
“Bhagavān, it will be great!” replied the bodhisattva mahāsattva Akṣayamati.
I have abandoned desire like putrid snot. “
‘By their power, majesty, and might may I have well-being!
they would then dedicate [these gifts] toward unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, without apprehending anything.
Instead they train intensively in a mind of love that is free of resentment, rivalry, and harm, and is expansive, immeasurable, and nondual.
“The foolish examine that preeminence And subsequently continue in saṃsāra.
the preceptor drinks molten copper among the denizens of Avīci, the Great Hell of Unrelenting Torment.”
Twenty-eight bhūtas
the possession of untaught generosity, untaught discipline, untaught patience, untaught diligence, untaught concentration, and untaught insight.
“Noble son, if you know that the time has come, you may leave.”
They should not dwell on the notion that ‘I am a genuinely perfect buddha.”
They who hear and retain this sūtra in the degenerate times Will be endowed with memory, understanding, wisdom, and constancy.
White, well-fed, strong oxen, Of great size and beauty, Are yoked to those precious carts
In the future, during the final five hundred years when the sacred Dharma is destroyed and the teachings disturbed, when sentient beings enter evil ways, when the lamp of wisdom dies out and there is no Teacher—
Motivated by compassion for others, He sought to bring about vast benefits to the world.
You have all been practicing bodhisattva conduct and
without knowing and without seeing,
‘This worldly life is devoid of intrinsic nature and is just like a dancer’s mask or a city of gandharvas.
The complete array could never be fully described.
They bowed down to the Victorious One and circumambulated him.
perceive that which is insubstantial as something substantial!’
the tathāgatas consecrate them within their aureoles, extending a full arm span.
If one infuses a hempen cloth with campaka and vārṣika flowers, their scent fades quickly.
and attachment will not disappear; aversion will arise and aversion will not disappear;
There were those who aspired to attain That inconceivable supreme attainment.
The bodhisattva Suvinīta declared,
but they do not relinquish the doctrine.
We prostrate to you, who are like wind and space. “ ‘Great sage, your qualities are like a treasure;
Jagatindhara replied,
Similarly, they will not construe the notion that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are empty, and that emptiness is consciousness [and the other aggregates].
They will never be separated from the five eyes that are neither fettered nor liberated.
“For example, Su­bhūti, space neither arises, nor does it cease, nor is it stable, and alterations are non-apprehensible.
We were never gladdened by hearing Descriptions of the realms of the buddhas.
“Similarly, Su­bhūti, even great bodhisattva beings who possess sublime, uncontaminated pristine cognition
in order to bring sentient beings to maturity,
and radiantly clear and brilliant like the sphere of the sun.
A woman who is childless, Or pregnant, Should, on the eighth and fourteenth days, Observe the trainings, go for refuge in the sublime Dharma, And worship well a reliquary.
At that time the two brothers Trapuṣa and Bhallika, With their caravan of merchants And carriages filled with riches, Reached a grove of sāl trees in full bloom.
Furthermore, just as one perceives the natural sensation of the wind on account of the body,
“ ‘ “Draw a vidyādhara beneath the legs of Ṣaḍakṣarī Mahāvidyā.
moreover, such deeds will not be considered good qualities.
Their minds will not be averted from the unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment,
He must have left this way.
I am the Tathāgata, the supreme human, the Jina, Appearing like a cloud in this world.
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess these ten qualities have a body that is solid like vajra.
because it is non-apprehensible in terms of all phenomena, and so forth.
With the light rays from your stainless and effulgent sublime body,
and they praised them with many kinds of bodhisattva praises, and then they stood to one side with their hands together in homage
himself presented and served a series of great offerings:
established in unsurpassable, complete, and perfect awakening—the spiritual level from which there can be no relapse.
‘With my angry mind, I will destroy the fever of such and such a person.’
“Mañjuśrī, it is because they assume a self and something that belongs to a self that sentient beings do not transcend saṃsāra.
Maitreya, those bodhisattvas distance themselves from desires and from sinful, non-virtuous things.
“When ignorance ceases, formations cease. When formations cease, consciousness ceases. When consciousness ceases, name and form cease. When name and form cease, the six sense sources cease. When the six sense sources cease, contact ceases. When contact ceases, sensation ceases. When sensation ceases, craving ceases. When craving ceases, appropriation ceases. When appropriation ceases, becoming ceases. When becoming ceases, birth ceases. And when birth ceases, aging and death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, despair, and anxiety cease.
“I then pondered what must be absent for sensation not to occur and what must cease for sensation to cease.
“Here I have purified the eye most sublime By which I see all worlds, Like fruit placed In the palm of the hand.
Padmaśrīgarbha, these two beings then spoke these verses to the blessed one,
The seed planted from this has yielded buddhas, pratyekabuddhas, arhats, and śrāvakas in the world.
“For seven days and nights, This embodiment of compassion has not consumed food or drink.
nor is it seen to have any color, such as blue or white.
“As another analogy,
Their bodies are lustrous.
turn the wheel of the sacred doctrine, even though nothing at all is set in motion or reversed.
Something the size of an atom cannot be found; It is a term used in teaching on the worldly level. {12}
Except for a bodhisattva who has reached his last existence and rests in equanimity in all-pervasive absorption,
[9] they are a light for beings; and [10] they have no fear of the lower existences.
When I claim to have explained those things which cause obstacles [on the spiritual path], if some virtuous ascetic, brāhmin, god, demon, Brahmā, or anyone else should say in this respect that even though one might depend on those things, there will be no obstacles,
You are a deep ocean of qualities, and have compassion.
Yet, ultimately, awakening is not the way that it is expressed through words.
and also various flowers:
The same also goes for the [other transcendent perfections], up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
“Divine son, in the same way, based on the circumstance of observing all beings, on the relative level a bodhisattva great being speaks without speaking.”
Venerable Lord! Why does the purity of the transcendent perfection of wisdom not appropriate anything at all?
while another of his wards was distributing water to the saṅgha.
Monk, as all phenomena are unperceived, they are wide open.
they will remain immutable and unchanged, without any damage to their vows.
Who is piercing or cutting it?
“He should avoid association with Beings who are women, or paṇḍakas.
What are these five? The first is the state of being a Brahmā, the second is the state of being a Śakra, the third is the state of being one of the four mahārājas, the fourth is the state of being a cakravartin, and the fifth is the state of being an irreversible bodhisattva.”
and yet nevertheless dull-witted.
And it illuminates, shining in all directions, In that way the dharmabhāṇaka is like Meru. {31}
In this regard, ‘calves resembling those of an antelope’ means that his calves are slender and tapered, just like those of Śarabha Aiṇeya, the king of ungulates.
I, in going forth, renounce the tokens of the householder life and fully embrace the tokens of the renunciant life.”
The charioteer replied:
for the sake of showing compassion to us, enjoy these airborne palaces of the Brahmās.
they correctly perceive that the sensory element of the eyes is empty of inherent existence.
From bhrūṃ, visualize the great celestial palace.
but have merely entered the stream and similarly attained [the other fruits], up to and including arhatship.
Noble one, there is no one like you in the world with its devas.
Thus we must surely go and solicit the worthy one, the perfectly and completely awakened Thus-Gone One, to turn the wheel of Dharma.”
from this world and this buddha realm they saw the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Amitābha, as well as the world of Sukhāvatī, which appeared in a great display of fine features, filled with trillions of qualities.
not to move forth on the outside is stainless;
Nirmāṇarati, Paranirmitavaśavartina, Brahmakāyikā,
“The one who masters all Dharmas Is called a lord of Dharma.
and liberate all beings from the ocean of existence
Your samādhi is the peak of wisdom.
You will always see me here at home and I will not depart.
it is because he did not consider that understanding to be due to the attainment of clear realization of internal phenomena.
“Thus, noble sons, a bodhisattva who aspires to such a Dharma neither rests in the uncompounded nor destroys the compounded.
Holding beautiful, excellent nāga pearls. He remained in the sky, making offerings to the king of sages. {64}
they cannot compare in terms of any fraction, number, analogy, or likeness.
The ordinand prostrates to the preceptor and squats before him,
“If, in thinking of his preceptor or instructor, he develops a negative view,
“Mañjuśrī, this light of the Thus-Gone One reaches everywhere. Just like that light, this Dharma teaching will also spread and pass into the hands of noble sons and daughters who have unimpaired knowledge and concern for the Dharma of the buddhas.”
the inconceivably numerous ways of the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous ways of purification. Those are the four.
How are the ones who resemble lotuses?
Others sleep with their heads toward the ground, in squatting posture, or on the bare ground.
May you turn away from the state of not being vigilant.
If the ordinand says his parents are deceased, he is asked:
Although they perform all the acts of a buddha with their buddha eye, ultimately they perform nothing whatsoever.
scattered divine flowers, incense, joss sticks, nectar, and black agar wood powders.
With veneration, they prostrate and join their palms before them.
“Whoever is born from conditions and causes is utterly unborn.
Ocean of Good Qualities, renowned throughout the world, To you, Thus-Gone One, we pay homage with our heads bowed!”
To kill the target within a week,
or that even the attributes of the bodhisattvas would have an essential nature of non-entity,
They maintain the conception of a result And lose all their wealth of mendicancy. {17}
“ ‘When there is fearlessness, Emptiness is fully comprehended.
“For so long he has inspired others to abandon killing living beings, so he is the One with Long Fingers.
and asks after your health—if you have but little trouble, little discomfort, little unrest; if you are strong, well, without complaint, and living in touch with supreme happiness.’
‘These phenomena arise due to the condition of ignorance; they emerge from ignorance, are preceded by ignorance, and they are dependent on ignorance.
It is the elimination of egoism and possessiveness.
The bhikṣu will be freed From this black erysipelas. {8}
and having become unfixated on all things, then also correctly introduce, secure, and establish others in that definitive discernment of the nature of all things,
inspired them,
Śāradvatī­putra, whenever great bodhisattva beings do not apprehend the physical body
With his power of merit superior because of generosity, he becomes the foremost on the surface of the earth, a benefactor endowed with diligence.
They know the characteristics to be unreal and imaginary.
I am going to teach those dharmas; Listen to me as to what they are and how they are.”
they are without skill in means and one should know them to be without skill in means.
“Then, noble ones, King Śubhavyūha descended from the sky,
and however the face speaks, shouts, moves, contracts, or stretches, the reflected face appears to do likewise.
Wild elephants; best horses of noble breed; Best snakes, hooded and venomous; Crocodiles; water buffaloes; and rhinoceroses— These they summon by the power of their mantra.
“Child, do you know how to calculate the number called ten million to the hundredth power?” “Yes, I do,” said the Bodhisattva.
Among them, sights are empty of sights because they do not endure and they do not disintegrate.
He is mind, the absence of mind, and mental form—the nature of knowledge and what can be known
he left his own abode and journeyed to the place where Buddha Padma­netra was residing.
Thus, they do not teach those who are hateful and blame others.
He will reduce this army to dust, Just as countries are destroyed by the sages.
Abandon all concepts without exception And always abide in a state without concepts. {99}
“After the rākṣasīs had spoken to us thus, each one took a merchant home to be the master of her house.
With parasols, standards, and the sound of bells, They would rise to the summit of existence.
Without anything to accept and reject, Causeless and without characteristics.
There is not an atom of them that is to be found, And that is why they are called unsurpassable. {11}
By performing 100,000 homa rituals with lotuses or bilva fruits,
And they bring forth the happiness Of all living beings.
Prostrations to all past buddhas;
How are their perfections of insight?
the ocean is 84,000 yojanas deep, and it has an immeasurable expanse, extending as far as Vaḍavāmukha. I can count all its drops of water, which are the size of the tip of a hair, but,
“It is as you have spoken because all things are without support!”
Now, to the east of this buddha realm, beyond as many worlds as there are grains of sand in the river Gaṅgā,
his mouth opened with the three gateways to liberation,
the nature of physical forms is omniscience,
You terrified the assembly of evil unbelievers,
for it leads one to reach the other shore.
Similarly, bodhisattvas are by their very nature moist with joy, faith, and delight, and they also moisten others with the same qualities.
From the solid earth sprung beautiful lotuses, the nature of vajra.
Moreover, great king, the pursuit of their desires keeps beings in a state of suffering for sextillions of eons. That is, they will experience the suffering of arising and cessation, the suffering of being in the womb, the suffering of rebirth as a hell being or an animal, or the suffering of the world of Yama, the suffering of poverty, and the suffering of being cut, bruised, beaten, struck, and burnt.
In fact the entire great trichiliocosm was bathed in an immense light.
But the prince insisted, “Your Majesty, it is absolutely essential that you tell me!”
they would not attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment
Their bodies are drenched with human blood.
“When that night was over, on the third morning, he went back into the capital city of Ratnāvatī.
Similarly, [they discern that] the applications of mindfulness are empty of the emptiness of the applications of mindfulness,
I must establish this many in the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth, in the fruit of no longer being subject to rebirth, in arhatship, and in individual enlightenment,
“You who are eager, you should consider that these experiences are conditioned by karma.
“The sugatas will give me answers For my quintillions of questions,
waving millions of pieces of cloth, crying out, “Ha! Ha! Ha!” and sending down a great rain of flowers.
He went through hardship for six years, and now he departs for the Bodhi tree.
Understanding the Blessed One’s silence to be assent,
"འཇམ་དཔལ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་བཞི་པོ་དག་གིས་སེམས་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག་ཏུ་གྱུར་པའི་སེམས་ཅན་རྣམས་འཕགས་པའི་བདེན་པ་བཞི་པོ་དག་<t“Mañjuśrī, having minds that are misguided by the four errors, sentient beings do not see the four truths of the noble ones as they really are, and therefore they do not transcend saṃsāra, which is actually unreal.”
Noble son, bodhisattvas will go alone into the wilderness and compose themselves, with their minds withdrawn and extremely weary.
(19) The lord buddhas are endowed with splendor and intelligence. (20) They are worthy of beholding.
While passing through the Yaṣtī forest,
Ghoṣadatta,
Moreover, Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings who practice the six transcendent perfections see the four social classes, namely, the royal class, the priestly class, the mercantile class, and the laboring class,
those who are no longer subject to rebirth,
“However, monks, once I had recited the four truths of the noble ones three times,
With agarwood, sandalwood, and magnolia, Valerian, fenugreek, and begonia,
taught the Dharma in many ways.
Su­bhūti, it is because those great bodhisattva beings abide in a non-abiding manner in the non-apprehension of all things.
They delight in the actions they perform, But those activities will not liberate them. {54}
Whoever becomes a slave of women through desire
unmatched in terms of any fraction, number, quantity, analogy, or likeness
Without a maṇḍala, fire offering, substances, and so forth, Spiritual accomplishments will not be achieved. “Therefore be diligent in the activity of fire offering.
“Noble one, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara possesses such inconceivable qualities.
“Monks, last night as I rested here,
I pay homage to Glorious Vajrasattva!
they should sprinkle him with sandalwood powder and with blue lotuses.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ freedom from incorrect mental engagements.
to fully engage in understanding the inexhaustible doctrine of the bodhisattva mahāsattvas that all phenomena are without self;
and should not apprehend any phenomenon whatsoever.
Our minds are filled with joy, and our bodies feel at ease and soothed.
“Those jinas, those great sages teach nothing else Than exactly this kind of knowledge that I have.
He will not teach the sacred doctrine according to the notions that physical forms are fettered or that they are liberated.
In the southeastern direction,
The natural mode is without dwelling, is nondependent. It is the level of peace, the stainless domain of the jinas. {21}
Likewise, indeterminate physical forms are neither fettered nor liberated, and similarly, indeterminate feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are neither fettered nor liberated.
They shun the wrong path And are always upon the true path of peace. {39}
You should keep in your mind the thought, ‘They are all going to become buddhas.’ {43}
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin said to the Bhagavat,
and likewise, they do not make assumptions about the four assurances, the four unhindered discernments, great loving kindness, great compassion, and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
Or Sumeru, the king of mountains. {8}
They all stand respectfully with hands together in homage, These mindful offspring of the Lord of the World.
Upatiṣya and Kolita then went to Ajita of the hair shawl and asked,
Brahmā,
if all the conditions for growth, from sprouting through to completion, are present,
Blessed One, by all means, please grant your blessing so that all māras and opposing forces are overcome, so that there are no obstacles, and so that in the future this Dharma teaching will be practiced in Jambudvīpa.”
The people said, “Who else but a rogue would allow the going forth of someone like him?”
I considered, ‘Alas! I have gone astray From inconceivable, unobstructed wisdom!’ {7}
“There is no one here other than worthy recipients. That is what these wise ones are like,
will attain the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena,
It is born of learning, wisdom, and liberative art.
They are understood to be physical forms with their bases of cognition.
If you ask why, Su­bhūti, it is because in [a modality] that is neither to be adopted nor to be forsaken, going or coming is non-apprehensible.
examine this [book of] the transcendent perfection of wisdom, pay homage to it, and so forth, and [only] then consider departing again [for their own abodes].
“Noble son, you may wonder how bodhisattvas flood high and low.
They will obtain the treasure of the tathāgatas, And see ten thousand million buddhas. {47}
just as I want no one to speak about me in a defamatory way, order someone to speak about me so, or rejoice in someone so speaking about me,
“Padmaśrīgarbha, it is exactly as you say,” said the Blessed One.
And offered me this request:
Su­bhūti, it is so! It is just as you have spoken.
venerable Urubilvā Kāśyapa,
One should write this mantra with saffron or bovine orpiment on birchbark,
Ah! You who are honest, glorious, and trustworthy— Where have you gone, leaving us behind? {106}
At that time, the Blessed One outshone Śakra, Brahmā, and all the worldly protectors. Then,
In samādhi within all dharmas.
Instead of seizing it in the sky, Instantly release the lantern of creatures!’
Bodhisattva, will you explain them? {54}
Venerable Lord, it is because all things that are subject to affliction or purification are non-existent.
I had immense compassion throughout that time And always my thoughts were of attaining buddha wisdom. {8}
and yet we do not know the meaning of what the Bhagavān has said.”
Skillful One, saying this you sought out supreme awakening, And for many millions of eons you made offerings to the learned.
Therefore, O sons of the victorious ones, you must act to benefit, and give up evil.
Then at that time the Bhagavān, in order to make the meaning clear,
the rākṣasī named Puṣpadantī, the rākṣasī named Makuṭadantī, the rākṣasī named Keśinī, the rākṣasī named Acalā, the rākṣasī named Mālādhārī, the rākṣasī named Kuntī, the rākṣasī named Sarva­sattvojohārī, and
When they have been eaten, their bones are scattered around the iron fortress.
settled to the north of that village in a grove of sāl trees, with a great saṅgha of bhikṣus
What has become of the brahmin Māṭhara?” “His time came.”
One should visualize them as white like the autumn moon
As an analogy, suppose some people were to be seized by evil spirits that cause emaciation or forgetfulness, or by gandharvas or gods.
looked at sentient beings. He saw them dying and being born, in all their beauty and ugliness, in favorable and unfavorable circumstances,
the body’s fluids recede into water, the body’s heat recedes into fire, and the body’s vital energies recede into wind.
Alternatively, one should write the mantra and the person’s name on a slip of birchbark and
That is called the emptiness of external phenomena.
Shining, they travel To countless buddha realms. {272}
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Attain the mindfulnesses, the bases of miraculous powers,
they focus on the nature of mind that benefits sentient beings, thinking, ‘I should save all sentient beings!’
[8] they engage with households without aversion or attachment; [9] they give the Dharma without expectation of a reward;
They will still not have divine eyes And so they will not have that knowledge.
“In the buddha realm of the Blessed, thus-gone, worthy, perfect Buddha Ratnaketu, there are no such instructions that involve reference points.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that one is liberated by perceiving the applications of mindfulness, and in the same vein, [all the aforementioned causal attributes] as far as the noble eightfold path as entities?”
Beneath a tree inhabited by piśācas,
hung with one hundred and eight-string and sixty-four-string necklaces;
so he ascended into the sky to the height of seven palm trees,
This profound sacred doctrine is neither diminished even when it is not explained, nor is it enhanced even when it is explained.
“How can it be that this goddess has heard this Dharma teaching so many times and served that many thus-gone ones, and still she has but a female body?”
The faculty of mindfulness is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
They do not teach a path that is associated with a self, a sentient being, a life-force, a soul, a human being, or a person.
to perceive all rebirths as though they were hellish states;
Based on it, they will be able to exert themselves in the four means of magnetizing, live by not forsaking any being,
By anointing one’s eyes with this lampblack, one will be adored by everyone.
he sat and sat, absorbed in thought.
and the inconceivably numerous words concerning illumination in regard to purification. Those are the four.
What are those ten? They are not being fixated on generosity although they aspire to generosity and, similarly, not being fixated on discipline, patience, diligence, concentration, insight, the three realms, awakening, the path, or the transcendence of suffering, although they aspire to each of them.
He then approaches a tree, intending to eat of the great fruit it bears.
They continuously remain within tranquility and special insight.
I will realize the Dharma, the state of peace, That the best of men realized in the Bodhimaṇḍa.” {71}
Now, what is the meaning of ‘aggregate’?
f a woman hears and possesses this Dharma teaching,
Venerable Lord! That is why this is the Great Vehicle of great bodhisattva beings.”
If this is his Dharma, What, for him, is antithetical to Dharma?”
There was a young brahmin who, desiring and in search of esoteric instruction, left the Middle Country and went to the South.
one should swallow it without touching it with one’s teeth.
The bodhisattvas asked,
Similarly, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness also do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not abide anywhere.
they who are immersed in yogic sleep, They concentrate upon the pill
(69) Their torso resembles that of a lion.
the śrāvakas, devas, nāgas,
“Where has the child gone? I do not see him.”
For many eons, with many kinds of offerings,
“No, Venerable Lord! It would descend to Jambu­dvīpa absolutely wounded and injured, and die or experience mortal sufferings.
On the relative level, liberation is a gateway to the absence of obscuration.
The fourfold assembly and the worlds of devas also
Vast and pleasing is his array:
The four main elements are themselves the nature of space.
so I shall name this prince Prasenajit (Supreme Light).”
they also achieve and maintain the four immeasurable aspirations and so forth, up to and including absorption in the cessation of perceptions and feelings. However,
I am cultivating the applications of mindfulness,
you should go to that Sahā world.”
With respect to everything it is the same, free from concepts,
will be made with seven precious attributes.
If there were any such apprehensible phenomena,
Thinking I shall ask the Bhagavān, ‘Have I strayed or have I not?’ {8}
and the expanse of reality is itself consciousness [and the rest].
Those individual followers of the vehicle of the bodhisattvas will only achieve an interim state, and owing to inappropriate conduct, they will incur great misfortune and suffer a decline with respect to the doctrine.
Similarly, they neither associate the sensory element of the mental faculty, the sensory element of mental phenomena, and the sensory element of mental consciousness with omniscience, nor do they disassociate them therefrom.
The four great kings understood the greeting and thought, “We have been dismissed by the Bodhisattva.”
When they sit, they do so with the motivation, ‘May all beings be relieved of the pains of desire, anger, and dullness.’
Seeing such a situation,
“When he said the letter pa, out came the statement: ‘The absolute (paramārtha).’
He will do this to benefit many beings, to bring happiness to many beings, to compassionately care for the world, for the welfare, betterment, and happiness of gods, humans, and the majority of beings.
Our beautiful eyes are as pure and large as lotuses.
Some had their heads uncovered, while the heads of others were covered.
being impervious to the eight worldly concerns;
“Noble son, you may wonder about the character of the bodhisattvas’ expertise concerning the absence of self.
Fully understood as false, these dogmas are severed at the root and wither like the head of a palm tree, never to arise or cease in the future.
they could play the role of a male for me while I could play the role of a female for them.”
Similarly, śrāvakas do not apprehend the sameness of the three times.
Similarly, there are views concerning the ten powers of a tathāgata, the assurances, the unhindered discernments, great loving kindness, great compassion, the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, the understanding of all phenomena, the understanding of the aspects of the path, [and omniscience].
In this way he strove for the benefit of others.
The village girl Sujātā, who has done much good in the past, Continuously makes offerings, thinking, “May this guide complete his discipline!”
The scent of jasmine and royal jasmine, Sandalwood and bay leaves,
They do not hold them to be pure owing to their sacred threads and auspicious ceremonies.
He states in the middle of that assembly, ‘This is my son, whom I lost a long time ago.
“Young man, the Bhagavān will always give you the opportunity.
They are the inconceivably numerous sūtra words concerning the composite,
who commit this transcendent perfection of wisdom to writing, or have it committed to writing, and
That going forth is for the gracious And ordination for the pure.
“Through incorrect thought There will be numerous, countless thoughts,
Therefore, Maitreya, listen well and retain in your mind what I shall explain to you.”
These dedications are made without engaging at all in the dualistic attitude that differentiates the subject who makes the dedication and the object to whom the dedication is made.
once born there, they suffer from unbearable and savage experiences as well as burning.
I can calculate, noble son, the number, parts, and groups of how many palas are in those mountains, how many hundreds of palas, or thousands of palas, or millions of trillions of palas, but,
“Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata does not think, ‘This sentient being has belief in giving,
[How do] they expound on the teachings using the words prescribed by the Buddha?
“In that way, in future times There will be those who have no wisdom, Yet they who do not engage in it Will make their living by praising it. {29}
When your gem fell in the ocean, You dried out the ocean. As the strong and firm leader of human beings, you recovered the valuable gem.
And every woman is a vajra yoginī.
So it is, Kauśika, that the transcendent perfection of wisdom is designated as beyond these five [lower] transcendent perfections.
Rather, the bodhisattvas themselves are the meditative stabilities, and the meditative stabilities are themselves the bodhisattvas.
When the consciousness has just undergone transfer, its actions become connected with beings of the hell realms.
Sees a lake that is a mirage. Know that all phenomena are like that. {20}
In order to benefit, delight, and satisfy many sentient beings,
It is the absence of yearning for respect. It is indifference to lack of respect.
they know their meanings exactly as they are,
Entered homelessness in the presence of the Sugata, Seeking to receive the Dharma of that Jina. {43}
“I rejoice in the bodhisattvas overwhelmed by compassion Who give away their wealth, grain, and jewels,
If he takes it otherwise, all his efforts will be in vain.
In the morning, the sword will burst into flames.
Then Sundarananda placed an iron drum six times shouting-distance away as his target.
“Young man, that which is called ‘physical restraint’
With all his heart, he stopped striving after compounded phenomena, as well as all kinds of grasping and clinging.
if they perfect the nine serial steps of meditative absorption exclusively by way of signlessness,
“Then the man saw that they had come out safe and well,
You shall beautify this entire world and me.
One should, in turn, kill Green Acala.
which is an instruction for bodhisattvas that is possessed by all the buddhas.
asked the Thus-Gone One for forgiveness, saying:
‘Oṁ, Vauherī, may such and such come to me! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
As he made his alms round, he arrived at a prostitute’s home, not knowing whose it was.
“As for the substantial offering, With the stages of red and yellow firewood and so forth:
Ripens thousands of millions of beings In this supreme, unsurpassable yāna,
And the windows and pavilions bent out of shape.
Similarly, the real nature of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness,
“Śāriputra, there came a time When I saw infinite thousands of quintillions Of offspring of the highest of humans Who had set out for the supreme, highest enlightenment. {128}
There are many flowering trees growing around the lakes, such as mango, aśoka, campaka, amaranth, and saffron trees.
There is the meditative stability named Devoid of Darkness.
why is it you are collecting tributes and taxes here?
Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin. Your eloquence and your teaching of this kind of Dharma to a gathering of devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, humans, nonhumans, upāsakas, and upāsikās is excellent! Excellent!
They do not ripen upon the element of water, upon the element of fire, nor upon the element of wind.
They should don the armor of the emptiness of internal phenomena, and don the armor of the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities.
the love that is great compassion because it infuses the Mahāyāna with radiance;
“When he said the letter a, out came the statement: ‘Every composite phenomenon is impermanent (anityaḥ sarva­saṃ­skāraḥ).’
And bestrewn with the petals of various kinds of flowers. That is the kind of merit the one with ten strengths had. {27}
The two nephews began to apply themselves to their studies with diligence.
You are not disturbed at sameness,
It is like clothing for the naked.
From the great hells, they will once again proceed to the great hells.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness as void or not void constitute a bodhisattva?”
Then a god from the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations approached King Śuddhodana and spoke to him:
but they do so without apprehending anything.
And where, with wisdom, sentient beings are established, That place is the sphere of activity of meditative concentration.
“And because I will not see this delightful sight, I cry.
‘If you love me, kill your suitor with this poison.’
Nor will I be able to smell any longer the divine scents,
“Those who understand the meaning, Do not say ‘he exists’ or ‘he does not.’
“When this fine intellect was questioned,
The Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha: These are the Three Jewels.
Son of noble family, when you use this dhāraṇī of the majestic lion turning backwards, which overwhelms everyone who sees him, at the time of death,
We bow to you who are dauntless, knowing no fear!
They fell on that bhagavān throughout the entire ten intermediate eons.
But the elder Śāriputra has both constructual thought and discrimination.
Do not say such things to others.
He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end!”
He will be honored by all beings.
Blessed One, how do a dying person’s sensory fields follow him?
Each group of parasites has its own respective eighty parasites that have both beaks and mouths.
‘The Blessed One has said that women are filthy, foul-smelling, disagreeable, and not worthy of being looked upon.
and shook Meru, the king of mountains.
And likewise over the lord of death and the demon of afflictions.
When practicing generosity by offering beds and pillows,
Some of the goddesses held conches, drums, clay kettle drums, wooden kettle drums, lutes, and flutes, while others sang melodiously, and yet others held up reed pipes, one-stringed lutes, and three-stringed lutes.
They will be reborn in wealthy families for ninety thousand eons and as a universal monarch for eighty thousand eons.
They ask, “Who is that being whom we have never seen before
the second door was made of acacia,
like dream-visions seen after waking;
None of the gods, nor the nāgas, Śakra, Brahmā, or the guardians of the world, Nor any other being in the trichiliocosm could accept such offerings as these,
When those deities had come from Avalokiteśvara’s body,
“I don’t recall that,” replied the physician.
body hairs rising,
similarly, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness of the past are neither fettered nor liberated.
"འོན་<tI did not succeed, but out of altruism and without hypocrisy, I engendered compassion for beings and
Because they do not know the cycle of dependent origination Their path is the river of suffering.
then they would not be intent on unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
The seasons and the stars all moved in a balanced manner.
Śāradvatī­putra, it is in this way that great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom
“We are delighted and overjoyed to have heard Such a supreme reassurance as this, The prophecy of our highest, complete enlightenment.
and he said to the venerable Śāriputra,
At the same time Lalitavyūha made it so that the Bodhisattva, who was sitting at the seat of awakening, became visible to all sentient beings living in the five types of existences.
Again, Su­bhūti, there are great bodhisattva beings who can indeed see with their eyes of flesh across an entire trichiliocosm.
We pray that you grant the gift of the Dharma.”
If even the four great kings show their faces when one holds this sūtra, Destroyer of the Great Trichiliocosm,
so I will teach him the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle
he is neither worthy of offerings nor unworthy of offerings.
Similarly, [the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path, are neither heard nor seen, owing to the nature of phenomena being inanimate.
bodhisattvas respect and pursue all the points of training and all the prescriptions.
One should place in her right hand a knife of iron or other material,
“What is the knowledge of the mind’s condition? It is not objectifying the mind
the joints of their limbs do not protrude;
and which is neither [identified with] the mindset of the śrāvakas nor with the mindset of the pratyekabuddhas,
anger, enmity, hypocrisy, annoyance, violence, jealousy, miserliness, and pride.
Such fools will not hear the Dharma; They will be deaf and without thought.
a virtuous spiritual friend,
When the Bhagavān was teaching this teaching of this chapter “Facing Everywhere,”
“The lamp said,
I am the Dharma King who has appeared in the world. I am the crusher of existence.
that those [phantom] persons emanated by the tathāgatas
so when practicing the transcendent perfection of wisdom, they perceive that all things are gathered within this transcendent perfection of wisdom,
Will become free of terrible fears, will be fearless, Will never abandon the aggregate of correct conduct, {6}
Noble son, it consists in the bodhisattvas’ making others retain and understand the teachings without any concern for material things.
The priests had their meal in the royal palace,
Their eyes gouged out, they are deprived of happiness.
Seated there, the Bodhisattva attained a one-pointed state of mind.
at the time of bowel evacuation,
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva who has those higher cognitions manifests all the manifestations of samādhi and teaches the Dharma to beings.
Let alone obtaining the entire sūtra. {64}
“If you see that there are many present Among your followers who have bad conduct
Even those sentient beings who, suffering in the desolate place of saṃsāra, have become polluted by their negative views, and do not know the means to reach the higher realms and liberation,
and those people in the four continents were to do no other work than growing mustard, and from time to time the king of the nāgas would send down rain,
Dwelling as mighty lords in the family of a universal monarch, they will establish sentient beings, many hundreds of billion trillions in number, on the path of the ten virtuous actions.
owing to the fact that sentient beings are uncreated,
“Noble son, you may wonder how bodhisattvas move in a flow of virtuous qualities.
Prostrations to all the saṅgha dwelling in the ten directions.
Rākṣasas with copper hair and teeth, Copper eyes and arms, Copper hammers for feet, Copper noses and mouths,
For the sake of accomplishing the benefit of beings There is nothing that has not been done before.
They will always follow in pursuit, from whence they came, to hear this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom.
But it is impossible that someone like me would ever move from the king of trees.”
If all living beings were to eat for an eon an amount of this food equal to Mount Sumeru in size, it still would not be depleted.
You, however, should be at the forefront.
“Though I have done much for this king, he has not taken care of me.
I set my mind on the enlightenment of a buddha
but who, nonetheless, lack the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
Your work to achieve awakening, exalted by the force of your perseverance, was infinite!
If one abides by them, the monk who has gone forth and been ordained in the well-proclaimed Dharma and Vinaya will be a genuine monk.
Joining his hands in devotion toward the Bhagavān, he asked him,
They have no longing for women and have unconfused minds. They are peaceful, completely peaceful, and undefiled. {187}
“Their wife is the joy in the Dharma,
Like a celestial maiden in the garden of Indra, Māyādevī lives in King Śuddhodana’s female quarters. She is fit to be the mother of the Bodhisattva. Thus it appears that the purity of the family described by the Bodhisattva can be seen only in the Śākya clan.
“Moreover, Kauśika, fundamental ignorance is empty of fundamental ignorance. Similarly, [the other links of dependent origination], up to and including aging and death, are empty of aging and death [and the rest].
this is formation,
and then it lit up the place where the arrow was, at the outer periphery of this buddhafield. 
They will attain the throne of Brahmā, The throne of a king, and the throne of Śakra.
‘Offering one’s hands represents the offering of the bodhisattvas’ Dharma hands to all beings. Therefore,
But then, on reflection, it occurred to them, “The noble Saṅgharakṣita possesses miraculous powers and great might.
The sun’s rays fall on foul-smelling things,
The meaning of the scripture is vast, And therefore it is called vast.” {3}
and the bodhisattva mahāsattva Padmaśrī attained the white lotus of the good Dharma samādhi.
All Doubts Diminished,
They are studded with a variety of jewels and hung with a variety of adornments.
This is the door of the Dharma called “The Inexhaustible Lamp.”
Only then would he cater to his own needs. It was as a result of this activity that the great Brahmā offered the Bodhisattva this drop of nectar.
Śāriputra, in this regard, the birthlessness of all phenomena is the primary sense of a section of the Dharma.
“For those who are careful in the Buddha’s teaching, For those who have perfect aspirations,
and the ripened fruits of mixed actions are mixed,
it is the termination of all conceptual elaboration;
as residing on the level of nirvāṇa;
that is called the unproduced purified of the three spheres.
“I should go find this monk Gautama.
Seeing him in that way, she was satisfied, elated, and delighted. She felt extremely happy, buoyant, and joyful.
“Having impaired training, They saw this wrong of theirs,
I entrust to you these bodhisattva mahāsattvas, these great śrāvakas, this enlightenment of buddhahood, this world realm, these precious platforms, these precious trees, and these devas who are honoring me.
Ānanda struck his drum target twice shouting-distance away, but he could not shoot any farther.
“I destroyed ignorance With blazing, vajra-hard wisdom, And attained the state of the ten powers. That is why I now abandon the cross-legged posture.
They sat on a bed of grass!”
“Young brahmin, as we are well-known brahmins, we cannot join just any renunciant order.
Because of his love, the body of this sage Is inaccessible to poison, weapons, and fire. Since the love that he feels transcends the world,
Oṁ, Lavaṇāmbha! You are fierce! You are vast! O terrifying one! Burn the limbs of such-and-such! Burn his flesh! Burn his skin! Burn even his nails! Burn his bones and the marrow in his bones! He cuts the salt, breaks the salt, and cooks the salt. When the salt of the earth is being seized, how could one sleep, how could one find pleasure? If such-and-such dwells a hundred leagues away, behind a hundred rivers, in a city surrounded by iron walls and protected by cobras—at that very place, enthrall that person, having first bound the salt. Oṁ, ciṭi, ciṭi! Vikloli! Please bring here such-and-such a person! Svāhā!
Burning his arm, he made an offering to those stūpas of the Tathāgata for seventy-two thousand years.
Su­bhūti, it is because the essential nature of the emptiness of internal phenomena will not attain emancipation from the three world systems, and will not come to rest in omniscience.
For all of them he was someone who had attained discernment.
just as this: the aggregates,
“Ānanda, leave aside this description of the physical states of those individuals who will be reborn in the inferior realms, having defamed the sacred doctrine!
and [the other causal attributes] from there up to and including the noble eightfold path, and up to the three gateways to liberation, are all empty of notions of “I” and “mine.”
Why have you gone forth amongst these thieving sons of the Śākya?
Who will become a buddha, excellent among humans, Named Bodhyaṅga­puṣpa­kara
Lesser anger is when one’s anger causes one to accumulate negative acts through mere words and unpleasant or harsh expressions.
With his special insight, he outshines the entire world of gods, humans, and demigods, including Māra, Brahmā, and all the gods, mendicants, and brahmins.
This body is like grass, a tree, a wall, or the scenery along a road: it is inactive, actionless, inanimate, insubstantial, and composed of elements.
“Su­bhūti, the buddhas, the nature of the buddhas, the real nature of the buddhas, the essential nature of the buddhas, and the defining characteristics of the essential nature of the buddhas
So it is, Su­bhūti, that great bodhisattva beings should never lack the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
the great king Vaiśravaṇa, the great king Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the great king Virūḍhaka, and the great king Virūpākṣa, each surrounded by his respective attendants.
Although I will not pass into nirvāṇa, I state that I am going to pass into nirvāṇa.
They will also smell the scents of the bodies of the deva maidens and the deva wives.
For all actions, recite a hundred thousand mantras.
the eye-consciousness-base do not swerve from the tathatā.
they will not attain emancipation in the state of omniscience.”
“You have an excellent body, like a clear sky.
Considering what ought to be done to train those monks, youthful Mañjuśrī projected an emanation in the form of a monk on the road in front of them.
And the jinas attained their qualities Through seeking this supreme samādhi of peace. {1}
Thus-gone Śākyamuni, “Blessed One, who has brought us to this Jewel World?”
And I asked him questions. {2}
The newly cured monk said, “Preceptor, I have achieved the aim I had in going forth.”
What is ultimately destroyed does not become destroyed; hence, it is called ‘indestructible.’
“ ‘Secondly, those who are pratyekabuddhas, And also śrāvakas with miraculous powers,
“Noble son, all the tathāgatas have spent sixteen eons wandering in search of this six-syllable mahāvidyā, so therefore how could bodhisattvas know it?
“They have a body that is the color of gold And emanate countless manifestations,
The Bodhisattva asked the god, “My friend,
Joyous, auspicious, imperishable, and without sorrow.
Śāriputra, it is because all phenomena are characterized as being unborn and unceasing.
King Śuddhodana had a seat prepared for the sage Asita and said to the gatekeeper,
Knowing this, they demonstrate the sacred doctrine accordingly to sentient beings.
one will not have to fear the lower realms.
defeat the hordes of demons, and awaken to unexcelled and complete buddhahood.
sentient beings do not understand
Similarly, in numerous ways, the wind-like bodhisattvas employ their unhindered and unobstructed wisdom with respect to correct understandings and eloquence
Single-faced, with elongated eyes,
neither originated nor unoriginated;
The Blessed One replied, “It is the prayers he made. What did he pray for?
Still in doubt, the monks questioned him who severs all doubts, the Blessed Buddha,
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Īśvara to those beings who are to be guided by Īśvara.
‘What god, nāga, or yakṣa can frighten me!’
To perfect the marks of buddhahood, he does not rest in the uncompounded, and,
he proclaimed these satisfying words in lion-like fashion:
similarly, Su­bhūti, the vehicle does not come to rest,
I shall never part from the path of training that the Blessed One has prescribed, even if it were to cost my life.
whose results have matured, which follow their course like an irrigation channel,
In that respect, Mañjuśrī, there is no duality by which emptiness and awakening could be made into two.
Who, in the future, Will listen to this samādhi?” {18}
Bhagavān, I have reprimanded myself for that day and night.
“Bhikṣus, at that time the sixteen young princes, having faith, together renounced home for homelessness.
The bodhisattvas bowed to the Blessed One’s feet, sat down before him,
With the application of the samaya seal They should enter by the open pathway.
Building a boat he frees himself and can save others; He takes them to the best of shores, the one that is free from fear and suffering.
As they saw the structure, they were satisfied, uplifted, and full of rejoicing. In a joyful mood, they were happy and delighted.
In this connection, the Bhagavān concisely taught the characteristics of dependent arising as follows:
They will have become vessels for the Buddha’s Dharma.
all the lord buddhas who reside therein
“Those who come with clods and sticks, And likewise abuse and threats,
Son of noble family, through these two instructions will one attain the absorption that encapsulates all merit.
And attained the supreme goal.
What is the root of unreal construction?
It would not even count for one thousandth or one-billionth of it. It would not even count as any part, any number worthy of consideration, simile or approximation of any kind.
“He is the one with a voice like the roar of a lion or a bull.
As it was before, so it is afterward. Know that all phenomena are like that. {1}
Therefore, I request that the Blessed One teach this mantra, so that other beings too may be protected by it.
When he has put them on, he performs various actions and experiences happiness and suffering.
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ trust in the teachings on the principle of the various ways consist in?
either in the usual way or by visiting them in their own dwellings.
he is the One with the Power That Comes from Knowing the Cause and Effect of All Actions in the Past, Present, and the Future.
Here, with the sun of wisdom, I dispelled the fog of delusion, debased with impurities, Thick with views of arrogance and anger, Thus illuminating what was darkened for so long.
Eloquent one with earlobes like golden plumb lines, this is excellent!
Once I’m gone, the spoils I’ve won in debate will be taken away.”
and similarly, the more they wish to teach and grant instruction in [the aspects of emptiness], from the emptiness of internal phenomena up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities,
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom
“Without anyone asking you to speak of it You are praising your own conduct.
“You are a physician who removes pain, and a guide for those who need guidance;
“They have no true meaning; there is nothing designated and no concept.”
This is what we call a ‘heap,’
they train, without training, in the power‌s.
“That king had that degree of dedication, That for a full thousand eons, without weariness, He did no other work in the ten directions Until he obtained that which was called the Dharma.
They are devoid of mind; their nature is not mind. They are momentary and are devoid of sound. {19}
Likewise, sons of the Victorious One, the Tathāgata understands beings who are obscured by various kinds of suffering, as well as the conduct of beings who are to be converted in keeping with their various dispositions.
So also do I empower you.
A second time and a third time the Bhagavān with his right hand took hold of the right hands of those in the entire gathering of bodhisattvas and said,
are noble ones,
Kauśika, do you think you can guard, protect, and offer sanctuary to the tathāgatas or to an emanation of the tathāgatas?
They do not apprehend the emptiness of ultimate reality as the emptiness of ultimate reality.
“Some give, as places for resting during the day,
it is because dreams have an essential nature of non-entity, and the essential nature of non-entity is non-apprehensible.
whereby the king or his minister could rightly say to him,
Similarly, Senior Śāradvatī­putra, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are also non-existent and non-apprehensible.
[Imbued with renunciation, dwelling in solitude, maintaining detachment, and remaining in a state of cessation], they should cultivate the support for miraculous ability combining meditative stability of scrutiny with the formative force of exertion.
Divine son, when a bodhisattva great being,
These beings had their suffering pacified And experienced feelings of happiness.
Why? Because the appearance of the buddhas does not benefit anyone.”
The bodhisattva Satyananda declared,
When he said the letter gha, out came the statement: ‘Eradicating the darkness of delusion and the thick veils of ignorance (ghana­paṭalāvidyā­mohāndhakāra­vidhamana).’
During the period of his teachings, there was a priest named Wealthy as the Great Sal Tree.
An ocean of wisdom, with power both vast and pure,
There is no mundane or supramundane virtuous accumulation that is not practiced by bodhisattvas.
Oh, you think that light is darkness.
with the sweetest scent and the most beautiful color.
He sat there for a second intermediate eon but still did not attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
a hundred thousand eons, and so on, up to remembering many quintillions of eons.
They do not wish for fame. Those who remain in the disciplines of mendicancy
Therefore, monks, you should exclude from this Dharma and Vinaya those persons who have killed an arhat.
Then when they are reborn, they will again proceed from great hells to great hells.
“It is to be without frowns. It is to be pleasant. It is to have correct conduct. It is to be friendly.
These are called contaminated phenomena.
that some people took those individual seeds and split each single one into as many pieces as there were seeds.
where it spends its time until death.
In the ocean they become one flavor.
they do not dedicate it to the level of the śrāvakas,
This concludes “Skill in Methods,” the second chapter of the Dharma teaching of “The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.”
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds knowingly take birth to ripen sentient beings.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of comprehension of names concerning the kleśas,
So do not instruct them in the Disciple Vehicle.
From plants, trees, bushes, mountains, and rocks There came the words ‘phenomena have no existence.’ {4}
and so illuminates all the surrounding areas within the distance of one, two, or three leagues.
“Sister, you just can’t leave it be! You must want me to be kicked out!”
“Blessed One, the praises of the ocean could be incredibly numerous,
Because ultimately all phenomena are utterly unarisen.
great coral tree flowers, spider lily flowers, great spider lily flowers, and divine flowers, which were scattered upon the Bhagavān and his assembly.
and with her sported,
at any location that is free from harm.
How is desire purified?
The real nature of the Tathā­gata is not distinct from the real nature of all things.
“Noble son, because they are endowed with ten qualities bodhisattvas possess a subtle intellect.
The appearance of his sacred Dharma will remain for seven million five hundred thousand years.’“
“We just left because we did not like it.
And so, having been perfectly awakened by my perception, I proclaim it to an array of monks, nuns,
No root and no ground to stand upon,
They have indeed possessed all the transcendent perfections.
There are also some who subsist on just a single juniper berry, sesame seed, or grain of rice.
“I proclaim to you and make it known to you That to the extent that a person contemplates this,
“ ‘I was overcome with desire and envy And had this hero cut into pieces.
“On this seat my body may wither and rot, And my skin, my bones, and my flesh may dissolve.
and the consciousness which reincarnates amongst the beings of the formless realms is empty too
And expelling—anything at all Will one accomplish through meditation alone.
Was followed by a billion devas, And was praised when he came to the city. {47}
‘Bhagavat, this is extraordinarily marvelous.
“Oh, the bodhisattva’s great power! The bodhisattva’s great miracles! The bodhisattva’s great manifestations!
“For so long he has given up laughing at and mocking others. Instead he has made everyone happy, guarded his words, and spoken in a way that has made others happy.
“They had contentment, great power, and few desires. They were free of grasping and were established in buddha qualities.
who is going to retain and recite these names of the tathāgatas, should rise in the morning, clean up, and,
“Noble son, I remember going to as many worlds as there are atoms in the world for the sake of obtaining this six-syllable mahāvidyā.
In order to find him I came here from that town.
Along the way, he defeated an opponent in debate, and then bound him to his chariot.
who has paths to enlightenment accumulated within his body;
In doing so, they practice liberality while adhering to the ownership of property,
they do not hanker for the levels of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, and much less still for the levels of ordinary people.
“The nose is empty of a self and what belongs to a self;
Some bodhi trees were made of sandalwood and were three hundred thousand leagues high.
Friends, what is the reason why this has occurred?
thinking one thing but professing another.
In their hands they proffered many types of jewelry, such as necklaces, bracelets, armbands, gold threads, and pearl necklaces.
beliefs were eradicated,
These are called the faculties endowed with the knowledge of all things.
it is earth alone that nurtures it to put forth a stem and green leaves,
She is the source of all goddesses
“Similarly, in the same vein as before,
‘I possess mental phenomena,
Similarly, they may attract by the noble eightfold path and [the other causal attributes] those sentient beings who are attracted by the four immeasurable aspirations, the four meditative concentrations, and the four formless absorptions, as well as those who are attracted by the four applications of mindfulness, the four correct exertions, the four supports for miraculous ability, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven branches of enlightenment, and the noble eightfold path.
Who verbalizes: ‘Suffering should be recognized, origination should be eliminated, cessation should be realized, the path should be practiced,’
The village girl Sujātā also collected all the hair and the beard of the Bodhisattva. Thinking that it must be sacred,
He will explain and teach the hitherto unheard of, the unprecedented, the instructions of the omniscient one, the deep and profound sūtras, the dhāraṇīs, tolerance, and the grounds.
and the unshakable, liberated mind. Young man, that is the restraint of the mind.”
“Hero who subdues the unsubdued, The unsubdued are subdued by you.
It then occurred to him, “The six sense fields emerge when there is name and form.
One should make one’s mind free from indifference
Venerable Lord, if the notion of the eyes as afflicted is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of the eyes as purified become a bodhisattva?
Give me the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās!
“Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings who are irreversible dwell as householders,
“Young man, in the past, countless, vast, immeasurable, inconceivable, unfathomable, asaṃkhyeya eons ago,
As the group of six did whatever their self-appointed duties called for, they would never leave the gate into Jetavana unattended.
The second aspect of liberation ensues when formless beings endowed with internal perception observe external physical forms.
Prostrations to the tathāgata, Buddha “Joyous King Vīrasena”;
How many such sections are there?
Similarly, the transcendence of [all other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path, is always without fear.
“Not the domain of the ordinary individual and not the domain of the arhat, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
“This youth appears far more beautiful than Vaiśravaṇa.
include the knowledge of the fruit of entering the stream, knowledge of [the other fruits], up to and including knowledge of the fruit of individual enlightenment, and
The nasal faculty will be purified
in the beginning, they attract sentient beings exclusively through the transcendent perfection of generosity.
What, you may ask, is this world, with its gods, humans, and antigods?
in full possession of attention,
Oṁ, Vajrayoginī, hūṁ, phaṭ!
the recollection of the Buddha, the recollection of the Dharma, the recollection of the Saṅgha,
One should pronounce this mantra over it seven times, put it in a red, unbaked jar, and seal it with the great seal.
in the same way, when the element of consciousness has undergone transfer,
Now Candrabhūti rose from his seat.
Moreover, gathering herbs from the ground,
This body is inert, like the earth; selfless, like water; lifeless, like fire; impersonal, like the wind; and nonsubstantial, like space.
‘Sir, take us young women. We have no husband.
It is empty of the nature of seeing.
The lifespan of this bodhisattva who has attained enlightenment will be estimable,
He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of external and internal phenomena!”
how should they train in the transcendent perfection of generosity?
In this regard, bodhisattvas think as follows:
“Moreover, Ānanda, when, on the one hand, there are some sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who, for an eon, a period exceeding an eon, a hundred eons, a thousand eons, a hundred thousand eons, many hundreds of eons, many thousands of eons, many hundred thousands of eons, or many hundreds of billion trillion eons, honor, venerate, respect, and make offerings with flowers, garlands, perfume, unguents, powders, religious robes, clothing, parasols, victory banners, ribbons, and diverse musical sounds to the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas of the world systems of the eastern direction, numerous as the sands of the River Ganges, and similarly to the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas of the world systems of the southern, western, and northern directions, along with the nadir, the zenith, and likewise the four intermediate directions, numerous as the sands of the River Ganges, and,
Contemplate wrathful Vajrapāṇi, Youthful and with majestic poise.
who have impaired eyesight,
He looked with his divine sight into the heavens, wondering whose blessing this could be.
is neither afflicted nor purified, and is neither enhanced nor diminished,
The aspect-less is explained as the non-perception of any dharmas.
monks should not grant ordination into the monkhood to persons who have not yet reached twenty years.
another bodhisattva might establish a single sentient being in the state of one who follows the meaning.
Than from endlessly offering numerous, various worlds That are all filled with precious jewels. {13}
Friends, the body of a tathāgata is born of innumerable good works.
Divine son, understanding this utter emptiness is awakening.
“They will say the words, ‘I am a bodhisattva,’ And those words will spread in every direction.
They will know the devas of Ābhāsvara, Their deaths and rebirth, and those there for the first time.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ excellent power of retention.
The root of virtue is always shared with others whenever a bodhisattva proclaims the words Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha to others; or when he brings the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha to mind while making a gift; or when he mentally cultivates generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, concentration, or insight; or when he proclaims these six perfections to others and causes those beings to reflect on them.
If the ash streaks downward, the water jar will remain full.
Will not have success In this inverted conduct.
The words śrāvaka and solitary buddha will not even exist there.
“ ‘The sugatas who lived in the past Were omniscient and without outflows.
In front of the patient a buddha image, a buddha reliquary, or an image of Brahmā, Śakra, or the four great kings should be placed on a stool or on a casket and marked with the four seals.
and what is not perceived is neither presumed nor repudiated.
The whole of Śrāvastī is your field and fatherland, so seek out alms and live on them.”
They have no quarrels. They live alone in the forest. {70}
A great cloud filled with water rises up, and having risen covers all the worlds in the all-containing realm of a billion worlds.
Thus, noble son, bodhisattvas who possess ten such qualities remain in the wild.
and two strong men then arrive and support him on his left and right sides,
It teaches the non-dual nature of all phenomena and is a gateway to the non-occurrence of all phenomena.
Then, out of great craving, which is impelled by the wind of one’s previous karma,
The king then said to the Blessed One,
That is why it is called acceptance.”
That sentient beings are afflicted has nothing to do with causes and conditions.
and said to be like the moon reflected in water.
Īśvara,
taught them from this Dharma teaching by chanting the following verses on entering through the doorway of the samādhi of physical restraint:
Senior Su­bhūti, what is a great bodhisattva being?
“I rejoice in those who develop the aspiration
“All the birds that there are In the deva or the human worlds
zinc,
Were established in the wisdom of buddhahood When they had heard that Dharma. {45}
For example, I can count the drops in the vast ocean, but,
There, noble son, the sun and moon do not shine.
“After Brahmeśvara there was a buddha, A jina who was named Agnīśvara.
“Mañjuśrī, due to your power, Māra Pāpīyān now has the complexion and physical marks of a thus-gone one and resides on a lion throne, teaching such profound matters—what a wonder this is!
Call our son, Koṣṭhila.”
they entail excessive attachment and longing for the objects of the five senses,
The Lord of the World taught the true conduct, Just as is practiced by wise bodhisattvas.
and ‘It is difficult for all śrāvakas and pratyeka­buddhas to understand it’?
they focus principally on generating compassion toward all these beings and
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess ten such qualities are experts on the relative.
to establish them in the Dharma teachings; and
I will act properly and renounce flattery, hypocrisy, and envy;
they recollect, ‘These are our teacher’s teachings,’ and so they apply themselves to them in a most excellent way.
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for the bodhisattva mahāsattvas from maintaining patience and being kind.”
Because we have never ceased from our prayers for omniscient wisdom, Bhagavān, the Tathāgata has made us understand, saying,
Seeing the three existences as being like a dream and becoming free of desire.
The yogin, adept in meditation,
Pūraṇa’s teaching heard, they cast it aside like an empty bottle and moved on.
The domain of manifesting the attitudes of the disciples and the solitary sages without sacrificing the qualities of the Buddha, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
In the same way, lesser negativity takes one to the lower realms just as great negativity does.’
the sounds of emptiness, signlessness and aspirationless will be stirred by the external sounds of the wind,
Rather, they begin their mendicant walk at one end and proceed until they have received what they need.
He does not remain in nirvāṇa.
“Bhaiṣajyarāja, if in the later times, after the Tathāgata has passed into nirvāṇa, a bodhisattva mahāsattva teaches this Dharma teaching to the fourfold assembly,
“Nārāyaṇa, bodhisattva great beings should train in all the 84,000 kinds of conduct of sentient beings.
Su­bhūti, when certain great bodhisattva beings, lacking the transcendent perfection of wisdom, over eons equal in number to the sands of the River Ganges, offer their gifts of the sacred doctrine to all sentient beings, do you think that they would generate many merits on this basis?
Having recited that verse, the bhikṣunīs said to the Bhagavān,
Devas and asuras encircled the Jina. The supreme human who entered Rājagṛha
In the past you always provided others with every comfort,
A paternal aunt, also a mother-in-law,
Are also the three non-returners,
Young man, it is the bodhisattva mahāsattvas’ evenness of mind toward all beings.
And what practice ought to be done?
Both of these actions become root transgressions. This is the seventh root transgression.
If you don’t accept us now, as we crave pleasure, You will quickly become a loser in this world.
Collected the cream from the top, And respectfully prepared a meal.
“it is not with his physical eyes but because he has inner visual consciousness.
pearls,
“Based upon gains and honors They will desire the intellect’s accomplishments.
In order to further guard the Bodhisattva, each of the young Śākya men had five hundred chariots at their disposal, and along with each chariot were five hundred infantrymen. Likewise they placed five hundred young men by the southern, western, and northern city gates to guard the Bodhisattva. All the men were armed, trained in combat, skilled in archery and javelin throwing, and were as strong as powerful wrestlers. In order to further guard the Bodhisattva, each of the young Śākya men had five hundred chariots at their disposal, and along with each chariot were five hundred infantrymen.
It is that with respect to which there is no function of consciousness.
This is the acquisition of the five perpetuating aggregates.
They said,
eight were playmates,
The second resembles smoke.
At that, the elder Śāriputra fell silent.
the fourteen aspects of emptiness, the eight aspects of liberation,
“Mañjuśrī, for what reason Did this guide of men emit this single ray of light,
They move without moving and without upsetting the characteristic purity of the nature of all phenomena.
One will not sink in water.
will split open his forehead
“Young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I will practice completely pure physical conduct in that way.’
Seated there, they entertained this thought:
and with their heads bowed down and their hands placed together in homage they spoke in one voice to the bhagavān tathāgata Śākyamuni:
The hand’s fingers were connected by a web.
“Mañjuśrī, the gathering here wishes to hear the Dharma from you. Therefore, please go ahead and speak some words to those who are gathered here.”
They each kept just a single garment for themselves and offered the remaining garments and jewelry to the Bodhisattva.
The woman, present in all directions, Is the Perfection of Wisdom‌.
When the moon is in the Rohiṇī lunar house, one should perform a hundred and eight recitations,
Upon Mount Potala, the king of mountains,
I have lost the path, so show me the path!
“Those who have a subtle perception Within their names-and-form
He now let his right hand slide over his entire body and then gracefully tapped on the earth
In those palaces, he manifested the lord of desire Kāmeśvara’s most sublime consort and her retinue;
Will be teaching and in that way are teaching The Dharma through hundreds of skillful methods. {18}
with handles of beryl, sapphire, crystal, and white coral,
Because it is the realization that harm and suffering are meaningless and that suffering has no self.
“Great Sage, in all these multitudes gathered here,
“They attain the ten bhūmis: Perfect Joy, Stainless, Shining, Brilliance, Difficult to Master, Manifest,
“Su­bhūti, if the emptiness of internal phenomena and the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, were entities and not non-entities,
“They will think of the buddhas, the supreme human beings, And always conceive of the jinas as their father.
‘What boon shall I grant you?’
They think, ‘If I depend on those who have no wisdom, There will be no higher rebirth, let alone the attainment of enlightenment.’ {63}
“They quickly attain the enlightenment of buddhahood. They protect the teaching of the Guide.
they do not consider [all the fruitional attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, as an entity or as a sign.
Who is being reprimanded, rebuked, or targeted with malice?
Like the sky, he was immaculate.
they do not resort to nonsensical speech,
Then together with his court, Queen Vimaladattā, the entire retinue of a crowd of women, and the two boys,
It is in this way, Su­bhūti, that great bodhisattva beings act as a torch-bearer and lamp of the worlds.
Chanda replied, “No, you will not be able to do so.
And who is influenced by foolish people
“The ones who have in their minds the thought ‘I shall become a buddha in this world’
Similarly, ‘I identify with the correct exertions, the supports for miraculous ability, the faculties,
“Upāli, his going forth should not be allowed.
‘Those who aspire to be the leaders of beings, Thinking, ‘I will be a buddha, lord of devas and humans,’ And are practicing diligence and dhyāna, Are declared to be the highest herbs.
syād yathedam khaṅge khaṅge khaṅga garbhe vicakṣaṇe cakra rājane candre capale pātāle bhīmavadavati kharāgre bhṛikuṭimukhe kuṭila­karāgre ekākṣi vargavati sāraṅgavati mārgavati gargavate citravati citrakānti | “May I have well-being in the north! Svāha!
The four auspiciousnesses and the four truths;
Being liberated yourself, you liberate other beings as well.
Their discipline is boundless.
Those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who hold and are attentive to the transcendent perfection of wisdom in the right manner, and so forth,
Only the precious Indranīla encircled by wish-fulfilling jewels appeared from afar; apart from that, nothing at all was visible.
(3) the faculty of recollection,
made a great offering to him of flowers, incense, perfume, garlands, ointments, powders, clothes, food, parasols, banners, and flags, playing music and percussion, and then they sat down in one place.
draped his shawl over one shoulder, and knelt on his right knee.
A being’s life is predetermined.
Then a man appears there who wishes to create merit, who wishes to benefit others, and who gives to that multitude of beings lovely, beautiful, cherished, desired pleasures and enjoyments of happiness.
it is unstinting loving kindness even toward sentient beings, when there are actually no sentient beings.
The extrasensory powers are not emptiness, and emptiness is not the extrasensory powers.
“They who hear and retain this sūtra in the degenerate times Are wise individuals who possess the treasure of the sugatas.
yet without being arrogant.
They had, in fact, made it appear like the gods’ Miśraka Garden.
His intelligence was such that he had attained the entire range of the Buddhadharma.
they should determine that the non-existence and non-apprehension of anything at all denote the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
They practice meditation with a one-pointed mind For billions of years in forests and in mountains,
When the periphery was high, the centre was low.
“They become irreversible, Those who drink that supreme water.
“Ānanda, in those villages the head merchants, merchants, local people, and
Good! We are so glad to see you! As for your life, we too can learn from it. Also forgive me for my earlier intention To invite the One Free from Desire to enjoy sense pleasures. “
they never cultivate thoughts of degenerate morality,
“Senior Su­bhūti, if all things were non-arising,
he would call to them with a loud voice from a distance, saying, ‘I do not ridicule you!’
“They dwell in space as their habitation. These heroes live below this realm.
“Children of noble family, none of the buddha realms are realms.
“If you ask what are the ‘four correct exertions,’
I will even refine the buddhafields. I will also bring sentient beings to maturity.
They pass like clouds and rain.
It is my mind that is perceived
Venerable Lord, I pay homage to the transcendent perfection of wisdom!
his protection in the Dharma, and his refuge in the Dharma.
“Therein, there is no attainment. There is no clear realization.
With that lion’s roar I promised to liberate, deliver, and train all beings, establishing them in perfect peace.
“Svastika, quick, hand me the grass!
As an analogy, just as even a small lamp flame is able to dispel great darkness inside an enclosure or a house,
bringing them to unsurpassable, truly perfect awakening.”
“That wise dharmabhāṇaka bhikṣu was Dīpaṃkara While he was practicing bodhisattva conduct,
At that time, good omens manifested in Jetavana Monastery.
may I put certain questions to the Venerable Lord?”
I hear the voices of the gods. I hear the voices of the nāga,
Based on copper, one can enjoy the appearance of gold.
The two sons of noble Ānanda’s sister have gone forth, and since they act and apply themselves diligently,
their own objectives already fulfilled,
“The rākṣasīs came to us and said, ‘You who are not masters of a house, become masters.
Likewise, they can do the same with a world of four continents, or a thousandfold universe, or a millionfold universe, or a trichiliocosm.
When they are thus tormented by the pangs of lust, their ducts burst and
[They correctly perceive that liberation ensues from the [last] two noble truths, but
Bhaiṣajyarāja, and
Tens of thousands of beings attained acceptance that all phenomena are non-arising.
About this matter they have no doubts or reservations.
‘Son of a lord, my brother has gone forth, accomplished his vow, and become a great being.
there lived a royal priest named Potalaka who was wealthy with many riches and goods,
I myself will never speak covetously to anyone,
There is the meditative stability named Lightning Lamp.
“Boys, where are your parents?” “They were killed by the ignorant Virūḍhaka,” they replied.
Those who always meditate on this sūtra of peace Will attain power and possess the highest strengths.
Some are to be converted by listening to the Dharma.
I shall create a beautiful wall and gates, And men and women without an equal.
Due to their practice of special insight that sees through all phenomena, they are unimpeded.
in order to serve the sick dharmabhāṇaka for whom there was no medicine, she used her own flesh and blood to heal him.
physical forms are pure, and [all other phenomena, attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, are pure, owing to the purity of the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration.
“Su­bhūti, in the same vein,
He remembered the supreme sage Jina Kāśyapa And saw what an unfavorable rebirth he himself had obtained. {69}
From the magnificent, brilliant, and resplendent uṣṇīṣa upon his head shone forth millions of circles of light,
Śāriputra, in the parable the man sees that he has brought the children out from the burning house
In any event, they will not fall into inferior realms and
They do not conceive of themselves as pure because of conduct, And always have faith in the buddhas. {58}
One who is replete with good qualities and is adorned by those qualities Shines with his own radiance.
In her raised right hand, she holds a red lotus;
One who is in conformity with everything does not move from the nature of the dharmas.
the samādhi of possessing faith,
after extending their own lifespan through their blessings,
and the second gesture is to penetrate exactly the profound principle of the Dharma without being afraid.
They develop mutual attachment and cling to each other.
ensure the unbroken continuity of the lineage of the Three Jewels.
I will give to the Bodhisattva, king, As an act of worship.”
As he was strolling through the park, he saw a beautiful and pleasant rose apple tree,
One effects protection from all types of fear merely by reciting the mantra.
Must never take place.
Emanations of the Buddha
“The Dharma of that Bhagavān who had passed into nirvāṇa remained for a hundred thousand quintillion years.
“ ‘What being in the three existences Would not give their flesh and blood?
“ ‘You know well all beings’ actions.
all the great oceans, rivers, bays, torrents, streams, brooks, and springs; and
not to do anything negative;
There would be no way to restore his spiritual practice.
When a donation is given to him,
“He is the marvelous object of offering and a great field of merit, The field for those wishing for merit, and the giver of the fruit of immortality.
“The eyes are like water bubbles—they are enclosed in a membrane,
in a world system called Most Fragrant,
They had trunks of gold and leaves of silver and were bedecked with a variety of adornments,
by the power of compassion for sentient beings you will expound various classes of Mahāyāna sūtras in the villages, towns, market places, provinces, countries, and kings’ palaces, manifesting in various forms with appropriate attire and conduct.
and defilement will arise and purification will not occur.
and he will be a holder of their teaching.
one will interrupt the livelihood of all who live there.
But she feels the child in her womb stir at the touch of very hot food and drink.
A bodhisattva may be a king or a great minister who is rich, wealthy, in possession of many enjoyments,
With that thought he hung his sword from his neck in surrender and came out.
“Young brahmin, I will see that they give their consent right away and return.”
they will not be controlled by the mind. Rather, the mind will come under their control.
Moreover, Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration
It was draped in cloth that was not woven, and covered with divine clothing from Tuṣita that was as soft and pleasant to the touch as down
“Alas! Sentient beings engage in negative physical, verbal, and mental conduct.
You should apply it and circulate it. Enter into the Buddha’s teachings. Like an elephant in a house of reeds,
“ ‘Whenever someone questioned me About my understanding of this samādhi,
They are concerned with this life. They are concerned with their next life.
She was not afflicted by attachment, anger, or delusion.
How are their perfections of wisdom?
He must be either deluded or ignorant Since he does not rise up quickly and flee.”
Of qualities of a buddha, And that is my distinctive characteristic. {30}
“Ajita, those eight princes who were the sons of Bhagavān Candra­sūrya­pradīpa had great miraculous powers.
“Tadyathā: jvale mahājvale ukke mukke aḍe aḍāvati nṛtye nṛtyāvati iṭṭini viṭṭini ciṭṭini nṛtyani nṛtyāvati svāhā.
“Ruler of this land, may your life be long!
This being the case, it is for these reasons that those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who follow the vehicle of the bodhisattvas
In each of the mansions appeared 84,000 jewel trees.
A domain of introspective insight, wherein one does not arrest voluntary reincarnation in the world, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
Bodhisattvas should maintain equanimity, without any regard for the joys and delights of sensual pleasures.
“ ‘If you give rise to the mind of awakening In order to help all embodied beings,
Those who continuously learn the Mahāyāna are good contemplative beings.
What is sameness?
Thus their acquaintance will in time bear fruit.” He said to Kolita,
I will explain the wonderful and marvelous attributes of great bodhisattva beings who practice this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom.
His palace with its corridors, skylights, and porticoes became covered in dust and crumbled down.
Some raised their arms and lamented loudly.
“Leading him, we will promptly Bring him under your control.
Thus one will obtain success
The gods thus strewed the Thus-Gone One with celestial flowers,
the ministers of Rājagṛha sent a message to King Bimbisāra, saying, “Your Majesty, your father’s time has come.”
and a cooling rain of flower petals fell on the ground.
“One should drink fresh ginger and cumin seeds with curds or the scum of boiled rice, together with salt.
are śramaṇas,
similarly, when they have turned away from feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness,
The colors of the young god filled the whole of Jetavana with a great light.
Hundreds of thousands of human and divine instruments sounded.
Take seven steps in the direction of the forests— They will have the superior merit.’ {11}
The disciple should be purified with the water in the four vases And the water of mantra.
“Evil one, you are weak, Like a young bull pained by a heavy load.
Su­bhūti, this is the vehicle of the bodhisattvas, which maintains sameness throughout the three times.
They were sitting cross-legged on lion thrones made of precious materials at the foot of trees made of precious materials in all eight directions from the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Śākyamuni.
Threatened with the punishment of yakṣas, They will not be well
at a time when ten countless ages had passed,
Also, they teach the doctrines that [the other sense organs], up to and including the mental faculty, are imbued with suffering
Venerable Lord! So, they would regress and become degenerate if they were to engage in such deeds destitute of the sacred doctrine. This is why bodhisattvas should restrain their verbal actions!
Thus, by applying himself diligently, Saṅgharakṣita came to understand saṃsāra’s ever-revolving five cycles.
He is not past,
Consciousness is pure, owing to the purity of formative predispositions.
They must have gratitude and know how to conduct themselves appropriately.
As a comparison, I can know the number of atoms, but,
What are the ‘six transcendent perfections,’ and likewise [those other fruitional attributes], up to and including the ‘eighty minor marks’?”
these are conducive to individual enlightenment,
“A most precious wish-fulfilling jewel Rests on the crown of his head.
Coming as they do from esteemed lineages and families, they bring fame and fortune.
Then the bodhisattva Prajñākūṭa asked Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta questions by chanting these verses:
and its perfume will emanate for seven days more after that,
“ ‘It is rejected by the foolish and ignorant. It is not the level of the numerous śrāvakas,
Śakra, Brahmā, the guardians of the world, and other gods Stand by, joyfully and happily, with folded hands.”
the aggregate of meditative stability is still discerned,
the light rays circled around the trichiliocosm, dispelling all darkness.
No! Such a woman would not really exist, so what would there be to transform?
Thus, it is necessary to know, king of gods, that among all the worships rendered to the Tathāgata, Dharma-worship is the very best.
As for ox, or elephant, This should be the flesh of one from which musk and the like emerges Based on the single material cause of it eating a ketaka flower.
Subsequently you will not experience those sufferings associated with conduct that pertains to cyclic existence!
"བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ལ་ཚིགས་སུ་བཅད་<tapplauded him by chanting these verses: 
some are on the seventh bhūmi;
Of the protector bodhisattvas are taught.
And he will teach this highest enlightenment.
The brilliant white necklaces of pearl have faded and collected dust.
“Oh no! It seems the young Siddhārtha is dying!”
First one should reduce the milk to one cup,
Establishing innumerable sentient beings on the paths to the higher realms and liberation,
They will never dedicate it so that they themselves may acquire merit.
To make the offering to me and my retinue, the practitioner should remain with one-pointed concentration in an isolated place.
Venerable Lord! The transcendent perfection of wisdom is endowed with the completely perfect [ten] powers because it cannot be crushed by any antagonists.
This is the fourth root transgression of beginner bodhisattvas.
Whoever one looks at with unblinking eyes while reciting the mantra, that person will become enthralled.
and the more they wish to benefit sentient beings with food, clothing, bedding, mats, medications which cure ailments, and [other] useful resources.
I possess such ethical discipline.
cuts it into four parts, and then examines the quartered carcass as he stands or sits,
Then, because all phenomena are unborn, Upon seeking them they do not see them.
My king, may you, my family, and the people of the kingdom forgive me.”
were it too weak they would become lazy.
To embrace awakening altruistically;
when I was in the street of the poor begging for my food, the Licchavi Vimalakīrti came along and said to me,
when the north was down, the south was up;
These benefits have been taught to me By you, the Lord of humans. {17}
“Mañjuśrī, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have this third quality, who teach this Dharma teaching after the Tathāgata has passed into nirvāṇa, in the final times when the Dharma is coming to an end,
Also teach this supreme yāna For the sake of the happiness of all beings. {104}
The wise ones will know them all in one instant. These are the benefits from possessing this sūtra.
When he said the letter ai, out came the statement: ‘The noble path is virtuous (airyāpathaḥ śreyāniti).’
so that in that beryl one could see reflections of the abode of the Thirty-Three; of Śakra, lord of the gods; and of his Palace of Victory.
Monks, when the Thus-Gone One reached complete awakening in this manner,
Desired objects are like a moon reflected in water, Like a reflection, or an echo,
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then accepted the alms bowl from the great king Virūpākṣa, regarding him with compassion.
For the cremation of this bhikṣu.’ {109}
the pratyeka­buddhas who in the forests Practice the well-taught Dharma.
Or those who play such sweet-sounding flutes and cymbals, Clay drums and reed pipes, making music and song,
Mental restraint is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Have faith, king of gods, and understand this:
the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four assurances, the four unhindered discernments, the three gateways to liberation, and [all the aforementioned attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of birth concerning purification. Those are the four.
One should collect the objects of worship as one wishes And commence the practice itself.
May their feet be like jasmine flowers. May they have anklebones that do not protrude, and calf bones similar to reeds or the calves of antelopes. With such features on their feet, may they gently and leisurely proceed to the vajra throne at the seat of awakening.
Do they avoid the conduct of very strong desire? Do they avoid the conduct of very strong anger? Do they avoid the conduct of very strong ignorance?
Monk, as all phenomena are always clear, they are unsullied.
Adorned with parasols and banners, And covered with a network of pearls and jewels.
‘Bhagavat, is Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara not coming?’
The sāl, that most wonderful of trees, is now in blossom.
He tried to make himself invisible, but, try as he might with all his magical powers, he could not vanish from sight.
He is a great captain who conquers the circle of Māra’s army.
the bodhisatva mahāsatva Jayamati,
Consider, noble son, the analogy of fire that dries out a muddy swamp.
they will have abandoned all thoughts and concepts.
How are those who are of noble birth?
Senior Śāradvatī­putra then asked as follows:
They were teachers of the pure Dharma, and had attained the perfection of the supreme powers of a bodhisattva.
Similarly, they do not consider whether sounds are connected with odors.
By engaging in ceaseless activity, You should worship the tathāgatas by longing for the Dharma In order to liberate those who have gone to negative forms of existence.
The Bhagavān Tathāgata Amitābha fully awakened to unsurpassable, completely perfect enlightenment ten eons ago
Whatever it is that they try to do They will be prevented by my emanations.
it goes together with space,
‘For a long time they have been increasing lower existences,
The best of munis, sitting on the Dharma throne, Meditated in the samādhi of the supreme infinite teaching. {61}
When they do not fabricate conceptions of any kind, they think, ‘This is the infinity of space,’
Thinking, “This child must be the god of gods!
“Are your parents still living?” If the ordinand says his parents are still living, he is then asked:
shakes his body,
hen apply the powder of sūrasūnna. This will cure diseases of the male organ.
The gatekeeper informed the king of their arrival,
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Are wise heroes who are skilled in the nature of emptiness.
If you allow going forth without asking this, a serious breach occurs.”
Śāradvatī­putra, the emptiness of physical forms does not generate physical forms.
“Bhikṣus, the lifespan of Tathāgata Devarāja will be twenty intermediate eons long
For the sake of many beings, and as a compendium to the tantras That elaborately teach the yogic practices, Lokeśvāra, Lord of the World, taught this manual of practice.
I can calculate the accumulation of that merit, but I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit.
A wheel-bearing monarch’s quantity of merit is not even a hundredth the amount of that,
“They are a sanctuary, they are a shelter, They are a refuge; they are eyes and a lamp.
At this time, through the power of the thus-gone ones,
Blessed One, we too will take hold of this sūtra and grasp it, read it, understand it, and teach it extensively to others.
They will always be dedicated to buying and selling. Attached to drinking, they will cast aside their shame. {12}
The Blessed One said to them, “Come, join me,” thereby allowing their going forth.
retains contact with all its faculties,
The way that they are following Is the way of those who are fraudulent in weights, The way of those who are fraudulent in measures.
They who have come here on this day, They also are beyond enumeration.
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is undifferentiated.”
Joyful and pleased, he rose from his seat, draped his shawl over one shoulder, set his right knee on the ground, and
it is because the five psycho-physical aggregates have an essential nature of non-entity, and the essential nature of non-entity is non-apprehensible.
That buddha realm will have limitless qualities of this kind.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of boundlessness. What are the four kinds of words of boundlessness?
He is utterly stainless, pure, and in possession of a very wholesome mind,
If you ask why that is the case, O child of enlightened heritage, it is because all things are empty of inherent existence.’”
and similarly, where egotism, possessiveness, acquisition, latent impulses, ensnarement, and
However, relatively, the vinaya of the bodhisattva great beings disturbs all classes of demons in all the limitless and boundless worlds in the ten directions, and conquers all hostile forces.
(17) emptiness of essential nature,
hairs that grow from his head and the hairs of his body
“Then the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Padmottama, having received the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās, went to the realm named Padmottama.
Have a loving mind And speak to them of austerity. {48}
ultimately all phenomena are utterly unborn,
and, because his high resolve is pure, he does not destroy compounded things.
Then there appeared before him a god from the demonic legions.
A cowherd, a fletcher,
Things are unobservable and perfectly at peace.
Venerable Lord! The transcendent perfection of wisdom is absolutely pure.
“Blessed One, we four great kings will worship those who spread this Dharma teaching and protect those who listen to it.
They remained in the middle of the sky, keeping watch.
And said to all the people before him,
and they dedicate their roots of what is wholesome toward taking birth in the world of the great Brahmā.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that anything other than fundamental ignorance constitutes a bodhisattva?”
As the poison is neutralized, his pain disappears.
it is because this transcendent perfection of wisdom is neither immanent nor transcendent,
He examined the time of his birth, the continent of his birth, the country of his birth, and the family of his birth.
This was the circumstance and the reason why the Bodhisattva, in the quiet of the night, would extend his right hand and draw it back. Finally he would let the hand rest while maintaining mindfulness and carefulness.
Hence, in worshiping the Dharma, they worship the thus-gone ones.
The ministers then prostrated at the king’s feet and asked,
You teach the Dharma of no-self In which there is neither like nor dislike. {22}
Seven bodies are not products, they are not by-products, they are not apparitions, they are not by-products of apparitions,
some are on the fifth bhūmi;
Naturally present Are eight and five characteristics.
“Lord, I am indeed reluctant to go to that good man to inquire about his illness.
“Then, if you ask what constitutes contaminated phenomena, they include the following:
Good health, however, ends with sickness.
While born in divine bodies that were like beautiful moonlight,
He will abandon his retinue of consorts and leave his home.
It was anything a person could wish for, full of all the things necessary for comfortable living.
They also said, “Hearers of the Blessed One, behold how delightful the world has become.”
“All of you listen with an unwavering mind, For I will teach the restraint of the mind.
He will discover a Dharma That will free beings.”
I see the nāgas, yakṣas, garuḍas, gandharvas, kiṁnaras,
He is then told: Or further, if you were to find shelter in a house, a temple, a multi-story building, a veranda,
They clear away the suffering of those tormented by pain.
There is nothing that would abide in the real nature, nor is there anything that would attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
Ānanda, these words will be spoken by Thus-Gone Ones, and will be taught by them;
Monks, once the gods of the Brahma realm, led by the god Subrahman, had praised the Thus-Gone One with these verses, they bowed to him with palms joined and stood to one side.
In the form of a supreme being, he is praised in infinite ways;
“Similarly, the emptiness of the eyes is not the eyes.
“This wheel cannot be enumerated because it is beyond something that can be counted.
On the side of that king of mountains there is an ageless, immortal man, who once every eon wipes the mountain one time with a Kaśika cloth.
She then told one of her servants, a woman named Uttarā,
The two eyes, the ears, and so too the nose and the mind.
Monks, while the Bodhisattva was still residing in the sublime Heaven of Joy, he considered the time for his birth. At that time he manifested eight omens at the sublime residence of King Śuddhodana.
‘Giving away gold, silver, jewels, pearls, beryls, conch shells, moonstones, coral, and other precious substances represents the blue, yellow, red, white, crimson, crystalline, and silvery colors of the bodhisattvas’ light rays that shine within the infinite myriad buddha realms.
“Even for the buddhas themselves, During a million eons, Or even a hundred million eons,
They should not dwell on the notion that physical forms are calm, nor should they dwell on the notion that they are not calm.
For those who will be like that And who possess this sūtra,
“Ten million tathāgatas reside in each pore of that noble son.
I am undertaking perseverance! I possess perseverance!
So, for these reasons, Su­bhūti, this transcendent perfection of wisdom is established by means of great deeds.
Divine being, when bodhisattvas act by means of wisdom and not through pride, they are bodhisattvas who are free from evil and beyond reproach.
He manifests an alluring form and conjures miracles
They can also move through space, sitting with their legs crossed, just like a bird on the wing.
the Sāmkhya philosophical system, the Yoga philosophical system, ceremonies, the art of courtesans, the Vaiśeṣika philosophical system, economics, ethics, hydraulics,
I will go to Rudraka, the son of Rāma,
to pursue objects while turning one’s back on the transcendence of suffering;
It should be perceived as the place where all the tathāgatas turn the wheel of the Dharma, and the place where all the tathāgatas pass into nirvāṇa.
Noble son, beyond that pore are the four great oceans that come from the big toe of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s right foot.
continuing in the same vein as far as [the designation of] the sensory element of mental consciousness, as a self or not a self, constitute a bodhisattva?
the retinues of the family, including Vajrapāṇi, along with all the hosts of deities, rejoiced and praised what the Blessed Vajradhara had said.
He is without impurity,
if the body should perish, that will be the end of suffering.’
On the relative level they do not discard the truths of saṃsāra, nor of nirvāṇa.
who realizes the nature of the realm of phenomena by means of fearlessness and freedom from attachment—that is an irreversible bodhisattva.
Noble ones, the various locations are completely pure.
“May this come to pass, Gautama!” replied the Ājīvika.
“Padmaśrīgarbha, bodhisattvas will dedicate any root of virtue that has been created, even a single instance of the thought of awakening, so that it becomes boundless.
“What were the disagreeable points in youthful Mañjuśrī’s Dharma teaching that made you leave the gathering?”
‘Because one thing exists, another one arises;
“You are neither one, nor many,
The blind gained their sight and the deaf could hear.
the four fearlessnesses, and the eighteen distinct qualities of a buddha.
“Here I have realized the nectar, For the sake of which I gave up my own flesh, my eyes, and many precious jewels For billions of eons.
Ratna­mudrā­hasta
Revatī,
Seeing these flowers, everyone assembled there was amazed
Blessed One, that Dharma teachings such as those of Mañjuśrī Kumārabhuta are not to be heard from any of the hearers,
Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, all the splendors of the abodes of the gods and all the splendors of the fields of the buddhas shine forth in this house.
“During the time of Dīpaṃkara you had abandoned all defilements,
in the same way, Su­bhūti, physical forms are confined by the limit of past time and the limit of future time.
“Here at the center of the earth, I cut through the entire snare of thirty-six courses of action With the powerful sword of insight, Then burned it up with the fire of wisdom.
“Listen to my story; this is what I dreamed.”
Moreover, Su­bhūti, there are individual followers of the vehicle of the bodhisattvas who, in former lives, have heard and received clear instruction on the emptiness of internal phenomena, and similarly on the emptiness of external phenomena, and [on all the other aspects of emptiness], up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities,
Also in attendance were twenty thousand gods who had all entered the Great Vehicle, such as Susīma and Su­pratiṣṭhita­buddhi.
You have become aroused by the dance of great bliss.
In that way there arises a great mass of sheer suffering.
devoid of foreign savages, and guided by learned men.
about leaving one’s home. Having heard this, he thought,
may they experience such fragrances that give rise neither to physical ailments, nor to imbalances of wind.’
‘Oṁ, goddess, enter, enter into her heart! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
and likewise, let alone bodhisattva mahāsattvas with forty bodhisattva followers, or thirty, or twenty, or ten, or five, or four, or three, or two, and
However, due to Mañjuśrī’s power, he could not disappear.
Here you are, without previously having come, been seen, or been heard.
so do I,
It is the adornment of the bodhisattvas. It is the delight of those who desire liberation.
If they engage with the notion that entities exist in physical forms, or that entities do not exist therein, then they are merely engaging with mental images.
His sense faculties were isolated and withdrawn. He was as well trained as an elephant, and as lucid, limpid, and clear as a lake.
Gathering up virtue and non-virtue, too, it abandons the body, undergoes transfer, and migrates.
Su­bhūti, Do you consider those feelings, those perceptions, those formative predispositions, and those modes of consciousness that the transcendent perfection of wisdom could appropriate or become fixated upon?
a precious wheel, a precious elephant, a precious horse,
“With the gait of a swan, we gently approach you; Soft and beautiful, we talk of amorous love.
the Tathāgata Harmonious Voice,
“Those gathered there asked him, ‘What are the qualities of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara?’
They have faith and trust in the thus-gone ones.
Show them respect And bow your head to their feet. {39}
In the same way, these light rays entered the mouth of the Blessed One, and yet his mouth could not be seen to be either open or closed.
‘Those dedicated children of the Sugata, Who practice kindness and whose conduct is peaceful, And have no doubts about the Leader of Beings Are in this way said to be the trees.
so many sentient beings will I establish in enlightenment, and so many sentient beings will I not establish [in enlightenment].
Please bless this, my, [ordinand’s name]’s, Dharma robe, as a ceremonial robe.
When they give away all their limbs and organs, they dedicate the merit so that all beings might possess all their limbs and organs intact.
Monks, the Bodhisattva dwelt in the supreme realm of the Heaven of Joy,
in order to make offerings to the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Candra­sūrya­vimala­prabhāsa­śrī.
Later the Bodhisattva arrived riding a chariot and noticed the dead elephant.
“O Sage, why do you weep? Tell me the truth, what good or evil do you see?”
you should ask, ‘You have not caused a schism in the saṅgha, have you?’
“They have rejected the net of the māras. They have pure, untroubled conduct.
they have obtained marvelous, amazing Dharma; and they know the Dharma that is difficult to know.
“After King Śūradatta had heard from the saṅgha what vast, extensive, and special qualities the dharmabhāṇaka Supuṣpacandra had,
“Those who remain in the dharmakāya Know that all things are nothing.
similarly if the finality of existence and the inconceivable expanse were entities and not non-entities,
As soon as the goddess entered that absorption, the great trichiliocosm became as even as the palm of a hand, with a ground made of beryl.
“Ānanda, this transcendent perfection of wisdom resembles the precious gemstone of the god realms.
“As for me, O Brahmā, I see this great earth, with its highs and lows, its thorns, its precipices, its peaks, and its abysses, as if it were entirely filled with ordure.”
It would be very ungrateful of me.
Attachment and anger And other disturbing emotions that harm beings— In that moment all these disturbing emotions were pacified, And beings were filled with happiness.
Su­bhūti, those merchants who act accordingly, unskilled in means, will incur great misfortune and suffer a decline in their prosperity.
To know no one teaching, to express nothing, to say nothing, to explain nothing, to announce nothing, to indicate nothing, and to designate nothing—that is the entrance into nonduality.”
“Tathāgata, we pay homage to those who have turned away from all births, freed all beings from suffering, and attained liberation.
“Mañjuśrī, imagine as many bodhisattvas as there are atomic particles in the great trichiliocosm, all of them ordained, disciplined, and pure in their inclinations. Each bodhisattva would attend as many buddhas and bodhisattvas,
“He cast away the kingdom like a lump of phlegm And together with eighty thousand persons
Rain clouds are arrayed So that body and speech may act for the welfare of beings, With divine pride in the two form buddha bodies Endowed with great compassion.
That which digests whatever the body eats, drinks, chews, and tastes is called the fire element.
The supreme ritual for repelling the obstructors below Appears like a wish-fulfilling jewel.
“Śāradvatī­putra, just as when someone moves through space by the power of miraculous abilities, but does not become fixated on the notion that this is space,
Śāriputra, you should have complete aspiration For that which the tathāgatas are teaching. {19}
On seeing him he thought,
Venerable Lord! Those great bodhisattva beings who embark on unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings are heroic and courageous.
So the Bodhisattva turned his fine chariot around and returned to the city.
commencing exclusively from the time when they first begin to set their mind on enlightenment until they are seated at the Focal Point of Enlightenment. It is impossible for them to attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, while any of these are unperfected.
What are those ten? They are as follows. Bodhisattvas retain what they have heard for the sake of protecting the sacred Dharma, and not for the sake of material gain.
Yet if they nevertheless engage in neutral acts they will apply mindfulness and exertion and apply themselves diligently based on analysis.
The great mathematician Arjuna was amazed and said these verses:
and similarly, retain, hold, and be attentive to it in the correct manner
The bodhisattva Ratna­mudrā­hasta declared,
without being favored by the transcendent perfection of wisdom and without skill in means,
What are these three? They are emptiness, the absence of attributes, and the absence of aspiration.
Quickly kill those dreadful magicians, Or afterward you will be filled with regret.’ {21}
The Lion-like Being, with disciplined conduct, emerged from Māyādevī’s right side;
Some, still holding clay kettledrums, were twisting their bodies and heads.
Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, if I had not previously obtained and possessed this Dharma teaching
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities have equal concern for all beings.
It is the attainment of fearlessness.
“Ānanda, these auspicious signs portend that the Licchavi Vimalakīrti and the crown prince Mañjuśrī, attended by a great multitude,
And the one who abides is not in need of abiding.
—together with a retinue of many trillions of nāgas.
At that time they recited this verse:
If, among them, you ask what is the transcendent perfection of generosity—
They will wrap themselves in a dark monastic cloak And wear a large, excellent lower robe.
They wake the Supreme Being with music and song.
That is to say, they do not consider physical forms, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, or consciousness,
some are on the ninth bhūmi;
“They themselves should be equipoised in the eight aspects of liberation and the nine serial steps of meditative equipoise.
It is without highness and lowness. It abides without movement or activity.
If I were to tell everything now to the audience here, You would faint and fall to the ground.”
Senior Su­bhūti, what is the nature of physical forms?
He has attained decisiveness with regard to all questions.
They do not remember to be generous.
A son will be born to you, his limbs adorned with the marks;
One hundred hetuhilas is called a karaphū.
O father, I will break the body of this monk! Be happy and go now without delay.”
“What is being free of behavior caused by the kleśas? It is being free of that which is caused by ignorance, craving for existence, and anger.
that he speaks by speaking truly means he speaks by speaking truly at the appropriate time.
Instead, they should recollect what the Blessed One has taught—‘Sentient beings influence one another; through their company, they are destroyed’
that you should perfect the other transcendent perfections, up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that anything other than sights constitutes a bodhisattva?”
They have elucidated all the transcendent perfections.
Open up the limitless river of Dharma for sentient beings.
for it leads one to cease all pursuits.
Just as a monk who has engaged in [meditative] union lacks strong attachment to food on arising from his meditative stability,
Once I have conquered Māra and his armies,
Their sexual fluid is vajra— One should lick it all with one’s tongue.
Having gone up into the air, they lay down there, they walked in the air, they shook themselves free of dust in the air,
They set forth matters indubitably with accounts that are conventional, unconventional, oblique, inverted, and so forth.
and similarly, anything that strengthens or weakens feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness,
Tossed flowers, and circumambulated her.
Mañjuśrī, it is like this: just as a monk who holds to the rules of the Vinaya is skilled in controlling all downfalls, likewise,
Come back!” As the householder reached out to grab at him, the monk,
The gatherings of bhūtas that remained, Frightened, bewildered, and panicked,
Here I cleansed the eye of wisdom, Naturally pure in all beings;
“The highest of humans taught in verses
After his going forth was allowed and he was granted ordination,
The four great oceans shook.
If at the time of sexual union A lamp with lard is lit,
like the inhalation and exhalation of an ascetic absorbed in the meditation of cessation;
At this point, the Blessed One expressed his approval of Mañjuśrī Kumārabhuta: “Well said, Mañjuśrī!
“Noble son,” replied the Blessed One, “there are no differences with respect to that which we refer to as their body, because the two fulfill in the same way the characteristics of a body.
This was the third example that he had never thought or heard of that came to the Bodhisattva’s mind.
“Su­bhūti, if the applications of mindfulness were entities and not non-entities,
sonorous and accessible.
“Noble son, you should have no doubts when you see this dharmabhāṇaka.
Venerable Lord, if fundamental ignorance is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of fundamental ignorance become a bodhisattva?
Ratna­śikhara
I will give my arms to those who want arms,
“Blessed One, I will take up this Dharma teaching,” replied the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi.
Facing a bound person,
smell scents as if they were like wind,
only a tathāgata will be able to count them.
Not dedicating; lacking skill in method; aiming for lower rebirths; and associating with negative companions.
the venerable Ānanda, the bodhisattvas,
Eight hundred million Devas, nāgas, and yakṣas stood up,
Just as no one can know the path That a bird has flown through the air.
Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have these three qualities will attain this samādhi.
Then at that time Mahākāśyapa recited these verses:
“Gods, these defining characteristics have not been conditioned by physical forms.
As the Buddha, you vanquished the evil gathering of demons.
Those who know that supreme nature Will have an unceasing confidence in teaching. {44}
The explanation of the activity is this:
“Blessed One, why is that?”
One who is free of all calculations, through the extreme purity of gnosis—his mind is aloof, like empty space; and thus he enters into nonduality.”
and defeated all of his opponents.
Ultimately, by not training, they see insight to be utterly unarisen.
and the gods of the realm of pure matter, attracted by the perfume, also came to the house of Vimalakīrti.
I am maintaining ethical discipline,
the dwelling place of those who experience peace.
The arrow shot skillfully cannot be stopped by a learned one;
They know the characteristics to be illusory.
paid homage to the tathāgatas and praised them with various bodhisattva praises for fifty intermediate eons.
These are called the six inner sense fields.
they do not regress from enlightenment
because they are not perceived, because they are non-apprehensible, because they are non-arising, because they are unceasing, and because they are in fact emptiness.
That which is the real nature of the Tathā­gata is also the real nature of the Elder Su­bhūti,
It performs the Thus-Gone One’s activity!”
Then the blessed lady Prajñāpāramitā said,
Similarly, O gods, this doctrine is profound owing to the profundity of the ears, the nose, the tongue, the body, and the mental faculty.
‘I shall deliver other beings from their suffering, to somewhere other than the three realms!
Considering who their awakening hinged on, he saw that it hinged on the monk Saṅgharakṣita.
They think of the impure as pure.
The soles of their feet will be even And their range of conduct will be even.
For the one who does not see phenomena, Phenomena are beyond conception. {41}
If one were to ask why, Venerable Lord,
When this “Gadgadasvara” chapter was taught,
and wish to attain quickly the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood, should have no attachment to their life or body.
You have the perfect body and primary signs. I pay homage to you who are an ocean of qualities. {i}
The Bhagavān addressed the youth Candraprabha, saying,
Su­bhūti, this transcendent perfection of wisdom is instructive because physical forms are unseen when there is no consciousness arising that apprehends physical forms.
Śāradvatī­putra, the evil associates of great bodhisattva beings are those who would separate and dissuade them from the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
too spicy, or too astringent;
“Śāradvatī­putra, the immaturity of a bodhisattva manifests when great bodhisattva beings who have previously regressed descend to the level of the śrāvakas or the level of the pratyekabuddhas, and fail to enter into the maturity of the bodhisattvas.”
Venerable Śāradvatīputra replied,
Mahāsthāmaprāpta, that bodhisattva mahāsattva spent many years being scolded and abused in that way,
Would this man, this lord of generosity, this lord of great generosity, have generated vast countless immeasurable merit through that as a cause?
This was the fifth omen.
With such persistence, they accomplish the concentrations, absorptions, and attainments.
‘I shall be the slave of whoever teaches me the Dharma.’
after they have cultivated the other meditative concentrations, up to and including the fourth meditative concentration,
“Sacred One, you are beautiful, Like the moon during the bright fortnight.
be it grey, white, sallow, mottled, black, or naturally changeable,
“Though someone may try to entice them by giving them a billion gold coins, or even a four-continent world system filled with gold coins, bodhisattvas will remain vigilant and not tell lies.
Homage to Tathāgata Ratna­kusuma­guṇa­sāgara­vaiḍūrya­kanaka­giri­suvarṇa­kāṃcana­prabhāsa­śrī.
Oṁ, Kamalavikāsinī, Kamalā, Mahālakṣmī, give me the kingdom! You who grant boons, svāhā!
They will not fear enemy armies or the calamity of famines.
He was praised, honored, and commended by all the buddhas
Although they speak, ultimately their speech is not pronounced in the form of syllables.
There is no pure engagement with the locus of a view. There is no conduct of beings and no engagement with peace. {17}
“Young man, when bodhisattva mahāsattvas search for kalyāṇamitras, and respect them and serve them without weariness,
It is in this way, Su­bhūti, that great bodhisattva beings are worthy to act as a refuge for the worlds.
“Friends, let us scatter flowers! The Blessed One has reached perfect awakening!”
“The vinaya of the hearers does not interrupt the stream of habitual patterns.
Teaching the Dharma to many millions of beings, With many millions of parables and reasons. {27}
Bhagavān, by hearing about obscuration and non-obscuration,
considering that it comprises the element of earth, the element of water, the element of fire, and the element of wind.
The nature of fundamental ignorance is emptiness. Emptiness is fundamental ignorance;
and likewise, they offer their sons, they offer their daughters, they offer their wives and courtesans;
they have exclusively demonstrated and continue to demonstrate all those phenomena to sentient beings without transcending the reality of those phenomena.
Some time later, Upananda was out for a stroll when he saw a man missing his hands and said,
And the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
It is like a pond for those who are thirsty.
do not toss flowers until the Blessed One has made a sign.”
‘This is Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara who is arriving.’
It is speech free of doubt.
“What is the scope of practice of the bodhisattvas? It is composed of the six perfections.
Our wish is to make offerings to the great intelligent one.
He gets up from the ground,
When the assembly saw the grand display of the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha,
“Through many hundreds of skillful methods They ripen many bodhisattvas,
that these five transcendent perfections are designated as transcendent perfections.
And experience the suffering of death Within six months.
The king created for them a stūpa And said, ‘I wish to make an offering to it.’
After entering inside he established nine million, nine hundred thousand beings in irreversible progress toward the highest enlightenment.
in the early station of the night he produced the intent to actualize the knowledge that sees wisdom with the divine eye, and so he directed his mind toward that purpose.
In order to increase and magnetize For the activity and specific stages,
“When one has noticed, with one’s own senses, That the pleasure given by the woman has died out,
a kumbhāṇḍa,
Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms joined,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Anikṣiptadhura,
“Divine being, being unborn and unoriginated is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
This should be known as the perfection of diligence,
This concludes the sixteenth chapter, on the visit of King Bimbisāra.
Then the third sage remarked:
Of these, eight would carry him,
The Blessed One replied to Senior Su­bhūti as follows:
The intermediate state is the fruitional tantra.
(4) the total consummation of the wind element,
Even if paid, it will soon be lost.
O noble one, please see that the ultimate sūtras take root among us!”
So it is, Śāradvatī­putra, that great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom, who wish to pursue the path to enlightenment, and who wish to enter into the maturity of the bodhisattvas
to be like the rays of the sun.
Su­bhūti, if all the sentient beings, as many as there are, in world systems as numerous as the sands of the River Ganges, were to transform into malign demonic forces, and
I am yours, and you can have the palace, the servants, and this whole kingdom.”
They are terrifying, with weapons in their hands.
They point out true omniscient wisdom to all beings, and
Then the monk Vīradatta will come to our home regularly
With this in mind they are afraid of evil, and this, then, is the bodhisattvas’ fear of evil.
The mind whirls like a firebrand, roams like a horse, consumes like a forest fire, and swells like a flood.’
“Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, great bodhisattva beings who engage in union with the transcendent perfection of wisdom do not consider whether physical forms are permanent or impermanent;
“Some said, ‘She gives me diadems, earrings, and necklaces.’
who loves the lotus,
And likewise a girdle around one’s waist.
likewise they will experience the sufferings of the worlds of Yama, Lord of Death, over a long period of time. Such should be made apparent to the sentient beings of posterity
Through that root of merit, he did not fall into the lower existences for two hundred million eons.
Monks, when the young child had grown a little older,
Śāradvatī­putra, great bodhisattva beings who engage in union accordingly are said to engage in union with the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Absence of shyness, on the other hand, is when the causes, conditions, and bases for desire make it so that even if one’s parents, spiritual teacher, or the like object to, oppose, or criticize this, one feels no shame about one’s desire, and instead, shamelessly, one holds the emotion to be a valuable quality.
Causing its perfect illumination within a hundred miles.
Similarly, this same transcendent perfection of wisdom has primacy for those great bodhisattva beings who keep [the vows of] ethical discipline.
Diligence, meditation, and learning, Contentment, few desires, and austerity. {51}
“Bodhisattvas are skilled in reversing the mind.
The three poisons based on desire Are the demon of afflictions, Involving twelve attributes of desire.
and I heard from him the description of the qualities of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.”
If there is a desire to mete out such an act
“Whatever is the same as suchness,
Thus, while the schoolmaster taught the children the alphabet, there emerged innumerable hundreds of thousands of excellent Dharma teachings due to the Bodhisattva’s power.
‘Venerables, do not nurse hatred for your brethren as Kāśyapa’s monks did.
Su­bhūti, when individual followers of the vehicle of the bodhisattvas dispense gifts,
tasting human and divine success by purifying the path of the ten virtues;
He considers placelessness but does not abandon the place of good actions.
Knowing the faults in all of saṃsāra, the Stainless One replied,
when they do not make assumptions associated with consciousness [and the rest],
With only one lifetime remaining,
that latter child of enlightened heritage would generate much greater merit.
yet he is not consciousness.
with respect to the sounds that are objects of the ear consciousness, the smells that are objects of the nose consciousness, the tastes that are objects of the tongue consciousness, the textures that are objects of the body consciousness, and the mental phenomena that are objects of the mind consciousness.
The Chapters on Monastic Discipline includes chapters on: Going forth, purification,
“Noble ones, why would you need to do this?
These are called the ten sense fields of total consummation.
You, who are endowed with great compassion, look upon me;
Also sing out a word, The unsurpassable word buddha. {258}
One should then swallow a single pill each day.
In the same way, an oblation should be offered in the event of any disease, attacks by ḍākinīs, or other misfortunes.
And so, without reference points, they become exceedingly fragrant with the scent of omniscient wisdom endowed with the supreme of all aspects.
“If one examines the Dharma of selflessness, And if after examining, one meditates,
They have a kartri knife and a skull cup in their hands;
make use of spells, lick their hands, remain seated, cease talking, ingest various roots,
“You may wonder how bodhisattvas are there for all sentient beings equally.
Alas! This body is like a machine, a nexus of bones and tendons.
The major marks above and emptiness below
and cut off from any expressions.
“Whatever doubts there may be, Whatever uncertainty or vacillation
He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of stains!”
Bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked the Bhagavat,
“What is never being satisfied with the good actions one has done?
some mansions were made of red sandalwood;
Like Mount Meru, the Sage sat there unshakable, Absorbed in concentration and meditation.
and they should also praise and rejoice in others who act in order to cultivate the extrasensory powers of the bodhisattvas.
We will preserve it.
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, I am also inspired to say that the statement ‘things are non-arising, things are indeed non-arising’ is itself non-arising.
In the meanwhile the Bodhisattva’s mind was on the Dharma.
They will abide within the perceptual range of their respective tathāgatas.
I dare not engage in sexual activity. Please let me go! I would rather die than engage in sexual activity.
He then spoke of the qualities of Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara.
They will not know the suffering of being inside a womb.
while coming to see the Blessed One, died en route
With these acts and methods I have not been able to manifest any true knowledge that would be higher than manmade teachings.
This applies extensively also to [the other sense organs], up to and including the mental faculty, just as it applies to the eyes.
The tathatā is the basis.
As they are experts with respect to the mind, they do not take delight in pleasures, they do not wish for pleasures, and they are not attached to pleasures.
One with knowledge of yogic illusion is likewise free from disease— Yogīs revel in the form of the mantra’s syllables
the moonlight of the soothing branches of awakening radiated from this sphere of concentration, liberation, and wisdom,
“Gentlemen, who won?”
“Does the noble one have no ascetic attendants?”
“You know the thoughts in the minds of beings And all beings’ infinite ways of conduct;
They joined their palms with respect And offered me this request:
Numerous are their wishes that run counter to the Dharma.
Among those devas there was a deva named Sukuṇḍala who was poor and suffering. “
In this way, having a completely liberated mind, a noble śrāvaka will perfectly know: ‘My defilements have ceased.
and arrived at King Śuddhodana’s residence, known as the Home of the Swans, the great mansion that resembled the palaces of the ruler of the gods.
“Su­bhūti, if great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom
As for shelter, it is preferable that you find shelter at the foot of a tree suitable.
Then the daughter of Daṇḍapāṇi Śākya, the Śākya girl named Gopā, surrounded and escorted by an entourage of female servants, came into the assembly hall where the Bodhisattva was seated.
How are their perfections of diligence?
Candraprabha spoke the following verses of praise directly to the Bhagavān.
sexual misconduct,
They made everything plunge into deep silence.
Similarly, all the virtuous qualities that bodhisattvas gather become of the same taste, the taste of omniscience.
It is the unsurpassable wealth of the bodhisattvas. Does the Jina teach this samādhi?
The definition of equanimity is to be neither arrogant nor timid.
When they saw that, they came to the Bhagavān, and
They determine which ones produce mastery, or an existence in hell, or as an animal, or in the realm of the Lord of Death, or as a human, or as a god, or as a universal emperor.
Prostrations to the tathāgata, Buddha “Lord of the Ocean That Is the Wisdom Vajra”;
he called up the four branches of his armed forces
Each of the glorious great kings Then went to one of the four directions.
He served two hundred million buddhas and heard this samādhi from all those tathāgatas.
It is only the wise with perfect vision who aspire to going forth
For I have myself created the worst bad karma. {53}
“O Sage, you are unflappable, faultless, and ever stable, like Mount Meru!
“A bodhisattva’s buddhafield is the purity of the path of the ten virtues.
One will quickly become awakened,
He does not approach families constantly thinking of teaching the Dharma to the women, the girls, and the wives, and does not delight in doing so.
The nāga, disguised as the retired devotee, thought, “I shall make this monastery disappear once the seven-day period is up.”
rust of iron, and sour gruel.
I have never seen nor heard of such a thing before.
All the gate adornments and so forth, Are said to be the powers and the like.
the pot burst open, and the inferno of fire transformed into a pool.
Keeping those insights in mind,
Bodhisattvas do not suffer from the pains of desire,
O Śākyamuni, conquering the powerful host of Māra,
They should teach the Dharma in the way That space is without any limit. {11}
Maintaining these five extrasensory powers,
When seeing someone who is suited for and capable of receiving the Dharma,
Understanding that the factors involved in this process are virtuous, they direct their minds toward those factors and apply mindfulness to them,
In this way, since there are many more that are mixed with the five kinds of impure food, how, Venerable Blessed One, should we conduct ourselves in this regard?
and the winds blew at appropriate moments.
Worthy of receiving gifts!
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then looked throughout the entire world with his awakened eye and
The shopkeeper replied, “Noble one, no one eats for free.
This is the origin of suffering.
With adoration they cast off their gold necklaces. They all placed their ten fingers together in homage
mastery of inspiration, as one reveals all realms of the world to be full of buddhas;
Their hands and feet were turned the wrong way, and their heads were afire;
Renowned worldly protectors, Reside in the north.
However, they should do so without apprehending anything
“They will have infinite miraculous powers. They will travel through the air unimpeded.
Nor is one liberated by perceiving them as non-entities, and nor is one liberated by perceiving them as entities and non-entities.
“When he said the letter śa, out came the statement: ‘Calm abiding and insight (śamatha­vipaśyanā).’
Outer and inner is the meaning of mantra.
I will also worship those who teach it, write it down, hold it, and read it aloud.
“Divine son, you may wonder what the five acts with immediate consequence are.
the minds of great bodhisattva beings are not afraid, not terrified, not fearful, and not frightened, and if they will not become frightened,
It is designated as the foremost, the best, the most excellent, the unsurpassed, and the highest.”
being expert in uttering reverse and inverse sounds;
Imagine that the moon dissolves into the letters, The letters dissolve into the sun, And then the sun dissolves into the u vowel diacritic.
put it under water using the pair of cupped hands, one below and one above. If the ash streaks upward,
Why do you say that a bodhisattva is not anything other than physical forms, and that nor indeed does the real nature of physical forms constitute a bodhisattva
Why then do you practice renunciation?
they never discriminate
“Those phenomena that arise from causes, The Tathāgata himself has taught That they have a cause and also a cessation.
taking care of them through the Dharma and taking care of them through material things.’
Then, without pride or haughtiness, the gods took their seats.
We are inspiring many bodhisattvas By declaring what is the desired result.’ {122}
The miraculous manner is to arise instantaneously, Like a fish jumping out of water.
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, it is for this reason that one should know great bodhisattva beings to be never separated from the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Through this all buddhas And knowledge holders will be achieved.
He invites a crowd of friends and kinsmen And says, ‘On this one I shall bestow all my wealth.’
“Blessed One, we heard this Dharma teaching on the indivisible nature of the realm of phenomena, so now we have come here to uphold the sacred Dharma.
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection constitutes the powers.”
They follow the Dharma but not based on the form realm.
This is harsh speech.
Bhagavān, without a body we will reside in the air and we will proclaim it with our voices.
And he will always be a holder of the supreme Dharma, And then will become a self-arisen buddha in the world,
whenever they do not engage with the notions that physical forms are empty or that they are not empty.
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya then addressed these verses to the Bhagavān:
“The ways beings act are vast, The teachings for them are vast,
or the pains of lacking material means.
and they make assumptions about wisdom [and so forth].
Such are the malevolent spirits that approach.
Some praised the Lord of the World; Some scattered a rain of flowers on the Jina;
Then he was contented, delighted, elated, and joyful, and he became glad and happy.
When the Blessed One had authorized preceptors and instructors to allow going forth and grant ordination,
Or, even if others, assailants or assassins, were to demand the body of a great bodhisattva being, they should not think, ‘Should I give it or not give it?’
If one doesn’t see flashes of light when pressing one’s eyes with one’s fingers, one will die within one hundred days.
That would not be a very difficult task.
They do not fall into wrong views.
to transcend the three realms; and
All doctrines are like dreams.
If you ask what are these five formless absorptions, they comprise attachment to the world system of form, attachment to the world system of formlessness, fundamental ignorance, pride, and mental agitation.
Ānanda, it is because they do not consider any entity which would cause them to cower, and to be intimidated or afraid.
Being stable, and having mindfulness, And being patient with criticism;
The karmic winds fan the flames, Which melts the moon, the central deity, and so forth
Ocean of Good Qualities, Lamp of the World, to you we bow with head and heart.
Ghoṣeśvara, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of ninety million years. {9}
“Blessed One, I have surveyed the wide earth.
“The blessed Arisen from Flowers answered that bodhisattva great being, ‘Noble son, whenever bodhisattva great beings manifest, it will be in order to purify beings.
Reverend Śāriputra, I have been in this house for twelve years, and I have heard no discourses concerning the disciples and solitary sages but have heard only those concerning the great love, the great compassion, and the inconceivable qualities of the Buddha.
if you are not a noble one, and not a non-noble one;
Are two a syllables, at the perimeter of which are nine petals.
He did not pursue pleasures and enjoyments, but observed discipline.
If you do not surrender, and instead take flight into the sky above, I will fell you with a volley of arrows.
That, son of noble family, is called boundless dedication.
A person may act or make another person act,
He took a sword oiled with sesame oil, And with it he cut the bhikṣu into eight pieces. {92}
They will be like a light that dispels the darkness of perplexity, uncertainty, and doubt of the people of the world and the devas.”
The king provided the palaces with the five desirable things, the likes of which had never been seen before.
They strewed flowers up to a distance of ten yojanas from the Bodhi tree.
Noble son, moreover, what do you think,
“ ‘I practiced whatever I taught. I always valued practice above all else.
nd they give [other gifts], including all human necessities whatsoever, to those who wish for [any other gifts] whatsoever, up to and including all human resources.
There were no Cakravāla or Mahācakravāla mountain ranges.
“Quickly, take your seat and grant your favor!
Then, all those bodhisattvas from the buddhafield of the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa joined their palms in reverence and,
Through all the splendor of the victorious ones in the ten directions,
It shows that you, Gopā, shall quickly cut the web of affliction And remove your chain of conceptual perception.
developing the good qualities that have not yet been developed, and not losing the good qualities that have been developed.
and in their last existence, looked and saw, yet were not at all frightened, afraid, or terrified,
Who would not honor such a precious jewel of a being?
Padmaśrīgarbha, on another occasion King Glorious Splendor was in his pleasure grove
Finally, birth does not think, ‘I produce aging and death.’
We bow to you who possesses the three stainless eyes.
Then, in a sweet voice, the Bodhisattva replied,
never being satisfied with the roots of virtue already accumulated;
And travel through millions of realms.
You who desire to honor the Sugata for having explained the noble Dharma to human beings, Go forth!
Some made clinking sounds with their anklets.
He will satisfy billions of beings Through the blessing of the Buddha.
“Su­bhūti, in the same way, one who wishes to attain emancipation in things without defining characteristics merely wishes to attain emancipation in that which is non-arising;
Even this alone will eventually cause the mountain to be worn down and vanish.
“Sublime Being, what sublime qualities must a precious family have for a bodhisattva to take his final birth there?”
He has attained the supreme excellence of the indivisible, nondual sphere of the ultimate realm.
That dharmabhāṇaka went to the king’s palace and became a kalyāṇamitra who was altruistic, was compassionate, and wished to benefit others.
In time, our ethics became lax and we became dissolute.
Ten million gods caused a cascade of divine flowers—blue lotuses, night lotuses, and white lotuses—to fall.
The buddhas teach the Dharma Throughout the extent of space.
Nārāyaṇa, this was the fourth introduction to the absorption that encapsulates all merit.”
Ask whatever you wish, Maitreya. What I shall say in response to your question will cause you to rejoice.
Also about the nature of the body as an instrument
“Go ahead,” he replied. On reaching the roof,
That bhagavān will be constantly teaching the Dharma while being suspended in midair,
Wealthy, prosperous, and free from conflicts.
whether it is the price of a bowl, the price of a water pot, the price of a cooking pot, the price of wood, the price of salt, or the price of food or clothes.
Yet it is impossible that you would go to the king of trees and rise before attaining awakening.
One part, wind and bile,
Thus, by means of these varied explanations of the Dharma, the Buddha trains the minds of those living beings who are just like wild horses.
“Well then, Su­bhūti, do the fruit of entering the stream,
“Preceptor, heed me.
Subsequently one should leave white mustard oil, mixed with the powdered tail of the halāhala snake, standing for seven days.
approach a bodhisattva, saying, ‘O child of enlightened heritage, what will you achieve through this transcendent perfection of wisdom?
For those suffering on islands, due to the wreckage of their merchant vessels, Tārā creates boats, ships, and so on.
“Mahāpratibhāna, inside this great precious stūpa there is the complete body of a tathāgata.
is the physical restraint through which bodhisattva mahāsattvas attain the ten strengths,
to a present tathāgata or
they neither know nor see physical forms.
in the last division of that night he passed into nirvāṇa, into the realm of nirvāṇa that has no remainder.
they then dedicate these [roots of virtue] for the sake of unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment. So this was the basis of the question I asked.
buildings with steps made of gold and silver;
the king became pleased, delighted, and overjoyed; he became joyful, and felt happiness and pleasure.
The young brahmin Kolita went to his parents and said,
It is clear that the One Who Practiced Good Conduct for Many Millions of Eons is walking toward the Bodhi tree.
(34) Their body is immaculate and without unpleasant odors. (35) Their complexion is radiant.
he attained the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
He practiced the Dharma that he taught.
If there were no such thing as deliverance at all,
“If all the worlds in the billion-world universe Were to be filled with precious jewels,
the bodhisattva great being Suvi­krānta­mati, and the bodhisattva great being Avaloki­teśvara.
“The Jina, knowing the aspiration Of the youths who were his own sons, Taught the highest, supreme enlightenment Through many quintillions of parables.
All of the extremist sages from Jambūdvīpa who possessed the five extraordinary abilities came flying through the sky and arrived before King Śuddhodana.
” He replied, “This is owing to the inanimate nature of all things!”
Among all illusions,
Why was that? Among the gods, those of the Brahma realm have the greatest ability,
Along with Meru, king of mountains, bowed to the seat of awakening.
He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of all afflicted mental states!”
The Bodhisattva, however, was calm and unhurried. He playfully seized Devadatta with his right hand, twirled him into a triple spin, and tossed him to the ground. All the while the Bodhisattva’s mind was full of love. He did not intend to hurt Devadatta, but only to break his pride. Therefore Devadatta was unharmed.
nor is there arising of physical forms.
"འཇམ་དཔལ་བྱང་ཆུབ་<t“Mañjuśrī, what should bodhisattva great beings abide by, so that they will not lose this absorption that encapsulates all merit, and so that they will attain an inexhaustible amount of merit and wisdom?”
Those detrimental to life Appear in the form of wind and shooting stars.
This bodhisattva will refine the fields in which enlightenment is attained, and that one will not.
Thus they who know phenomena Realize the highest enlightenment, {13}
‘The young prince has left. Please do not be saddened! When he attains awakening, he will return. Then you will listen to the Dharma and find peace.’ ”
So the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya, having received in his mind that verse from the Bhagavān,
“‘O child of enlightened heritage, do not generate desire for the fruit of entering the stream!
Prostrations to the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī;
Venerable Lord! Those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who follow the vehicle of the bodhisattvas
Nor does such a person reflect on the present thinking, ‘What is this? How is this? Being what, what will we become? Where does this being come from? Where will it go when transmigrating from here at death?’
or a great king,
Finally, for a minister to commit one or more of the five heinous deeds constitutes the fifth root transgression.
You will come to a high fortress without windows or doorways.
They will not inspire regret in the bhikṣus, bhikṣunīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās who follow the Śrāvakayāna, the Pratyeka­buddha­yāna, or the Bodhisattva­yāna.
overspread with canopies,
Come, let us pay a visit.”
“Venerable Lord! This purity of phenomena is profound.”
“Blessed One, even if the beings on all four continents became like Śāriputra and had an eon in which to count them, they would not be able to arrive at the total number of pieces of one single seed,
Venerable Lord! When, apart from the real nature, they do not apprehend anything at all,
“This display does not exist Anywhere in any realm. This unique, superior sight Is not to be seen in this realm. {261}
Śāradvatīputra, how, then, can you declare that the mind is liberated in relative terms?
“If they request from you The gift of the Dharma,
(45) Their head is [large], similar to a parasol. (46) Their speech is sweet and fully perfected.
You should absorb yourself in contemplation in such a way that you are released in liberation without abandoning the passions that are the province of the world.
But the princes refused to obey King Śūradatta and he thought,
They should also praise and rejoice in others who cultivate the emptiness of internal phenomena,
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ trust in the secret of the speech of the thus-gone ones consist in?
Devas, nāgas, asuras, and guhyakas Were dedicated to making offerings to that Jina.
But he did not think of obtaining a great amount to eat. He had forgotten that he possessed the jewel.
Is said to be Envy Vajrī.
and in the same vein, [all the causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighty minor marks, are non-apprehensible. Abiding in the emptiness of inherent existence, with regard to which this same refrain extensively applies,
This was translated and edited by the Indian scholars Śīlendrabodhi, Jñānasiddhi, and Śākyaprabha, along with the translator-editor Bandé Yeshé Dé, who then revised it according to the new lexicon and finalized it.
Tell me, O supreme lord!
or the concept of sentient beings;
I cannot calculate Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara’s accumulation of merit, but
“The Lord of the World has taught That there is no death and there is no birth.
Adorned with hundreds of thousands of auspicious signs, such was the road on which the Bodhisattva traveled on his way to the seat of awakening.
Four-sided and with four doors, It is adorned with four arches.
He then straightened his back, collected himself one-pointedly, and formed this firm resolve:
granting ordination,
The bodhisattva great being who practices in this way—without getting attached to the mind of the past, future, or present—is carrying out the bodhisattva practices.
imagine two men: one of them praises the hoofprints of an ox,
After a very long time you are seen today.
They do not see the nature of consciousness as other than the tathāgata.
Having written this mantra with chalk on a platter,
“This pure being knows in a single instant The manifold, diverse thoughts of beings.
the treasure of intelligence by careful analysis,
“ ‘Just as space and the sky are pure, Ultimately pure, and with a clear nature,
in return the monks will give them the leftovers from their begging bowls.”
This is a phantom!’ and they would think,
There are 21,600
Fearing for his royal status he became furious.
Rather than acting as a ruler,
I applied myself, Ānanda, with burning diligence and
In this way, Nārāyaṇa, bodhisattvas abide in love, compassion, joy, and equanimity.
and they were holding coral tree flowers, asters, orchids, hibiscus, amaranths, magnolias, karnikara flowers, aśoka flowers, bignonias, kachnar flowers, blue lotuses, medlar flowers,
Indeed, [the attainments], up to and including omniscience, have been taught without apprehending anything.”
before a bodhisattva with no one else around,
They had cotton-filled cushions covered with calico and silk, and red backrests on both sides.
“With a loving voice and soft, compassionate speech,
Those who are confused about these things counsel giving, while the wise counsel taking.
They should not dwell on feelings conditioned by sensory contact that is visually compounded, and they should not dwell on [the other aspects of feeling], up to and including feelings conditioned by sensory contact that is mentally compounded.
I should be equipoised in meditative concentration,
“After Ghoṣānana there was a buddha, A jina who was named Candrānana.
Will progress irreversibly toward Buddhahood’s highest wisdom. {152}
The four doors are the four truths.
In the later times, in the later era, after the Tathāgata has passed into nirvāṇa, we also will expound this Dharma teaching in other world realms.
“ ‘We praise the unequaled Jina, the king of healing, And this bhikṣu who is his heart son.’
They went to inform the saṅgha That Supuṣpacandra had been slain in the capital. {55}
a preta drawn with potash of a burnt goldfish;
Will attain these qualities And quickly attain enlightenment.
She is indeed the curer of poison
places that are clean, without bad smells, and with only little hardship;
And I teach the Dharma to the entire world Through caring to benefit and having compassion.
There is the meditative stability named Majestic.
After the Tathāgata has passed into nirvāṇa, they will hear this Dharma teaching and they will not believe it, will not have faith in it, and will not be attracted to it.
“Exactly, Ānanda,” replied the Blessed One.
the nine contemplations of impurity,
they should train in the transcendent perfection of non-referential wisdom.
do not make assumptions about consciousness [and the rest];
They did not even see the orbs of the sun or the moon.
‘I possess [the sensory elements up to that of] mental consciousness.’
“As soon as he taught the Dharma In infinite various ways,
and for the roots of non-virtuous action, to impede the attainment of unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment is the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration of great bodhisattva beings when they practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
As they consume that person, will those creatures eat the person up, or not?”
and similarly, that the designations of sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena do not constitute a bodhisattva?
Their concentration is boundless.
“Putting down the load of the five aggregates is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
Soon you shall have happiness and fortune.
and even the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four assurances, the four unhindered discernments, great loving kindness, great compassion, and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, which the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas possess, all originate from this [transcendent perfection of wisdom].
“Here, through witnessing causality,
for it enables one to transcend the three lower realms.
having unimpeded speech, having unalloyed speech, not being mute, not stammering,
Bhadrapāla then joined his palms, bowed, and asked,
since the real nature arises from nowhere,
He is the foundation of all beings.
not even to speak of this Dharma teaching on entering great compassion, depends upon kalyāṇamitras.
The earth trembled in six ways, And then this lion among men rose, with the movements of a lion.
will not remain in any location that is inappropriate, to be abandoned, or in disharmony with the way of ordained practitioners.
you should know that
If one becomes fond of these, Minor accomplishments will be attained through Tārā.
Their bodies were covered in finest cuirasses and armor.
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities give up unwholesome company.
The Blessed One said, “Padmaśrīgarbha, that being so, I ask you to listen well to what I will say and keep it in mind.”
displaying the form of a hearer to sentient beings who are to be trained by the form of a hearer;
he has lost an arm!
It is stable because it transcends the scope of ignorance. It is taught through the teaching of emptiness. It is unborn because it transcends birth.
They have forsaken gain and honors, And their field of activity is meditative seclusion. {63}
then great bodhisattva beings, after realizing that all involuntary reincarnation through propensities and afflicted mental states are not entities,
“Venerable, where is the Blessed One now?”
they will not be reborn through their power.
Yet before he enters his mother’s womb, a temple of precious materials is manifested on the right side of the mother’s womb.
Through honoring their husbands, they praise their bodies.
perfection of the sublime states,
“They were gentle, with good discipline and few kleśas. They enjoyed the strength of patience and had good features.
When he saw the resident monks, finely dressed and well trained,
many hundreds of thousands of beings gained a vision of phenomena through the dustless and stainless eye of the Dharma,
“She practiced celibacy within the teachings Of the tathāgata Dīpaprabha.
They do not associate with, revere, or serve those other practitioners, mendicants, beggars, and naked ones who are tīrthikas, nor those who teach poetry.
“All world systems of the great trichiliocosm will be permeated with luminosity.
Then they teach those same sentient beings the sacred doctrine that physical forms have the modality of space.
May the mantra syllables be fulfilled! May they be fulfilled! May beings be delivered through the incantation! May they be considered by Brahmā! Svāha!
let alone that of those who transmit it, chant it, contemplate it, and keep it in mind.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Mahāsthāmaprāpta,
has excellent meaning and excellent words; and is unalloyed, complete, pure, perfected, and concerns pure conduct.
“ ‘It permeates evenly all things, because all are included in the ultimate realm.
“With the roar of conduct that comes from compassion, And the good qualities of the great clouds of kindness.
their designation as having aspirations or lacking aspirations, their designation as calm or not calm
“Young man, the prince went to the Bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha Abhāva­samudgata
it is because they do not consider anything at all that is irreversible or not irreversible, even to the extent of the tiniest particle.
He is skilled in granting means of attainment in accordance with the spiritual faculties of all living beings.
and, keeping with it a little feeling along with merit and non-merit, undergoes transfer from this world to the next.
“And also the words emptiness, Absence of attributes, and absence of aspiration.
When the poor man sees there This beautified residence of the householder,
one made of either quality iron or hard wood
Are the beings who follow you able to understand easily?
You have described very well the skill of remaining constantly in the bodhisattva’s practice.
Supported by his great accumulation of merit and roots of merit he leapt from the roof of the palace,
” The Blessed One replied, “This is owing to emptiness, beyond limitations!”
But the love of buddhas For their disciples shall not.
Today you will become a leader who delivers beings from birth and old age in the three realms.
From what, Śārisuta, are they liberated?
The young brahmins Upatiṣya and Kolita went to where the teacher Sañjayin lived and asked,
Su­bhūti, it is because those individual followers of the vehicle of the bodhisattvas who have been born in the abode of Tuṣita have questioned and counter-questioned the great bodhisattva being Maitreya concerning this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom.
In a future time, after endless eons, He will guide billions of beings.
The postulant should then kneel with palms joined and petition the saṅgha three times, after which
teaching them through nirvāṇa, but not teaching them this kind of Dharma teaching.
The entourages of the guardians of the world Have not received the instruction
And yet fools have desire for it. Know that all phenomena are like that. {10}
“The king appointed to the highest rank of the ruling class will then draw his cloak back from one shoulder and lower his right knee to the ground.
“The objects of enjoyment always bring fear and depravity; They make us suffer when we think of them, and they make us blind.
They become equipoised in the first meditative concentration,
The lingering symptoms of false belief, affliction, and ignorance that has accumulated.
“I am from the Middle Country.”
“For people such as this there is no pleasure or displeasure. They are always perfectly happy in the world.
All the children are infants who crawl around, unaware and unskilled.
She did not entertain any desirous thoughts, nor any thoughts of ill will or harm.
The bodhisattvas’ true accomplishment of wisdom is similarly profound
Sugata who has profound wisdom, Make your voice resound within this assembly. {19}
And he will not believe, “This wealth is for me!” He will not believe, “This is my father!”
He appears in the three realms that are like a house with a ruined upper story and roof burning with a great mass of suffering, and he liberates from desire, anger, and ignorance those beings who undergo birth, aging, illness, death, misery, wailing, suffering, unhappiness, the darkness of ignorance, the obscuration of the dark of blindness, and being in bondage, in order to bring them to the highest, complete enlightenment.
By embracing or touching a dog’s corpse, will sentient beings end up being born in the hell realms?”
This completes the Noble Great Vehicle sūtra known as “The Jewel Cloud.”
He is the one who instructs the bodhisattvas, who inspires them, and delights them.
thinking that the Licchavi Vimalakīrti had come to expose him.
That evening he lit a quintillion lights before the stūpas that contained the relics of the Tathāgata.
they see that some have aroused the mind of awakening and some have not,
He was encircled by the assembly of bhikṣus,
Next, is the fourth secret, Related to the fourth initiation.
“Better is death, the thief of the life force, Than living an unwholesome life.
like the instincts of afflictions in a tathāgata;
and in the same vein, this mind [of the bodhisattvas] is unattached to [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
Indeed, it is the unborn that is born.
The Bhagavān addressed Brother Ānanda, saying,
“In that case, son, go forth.”
Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings practice the six transcendent perfections,
survey and abide in the modality of voidness, the modality of quiescence, the modality of the ending [of contaminants], and the modality of cessation,
And neither does he see The three daughters of Māra. {217}
Therefore, if beginner bodhisattvas who have incurred such a root transgression and are terrified by the lower realms hear the name of the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha and wish to see him in order to disclose those transgressions,
and are attentive to the transcendent perfection of wisdom in the right manner, and so forth, will not cower.
“Desire, anger, and ignorance Will cease without trace.
Having removed the stain of the formation of suffering,
Śubha­vi­mala­garbha
Until the thousand and one buddhas are all gone.
At that moment, one becomes, effortlessly, The same as a wish-fulfilling gem.
They were endowed with powers, and had liberated minds and liberated insight.
Through whatever form Beings may be guided, In that very form,
at that time, in that era, in an eon named Mahārūpa,
“Monk, is it true that you did thus?”
I shall also praise the abstention from wrong views [and so forth], and
Being delighted, pleased, and overjoyed, he gives various gifts to those warriors.
When he said the letter ra, out came the statement: ‘Dissatisfaction with pleasure is delighting in the absolute (ratyarati­paramārtha­rati).’
One should make a hole in the ground in the shape of a vulva.
Alas, O friends, this world is really doomed!
I will not return to the city of Kapilavastu.
But if they hear such a teaching, they will rejoice, will believe, and
If one wishes to increase insight one should, in the same pit as before, burn arka and karavīra with the sacrificial fire used for brahmin oblations.
“Toward beings who revile, threaten, or beat them, They feel no anger, nor pride.
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who remain intently in meditative seclusion.”
They are the commitment to the vows of individual liberation,
“Go, and let that village be your victor’s prize.”
The Bhagavān said to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Akṣayamati,
That is why that eon will be called Adorned by Great Jewels.
similarly, they will experience the sufferings of the animals over a long period of time, and
and whose bodies were adorned by excellent divine crowns, ornamented anklets, earrings, bracelets, flowers on their ears, bejeweled necklaces, and flower garlands.
Pāṭhā, ugrā, drum-stick plant, and salt.
Then, while the incantation is being recollected by a holder of the secret mantra, a knot should be tied in the cord.
How are their perfections of aspirations?
the real nature of the Tathā­gata, and similarly, the real nature [of the other transcendent perfections], up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom, and the real nature of the Tathā­gata, are one and the same real nature.
“In the sky above him eighty thousand devas proclaimed in one voice,
should become skilled in the wisdom of the nonexistent nature of all phenomena.
Visualize the world and its contents as Vajracaṇḍa.
After agreeing to do just that, Saṅgharakṣita departed.
Desire is the root of materiality.
Any yakṣa that does not heed This sūtra, Destroyer of the Great Trichiliocosm, Will incur the wrath of Vajradhara,
I was born in this world in order to bring happiness.
Śakra, lord of the gods, also teaches it.
Having put them on, this person performs all sorts of actions and experiences happiness and suffering.
Then within six months, one will regain one’s youth.
The minds of all ordinary persons are also free from contaminants and not included within the three world systems, owing to the emptiness of inherent existence.
“All beings that have strayed from the path, I show the supreme path.
Engendering compassion for the world,
kaṭapūtanas—all of the assembled humans and non-humans—were very frightened and in despair.
They always have an equal mind Toward all beings. {128}
they might appropriately say, ‘Would that I might not experience such sufferings!
“If someone had to grasp Mount Sumeru in their hand
They maintain discipline out of the wish for miraculous powers, and out of the wish for magical powers.
Their gentle speech gives joy to beings.
like the previous moment of a ball of foam;
and defeating those who believe in objective reality.
become skilled in means,
nor is theirs the conduct that is to be followed.
“Always praise and teach Generosity, conduct, patience,
As they stood discussing the matter amongst themselves, the physician passed by and they inquired of him,
and why are [all those other attributes I mentioned], up to and including the fact that great bodhisattva beings will be endowed with distinguished, supramundane inspiration, taught without apprehending anything?”
so proclaims the Buddha.
“I am guilty of that, as you say,” she responded, “
Prostrations to the tathāgata in the “World of Noble Light,” Buddha Vairocana;
All things are of no import, peaceful, and without essence.
May the name, power, sovereignty, and might of the great king Vaiśravaṇa bring me well-being!
He has explained the virtues of spiritual practice and preserved his self-dignity, and therefore he is the One Who Has His Private Parts Well Sheathed.
Thus, sublime king, do not feel sad; We wish to see the one who has these many marks.
and gained the confidence born of knowledge and freedom.
“They do not consider whether physical forms are empty or not empty;
When the young nāgas began to recite,
He is then told: “Or further, if you were to obtain ghee, sesame oil, honey, molasses, food fit for a time,
thinking, ‘With higher knowledge I should cultivate the path leading to the cessation of suffering, that truth of noble beings,’ vision arose
Consider, Nārāyaṇa, the way the moon and sun connect to everything, extending out to the four continents, not excluding anything.
They should cultivate an attitude that regards all sentient beings as their friends, peers, and kinsmen.
and, in order to cure all sicknesses of all living beings, he does not destroy compounded things.
They go alone to an isolated place, and,
Its head is ornamented with gold,
Some others after two or three, Will attain enlightenment and see the ultimate truth.
what need is there to mention five measures of gold or more?
Vanquishing fierce armies, They bring terror everywhere.
What is transcending comparison?
“Will these two be captivated by the Teacher or by his disciples?”
the entire universe was bathed in a vast light more luminous than the glow of the gods of the Thirty-Three.
They all assembled with their retinues.
and the one whose mind is utterly free.
Riding in a coracle made of wicker and cloth smeared with this mixture, one will not sink in water.
Sūryānana, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of eighteen thousand years. {12}
Filled with the seven precious jewels,
Realizing the path, they attain the intrinsic nature.
“Ānanda, you should remember this Dharma teaching as The Teaching on the Indivisible Nature of the Realm of Phenomena.
When placing the feet astride, one should add: ‘Kill such and such, kill!’
“If you ask how they correctly perceive the sense fields,
Indeed, is there no imputation of being tied to one more rebirth, of the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth, of being no longer subject to rebirth, of the fruit of being no longer subject to rebirth, of arhatship, of the fruit of arhatship, of [the status of] a pratyekabuddha, of the individual enlightenment [of a pratyekabuddha], of a bodhisattva, of the bodhisattva levels, of genuinely perfect enlightenment, and of the genuinely perfect buddhas?
“The wisdom of buddhahood Is similarly far away
84,000 beings in the meditation of joy, and
Śakra and Brahmā held out their hands, receiving the Sage;
I ask the saṅgha to give its consent and
One morning I dressed in the skirt and robes of a mendicant and,
Practices this excellent samādhi. {121}
The Licchavi Vimalakīrti said to the crown prince Mañjuśrī,
While the Licchavi Vimalakīrti thus taught the Dharma to those who had come to inquire about his sickness,
“ ‘When childish ones see reflected images,
The bodhisattva Kṣitigarbha then asked the Blessed One
And so the Thus-Gone One had thrice made up his mind to remain disinterested.
and to develop living beings without interruption through the four means of unification.
Mahā­sthāma­prāpta, why was that bodhisattva mahāsattva named Sadāparibhūta?
Saying this, you have relied on diligence to achieve that.
“If he does not directly appear in front of them, the beginner bodhisattvas should rise before dawn and pray to Aruṇa,
you should ask, ‘Are you not a matricide?’
“Those who see the dharmakāya, They are the ones who see the Guide.
This is how to give the layperson’s vows.
accompanied by this request: “Please consider us with love and take your seat on this throne. We pray that the Blessed One will then turn the wheel of Dharma.”
“The fatigue of any person practicing Sexual intercourse would be great.
The king thought, ‘This bhikṣu is looking at my queens with lust in his mind and he is winking at them!
Hearing it will purify them of the five actions with immediate results on death.
I will definitely practice generosity by offering perfumes, fragrant powders, and ointments!’
The palms of the hands are joined And the two little fingers visualized.
they do not instinctively maintain longing for sensual pleasure, harmful intention, dullness and sleepiness, agitation and regret, and hesitation.
and, having embarked on the maturity of the bodhisattvas, will accept that phenomena are non-arising.
“ ‘Life’ and ‘liberation’ are dualistic.
and a black cloth becomes white.
‘Good man, come,’ said the prince. ‘I will give you a begging bowl and a Dharma robe.’“
And the delightful voices of male and female devas Cannot equal a hundredth of the Buddha’s voice. {35}
are indefatigable with respect to the six transcendent perfections,
the four bases for miraculous powers, the five powers, the five strengths, the seven aspects of enlightenment,
failing to see lesser evils as frightening; to be dull and with obscured faculties;
The buddhas have not spoken or expressed anything.
The practices of enthralling and summoning; The killing, the driving away, and so forth.
Who look upon your countenance with hearts sincere in faith,
Ordinary persons are empty of ordinary persons.
similarly, those who wish to comprehend the sensory element of the eyes,
Venerable Lord! The purity of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness is due to the purity of self.
All those bodhisattvas would thus produce merit through their acts of giving.
For a hedonist to be happy among renunciants is hard.
the Bhagavān Buddha Acintya­praṇidhāna­viśeṣa­samudgata­rāja who had appeared in the world.
One should cultivate the clear understanding of non-apprehension.
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ diligence that does not deprecate consist in?
When I have attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment,
“Always protect pure conduct, Gain the prosperity of renunciation,
With hands and feet ablaze,
the faculties of sentient beings were seen in all their variety,
will induce miscarriage.
more indescribable than indescribably many hundred thousand quintillions of samādhi entranceways that arise from the perfection of wisdom were revealed to
Even the gift of just one finger will be a service to the stūpa of the Dharma for beings.”
Lifting restrictions, the rains, leather,
And they asked him, “Retired devotee, who is your preceptor?”
In the same way that a flower appears wherever a seed rests, so too, wherever a body happens to be born, that is where its virtuous and non-virtuous actions appear.
for the bodhisattva mahāsattvas
In this way the entire world will be his kingdom.
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is like a magical display.”
Apply the first syllable and sustain the upward breath
The brahmins’ students were in the habit,
his obsessive thoughts will pursue him even until death,
Noble son, such are the bodhisattvas who live in that pore.
When she saw her son, she beat her fists on his chest and cried,
The perfection of discipline is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
These are distinctive qualities of the third patience. {15}
Owing to the emptiness of ultimate reality, they do not consider that any sentient beings are benefitted or harmed.
“Precisely thus, Mañjuśrī, does a bodhisattva who realizes ultimate selflessness consider all beings.”
“ ‘This physical restraint is devoid and empty, And those are also the two characteristics of the body.
‘Bhikṣus, these sixteen mendicants are amazing, wonderful, and wise;
“Maitreya, you may put to the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha whatever question you wish. What I shall say in response to your question will cause you to rejoice.”
One hundred thousand instruments sounded without being played,
It does not cause one to know supramundane, conditioned, unconditioned, contaminated, and uncontaminated phenomena—
Hence, noble son, when these factors come together one is born there, and when they are incomplete one is not.
The yogī who constantly meditates on this without interruption
Congenital hermaphrodites, sequential hermaphrodites, fetishists, voyeurs, and those who are sexually impaired.
for this reason other bodhisattvas, apart from them, should know that those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage have been favored by the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, and similarly, by the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, and the transcendent perfection of generosity, and in the same vein, that those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage have been favored by [all attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience.
Likewise, they will not become fixated on the ten powers of the tathāgatas,
He will also teach them such skillful means.
Because, Ānanda, if someone puts this Dharma discourse into practice, he meets the Buddha.
“Mañjuśrī, what is authentic engagement?”
Su­bhūti, rightly would one speak if one were to say correctly that the tathāgatas are grateful and thankful.
Constructions are empty, because of emptiness.
‘Noble son, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara is arriving,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Vajrasena,
Seven of his body parts are well-rounded.
I will not drink water, nor mead or liquor.
He thought, “What does the brahmin Tiṣya know?
As the group of six did whatever their self-appointed duties called for,
“From the crotch, awful smells are leaked; The thighs, the calves, and the feet are joined together like a mechanical contraption.
giving without end concerns instructions about the path;
nor with elaboration,
You remove the three stains and teach the threefold knowledge and the threefold liberation.
if they respond that when they cultivate all the aspects of enlightenment, they should be attentive to emptiness,
How do they avoid verbal pretense?
He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of sounds and the ears!”
For this reason, he is called ‘Tathāgata Amitāyus.’
Were illuminated by that lamp, Which was like the fire at an eon’s end.
“Son, I am taking you to the temple.”
“They will be in the presence of the lords of worlds And made happy by hundreds of beautiful verses.
they become skilled in the formation of syllables.
At the same time his five companions had also attended him by bringing him the single juniper berry, sesame seed, or rice grain that he ate.
“Noble son, bodhisattvas possessing ten qualities are similar to fire.
sun, moon, and fire, respectively.
You should then say, “Lord, I am going to cross over to the far shore.”
Son of noble family, the accumulation of generosity involves defilement and grasping, and ripens in the aggregates.
Noble son, the aims of sentient beings could not be accomplished if they were to relinquish their commitment, turn their back on the activities of the bodhisattvas, speak lies, fail to live up to what they had said, fail to abide by their pledge, develop weariness, and separate from the mind of awakening.
When he attained perfect awakening, The guardians of the world
“Just as they know their own conceptions to be, Thus they direct their understanding of everything.
Abides in the Secret Guardian of Bliss.
Prostrations to noble Subhūti, foremost in questioning and answering;
and those who wish to abandon all fetters,
what constituted spiritual practice, how to attain perfect fulfillment of his greatest desire,
Son of noble family, beings who are without deceit, without pretense, are diligent, endowed with honest views,
and is capable of touching and probing around his nostrils, eye sockets, and ears,
“The songs of peacocks, cuckoos, and avadavats, And likewise the beautiful song of the partridge,
No one has ever heard of such a thing before.
Sovereign Lord of Dharma, obeisance to you!
a teacher, a tathāgata, an arhat, a perfectly awakened buddha,
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is without assumptions.”
Monks, the Bodhisattva demonstrated, with a playful mastery of his great skillful means, the actions conforming to the wishes of his entire retinue of consorts.
This is what is known as their aspiration to full perfection.
The faculty of knowledge is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
When the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Dharmaprabhāsa has passed into nirvāṇa
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of birth concerning teaching the composite,
it is the termination of desire, anger, and ignorance;
“Thus the cessation of ignorance arrests conditioning, the cessation of conditioning arrests consciousness,
knowing the emptiness of the aggregate of the vision of liberated wisdom,
This completes the Noble Mahāyāna sūtra, “The Inquiry of Jayamati.”
similarly, they are not fixated on the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, and the transcendent perfection of generosity.
they consider the suffering of sentient beings and so aspire toward unexcelled and complete awakening.
He replied, “This is owing to the non-apprehension of unconditioned phenomena!”
Free from all mental constructs.
he will serve in that way two hundred million buddhas,
the Gagana­prekṣiṇī script, the Sarvauṣadhi­niṣyanda script,
Moreover, the tathāgatas definitively know whether the acumen of other sentient beings, and other individuals, is supreme or not.
they incur a serious transgression.
By the previous attainments of Kauṇḍinya, The learning of Ānanda, The benevolence of Brahmā, And the supremacy of Śatakratu,
‘Such refuse rags have been worn by the sages.
Su­bhūti! Do you consider those physical forms which the transcendent perfection of wisdom could appropriate or become fixated upon?
tadyathā: jaya jaya, jayavaha, khavaha, jayavaha, hulu hulu, padmābhe, avam ava me,
All birds, such as swans, cranes, peacocks, cuckoos, kunālas, the two-headed pheasants, and so forth, had broken wings.
Gather everything auspicious!
“If you ask how they correctly perceive consciousness,
Right action is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Then a god from the Heaven of Joy approached King Śuddhodana and spoke to him:
He rose from his seat,
[The other sensory elements] up to and including the sensory element of mental consciousness do not consider the expanse of reality
This is the vehicle of the hearers.
Whatever he is about to discover, he will probably share it with us.”
I salute you, the fearless one who bestows fearlessness.
There will be no extremists.
“Bhagavān, then that man’s old friend who had sewn the priceless jewel in the hem of that man’s clothing sees him, and
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas from being devoted to meditation. What are the ten benefits?
a non-virtuous support is not.
“That which is called the restraint of speech
Candraprabha floated up to the height of seven palm trees And remaining in the sky he made this declaration: {10}
Thirty-two, divided into left and right parts, Is concealed in the amount of sixty-four.
His bodily relics proliferated in the same way that my bodily relics will proliferate.
the emptiness that is a gateway to liberation,
O Sage, you understand, according to intellect, who is a fitting vessel and who is not! To you, unique in the trichiliocosm and honored in heavens and on earth, we pay homage!”
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings will have achieved and maintained the first meditative concentration, where there is freedom from desires, and freedom from negative and non-virtuous attributes, while ideation and scrutiny are present, alongside the joy and bliss that arise from that freedom.
One should bite one’s lower lip with one’s teeth.
Or the red Kurukullā
But having acute desires they will proceed toward destruction, Forsaking the way of the supreme humans. {23}
Candrānana, highest of humans, Had a lifespan of one day. {11}
“Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings practice the six transcendent perfections,
Monks, the Thus-Gone One then accepted the alms bowl from the great king Vaiśravaṇa, regarding him with compassion.
‘In accordance with the aspirations expressed by the buddhas, through this offering of flowers and flower garlands
And let us suppose finally that, having erected all these stūpas for the tathāgatas, he or she were to devote an eon or more to offering them flowers, perfumes, banners, and standards, while playing drums and music.
Alas! If only beings understood how to extinguish this massive heap of pure anguish marked foremost by old age, sickness, and death.”
Then what is so amazing about the other five hundred boys?
The cultivation of the transcendent perfection of wisdom is the non-cultivation of physical forms.
Then she also paid homage to all the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who were dwelling in Sukhāvati and remained at one side.
“His going forth will require our parting with him.”
Having practiced for many hundreds of eons, He has attained the stainless, highest enlightenment.
they worshipped him and his surrounding retinue with the roots of virtue that arose from their own merit.
“Imagine the light gathered back in the form of hūṃ Marked with a five-pronged vajra.
It is such that the bodhisattva is able to fit as many countless, infinite worlds as there are grains of sand in the Ganges into a single pore of skin on his big toe, without squashing even a single being.
Prostrations to all the tathāgatas in the “World of the Glory of the Lotus,” the splendid noble buddhas.
In order to accomplish higher knowledge You must contemplate in solitude The pure Dharma, and then through that You will accomplish higher knowledge.’
You know them all without impediment. Guide, you are sublime because of all your qualities. {80}
Some of them become bowls that hold molasses,
They wondered, “When will we attain this kind of wisdom?” And the Jina, knowing that, gave them their prophecies. {22}
“ ‘Having heard this we have come to you, To tell you all that has occurred.
“Oṃ nīlāmbara­dhara­vajra­pāṇi ājñāpayati imaṃ baligṛhnantu Samayarakṣantu Mama sarva­siddhiṃ me prayacchantu mama karmāmogha svāhā Oṃ vaiśravaṇāyā svāhā Oṃ jambhalāya svāhā Oṃ pūrṇavhadrāya svāhā Oṃ maṇibhadrāya svāhā Oṃ kuberāya svāhā Oṃ samprajñānāya svāhā Oṃ guhyasthānāya svāhā Oṃ pāñcikāya svāhā Oṃ bījakuṇḍaline svāhā These are the mantras for offering the oblation.
Thus it was that there appeared from out of the ground of this Sahā world realm bodhisattva mahāsattvas in groups, great groups, along with the teachers of those groups—hundreds of thousands of quintillions of bodhisattvas as numerous as the grains of sand in sixty Ganges Rivers,
Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, in this house there are always four inexhaustible treasures, replete with all kinds of jewels,
“Blocking the six faculties is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
and I would indeed establish all sentient beings in such patient endurance.
Any being, whether a god or a human, Could never see enough of Māyā.
Within that trichiliocosm all the dense darkness that exists between the worlds
I lost him in the city of such and such a name, And it was in search of him that I came here.
Next, one should take 108 flowers of the giant milkweed shrub and,
“Not hearing the lion’s roar,
“Whenever someone shows them respect, Attending to them, honoring them, and making offerings,
He is the one who crossed the ocean of saṃsāra, the one who came to the other shore,
“They will be divided against each other. They will yearn for that which is acquired inappropriately.
“Venerable Śāradvatīputra, if I were to bless them in the same manner, even inanimate objects, such as the trees, grass, and forest here would display those features and teach the Dharma with the eloquence of a buddha.
The Bodhisattva accepted the gift and, out of affection for the great Brahmā, he drank it.
Through the power of that absorption, the earth shook violently, causing it to rise and sink. It quivered, trembled, and quaked;
However, due to the purity of the great beryl,
will die within six months.
and if perchance he should seek monkhood, to go forth and be ordained in the well-proclaimed Dharma and Vinaya,
“With serene body, speech, and mind, They constantly recite praises to the buddhas.
They always stand at the head Of those terrified with fright,
Are not harmed by poison or weapons, And cannot be reached by enemies. {85}
Similarly, this same transcendent perfection of wisdom has primacy for those great bodhisattva beings who keep [the vows of] ethical discipline.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of doorways. What are the four kinds of doorways?
Noble one, the merit you have created cannot be described even by a hundred thousand buddhas.
If the Elder Su­bhūti is the emulator of the Tathā­gata because he is the emulator of the real nature,
Where should the sixty-two convictions be sought?
This will cure ear diseases.
they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
The net of ignorance is destroyed And all darkness comes to an end. {243}
“His ears are pristine:
and it was in the same way that they also attained [the other fruits], up to and including arhatship.
they too coiled their bodies seven times around the body of the Thus-Gone One and shielded him with their hoods.
Also the fifth, the intoxicants.
Himavat and Supūrṇaka,
He who donated trillions of jewels, fragrant substances, and parasols To those without an equal who abide, their minds full of loving kindness, in the state of passing beyond suffering,
when gold or a precious jewel is stainless and free of any flaws it is brilliant, bright, and radiant.
Look at us, save us, and emancipate us from all sufferings.
delighting in seclusion, and not wavering from the undertaking to which they have committed themselves
tossed mandārava and mahāmandārava flowers in praise of the Blessed One.
When investigated in terms of the ultimate They are unborn since the beginning.
You have arrived well and have defeated existence’s desires.
Ajita, when a noble man or noble woman hears this Dharma teaching that teaches the lifespan of the Tathāgata and aspires to it with a superior motivation,
Brahmā is the māra of the aggregates,
“ ‘I had prepared numerous kinds of food and drink.
Turmeric, jasmine,
One should make a pill from the root of white butterfly pea with semen, and
That is the first motion to act.
This can also be expressed in verse:
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess ten such qualities are heirs to the King of Dharma.
Therefore, king of gods,
All devas and humans will make offerings to it of incense, perfume, flowers, garlands, ointments, powders, cloths, parasols, banners, flags, banners of victory, and so on,
It is in this way, Su­bhūti, that great bodhisattva beings are an island unto the worlds.
“Similarly, they do not consider whether or not they engage in union with sights;
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that one is liberated by perceiving the gateways to liberation, and in the same vein, [all the aforementioned attainments], up to and including the eighteen aspects of emptiness as entities?”
Noble ones, it is as if there were a man who is a physician who is wise, eminent, learned, intelligent, very skilled, and could cure all illnesses, and that man has many sons—ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, or a thousand.
At that moment, all of them instantaneously attained the level of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa and
Then the ray of light emitted by the bhagavān tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Śākyamuni from his ūrṇā hair
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ steadfast commitment consist in?
These are the transgressions of the precepts.
they do not strive for the world system of form and the world system of formlessness, they do not strive for the level of the śrāvakas, and they do not strive for the level of the pratyekabuddhas, but,
“Blessed One,” continued the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi, “how should a bodhisattva live in solitude?”
Therefore the princes, the king’s ministers, and such others will be envious, hostile, and aggressive, and if they kill you that would not be good.’
In what way are the six transcendences included in that?
Who is that beautiful person?
Even the names of the serial steps of meditative equipoise do not exist internally, nor do they exist externally, and nor do they abide between these two.
likewise, the thirty-seven branches of enlightenment, the fourteen aspects of emptiness,
heir number cannot be easily expressed.
“Father, Mother, please listen.
the gods from the pure realms headed by Maheśvara; all the bodhisattvas, the great beings, headed by Maitreya;
“Yes, my son, there is.” replied the king.
Rather, sharing them with all beings, they use them to serve the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha, and to help those who suffer.
“The bodhisattvas remain in bodhisattva conduct And they reject everything that is not that conduct.
“Bhagavat, I will go to those pores because I want to see them.”
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty as a self or not a self constitute a bodhisattva?”
Even if he were to kill one hundred brahmins.
All conceptualizing is unreal.
and similarly, when they establish, cognize, and become fixated on the notion that [the aggregates] from physical forms to consciousness do not cease;
“For so long he has recognized his own faults and never pointed out the faults of others who have stumbled.
The prince replied, “Here, take all these other ornaments of mine as well.
Of the jinas who have passed into nirvāṇa,
with great delight and joy and great reverence for the Dharma, he rose from his seat,
Discovered food and drink Through the power of the Bodhisattva.
The element of dharmas, which knows what is virtuous or non-virtuous, arises on account of volition.
As a comparison, I can count each grain of sand in the ocean,
They offered him jewel parasols, jewel banners, jewel and silk brocade wreaths, ornate jewel earrings, flower wreaths, and pearl strands of various types held by gods who revealed the upper half of their bodies, as well as crescent moons.
When they arrived, they told him,
Venerable Lord! Why is it the transcendent perfection of wisdom of great bodhisattva beings through which this is realized?
Beginning with the soles of their feet and proceeding all the way up to the brain, they contemplate the flaws of the body and recognize how the body is devoid of a self.
“Those perfect parks were adorned With various beautiful trees with edible fruits—
Mucilinda Mountains, and Mahā­muci­linda Mountains, along with all the other dark mountains,
The god asked,
A snowy-silver colored elephant with six tusks,
They cannot be definitively said To be absent anywhere.
Those whose conduct is not that of the Dharma and who enjoy fighting: They will have offerings made to them at that time. {28}
“It may be possible to count the beings In as many buddha realms as there are Ganges sands
the Buddha Arhat named Jyoti­vikrīḍitābhijña.
“Within the breadth of one hair there are as many buddhas As the number of grains of sand in the Ganges.
it is because, in all respects, in each and every way, they neither acquire nor do they apprehend all these phenomena.
By giving up all negative physical acts.
Sārtha­vāha,
He is heroic and courageous with regard to the Dharma.
their verbal actions are kind,
As the young brahmin Upatiṣya enjoyed solitude, he had gone to live in the forest,
He gave his fine horse and his ornaments to Chanda and said,
Senior Su­bhūti then said to Śakra, mighty lord of the gods,
And with that, he went into the wilds,
Gods of feeble power, who were previously present in that place,
It is easy for him to make others understand and purify them. He has only little desire, anger, or delusion.
On the other hand, Mañjuśrī, because of variations in sentient beings’ inclinations to wholesome intent, the light of the rays of awareness from the round sun of the Tathāgata is varied too.
it is because these sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage will have been totally consecrated in [the understanding] that physical forms are emptiness,
“My śrāvakas have acted in many such ways,
Then the Venerable Ānanda inquired of the Bhagavān
At these words,
emptiness as a gateway to liberation implies that all things are empty of intrinsic defining characteristics.
“Venerable Lord! How do great bodhisattva beings, after abiding in the transcendent perfection of tolerance, acquire the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline?”
Knowing the various aspirations of beings They teach various kinds of practices. {107}
“The Guide, Indra­ketu­dhvaja­rāja, Said to the dharmabhāṇaka,
Struck by the light of wisdom free from attachment, which arouses the memory of the buddhas of times past, the gods of the pure realms were inspired by these verses and immediately arose from their tranquil absorptions.
Those with a poisonous gaze do not team up.
They will be within the realm of Māra And they will do the work of laypeople. {23}
Ānanda, in the future, after ten eons have passed, the monk Stainless Light will make offerings to two hundred and twenty million buddhas and
We will put on the armor of patience And we will teach this sūtra.
Similarly, they should not dwell on the notion that ‘I should attain the ten powers of the tathāgatas.’
At that point they manifested their miraculous powers, and by those miraculous powers
they traveled through the richly ornamented roads, intersections, crossroads, and marketplaces, which were enveloped in the fragrant scent of incense and strewn with flower petals, filled with horses, elephants, chariots, and foot soldiers, with parasols, victory banners, and flags held aloft, and resounding with many instruments.
It has not been revealed so that the sensory element of the tongue, the sensory element of tastes, and the sensory element of gustatory consciousness might be grasped or not grasped.
venerable Mahākāśyapa,
dim-witted, or unskilled, to allow going forth—
The same refrain [as for the eastern direction] should be extensively applied to all these, in every detail.
Aruṇa, as soon as you have risen in this world, enfold me in your compassion.
I will have to go alone, leaving all behind, Without taking any possessions with me. {104}
Queen Māyā would also pick herbs and distribute them to the sick, who would immediately regain their health and vigor.
“I will silence all sounds from horses, elephants, donkeys, camels, cows, buffaloes, women, men, boys, and girls.”
the same refrain should be extensively applied to [all these fruits], just as has been indicated in the context of the noble eightfold path.
Similarly, the emptiness of external phenomena,
and hungry spirits—one-eyed, limping, and with hunger in their eyes—ran toward the Bodhisattva with outstretched hands, distorted faces, and terrifying cries.
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, it is because physical forms are non-arising.
They should seek to give up all afflictions and exert themselves in pursuing the sacred Dharma.
Thus, monks, at this time the ruling-class families were dominant in the world,
Surprised, they joined their hands at their heads And paid homage, bowing down to his feet with palms joined.
They will hear all those sounds made by beings Without their hearing being obstructed.
So, father, look at the seat of awakening and that monk As I now turn both of them to ashes with my gaze.”
saying,
They are: [1] they have few activities; [2] they have gone far from busy crowds; [3] they have no quarrels;
Things are also not apprehended because other unconditioned phenomena, up to and including non-conditioning, are non-apprehensible, owing to their utter purity.
to attain omniscience—manifestly perfect buddhahood
adopting and assimilating them correctly.
Bodhisattva mahāsattvas as numerous as the atoms in eight world realms of a thousand million worlds heard this Dharma teaching and developed the aspiration to the highest, complete enlightenment.
arhats, those who are no longer subject to rebirth, those who are tied to one more rebirth,
If you do so, a serious breach occurs.”
And Vasunandi was Śāntirāja with the ten strengths. {119}
“As I bow with my necklace hanging low, Prostrate at your feet, I feel jubilant.
Vadhū, Kāmeśvarī,
When this powerful, supreme son of the sugata, This fragrant, beautiful-eyed bhikṣu arrived. {38}
“Please look toward the seat of awakening!
Samāna in the navel area,
“Oh no, what shall I do now? Who can help? To whom should I turn?
Oṁ, Arkamālinī! Kiṇi kiṇi! Khiṇi khiṇi! Svāhā!
In the same vein, it reveals the worlds comprising [all the attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, to be inconceivable.
Whatever is unborn and unceasing is boundless.
Concerning the particular three great ones,
Illuminating completely every direction. {22}
And always practice unsullied celibacy. {71}
You are not foreordained by the lord buddhas to attain unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
then, because of the severe disease, those bodhisattvas must partake of food without any regrets or doubts while maintaining the notion of it being medicine.
It was free of mountains, high lands, rocky landscapes, caves, ravines, abysses, grasses, walls, soil, thorns, unpleasant odors, and so on, and was smooth like the palm of a hand.
Those who were old and weak gained perfect strength.
to stay loving at all times without ever stopping;
and did not regress if their body or limbs were severed.
These are called the seven branches of enlightenment.
Through their sense of smell they will know the dwellings
With big effort, the bliss is intense— For this is the nature of things.
Monks, when the Bodhisattva sat down at the seat of awakening, he began to emit a light known as inspiring the bodhisattvas. The light shone in all the ten directions,
Therefore those who wish for the peace of enlightenment Should commit no bad actions within the three realms. {115}
who desires a sweet voice should speak truthfully;
“Go, and do not come back until you have found the prince!”
When that aspect has been attained Then you should praise correct conduct. {49}
Young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who practice alone, who dwell in solitude, will attain the five higher cognitions.
prostrated himself again before the Blessed One, and said,
to be accepting of and not intimidated by the unborn nature of phenomena.
“Evil one, you are on the wrong path, Like a traveler who has lost his way.
At that time, great bodhisattva beings acquire the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline.”
Bhadrapāla said,
knowing the emptiness of the fearlessnesses,
We thought, ‘He alone can purify patronage. We must get him to stay,’ and so he stayed.
This truth, O goddess, I have taught, O beautiful-faced one,
“What is not being disheartened when there is no gain? It is being aware of the qualities that oneself has given rise to.
Or how a fire devours plants, herbs, and living creatures.
One prepared a seat for him.
A hundred thousand pure, clean gods free from desire joyfully pay homage; Today the One Who Will Benefit the Entire World shall be born.
All beings with impaired faculties now recovered their senses.
I prostrate to the Blue-Clad Blessed Vajrapāṇi! I prostrate to the buddhas and bodhisattvas of the three times!
“Now I have obtained water,
“Venerable Lord, how is that so?”
Moreover, all great bodhisattva beings of the present who transcend the level of the śrāvakas or the level of the pratyekabuddhas,
He observed perfect mindfulness, his conduct was excellent, and he was composed and constantly in equipoise.
Vimalatejā, bodhisattva great beings who yearn for the Dharma with perfect motivation and devotion cause the blessed buddhas to manifest and teach the Dharma, even though they may dwell in a different world system.
such as the bodhisattva mahāsattva Ajita, and the sixty with incomparable minds, such as Mañjuśrī, and the sixteen good beings, such as Bhadrapāla,
that great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom
These young ones don’t stay still, are always running around,
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess ten such qualities pursue virtuous deeds.
“They will attain emancipation owing to their non-apprehension of the emptiness of internal phenomena, and in the same vein, owing to their non-apprehension of the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of all things.”
perfumed by divine incense and perfume,
Noble son, bodhisattvas possessing these ten qualities are similar to water.
garlands to those who wished for garlands,
A rain of lotus flowers fell, and the whole world was filled with an immense glow.
like a lord,
Is wise, and delights in the good of the world.
You will have to spend the rest of your life away from the fun and games of ordinary people.
“Young brahmin, you did say that.
it is because emptiness does not apprehend emptiness.
Free of laziness, and motivated to attain the intrinsic nature, I shall by all means muster and maintain diligence so that I will cross over this cycle of birth that knows neither beginning nor end.’
Monks, while the Bodhisattva was bathing, several hundred thousand gods came to venerate him. They poured divine aloe and sandalwood powder as well as various ointments into the river, and they scattered divine flowers of all colors onto the water.
All the light of the sun, the moon, Brahmā, Śakra, and the guardians of the world was eclipsed
Feeling experiences the objects of the faculties.
They are completely pure, stainless, bright, and clear.
It is having the knowledge of the categories of the skandhas, dhātus, and āyatanas, but having no perception of them.
Then, at the first light of dawn in this world, the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha will come and appear in the dreams of those beginner bodhisattvas, in the guise of an ordinary person, and will make them disclose their root transgressions.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of ascension concerning teaching the composite,
One who recites the mantra continuously according to the ritual will be able to make a city tremble.
It is not easy to state an end to them.
Which, then, are unvirtuous qualities?
Thinking of it upon the tongue or in the center of the heart, Will engender insights.
and some he gives after mixing them with each other, and also mixing them with food, drink, and so on.
become absorbed in the meditative concentrations,
All who depend upon associating with him Will see buddhas as numerous as the sands of the Ganges.”
At this time, the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa sat down with his bodhisattvas to take his meal,
They are those who engage in diligence But in isolation from body and mind. {26}
and serve them with all resources.
Such a person I should teach first of all.
“The king came to the stūpa of the bhikṣu During each of the three periods of every day,
There are omens that have aroused beings.
(3) definitive knowledge, through possibilities and causes, of the maturation of past, future, and present actions, and of those who undertake such actions;
Be diligent and proceed to the island!
they were skilled in the knowledge of accomplishing the activity of offering to all the buddhas;
Such is the bodhisattvas’ excellent power of insight.
“King Attainment of Victory and Queen Ratnaśrī then brought their son and the retinue of queens and servants and went before that blessed one. They circumambulated that blessed one seven times and offered him extremely valuable pearl necklaces, after which they all sat down among the assembly.
in which there lived, was present, and remained the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha named Kamala­dala­vimala­nakṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña.
Similarly, it indicates to these worlds that the twelve links of dependent origination and the false view about perishable composites, which are the basis of the sixty-two false views, are empty.
This is most amazing!”
“Furthermore, Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess three qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
“With their mind and attention focused on compassion; with a loud, clear voice, elevated and pleasant; and with especially noble vocabulary and a continuity of words
He will in that time serve in many ways Those guides, those supreme humans.
“Venerable Lord! If one trusts in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, what are the things in which one should not trust?”
Whichever your posture may be.
Monks, apply yourselves conscientiously and be sure you will have no regrets later.
They will not experience the suffering of birth, aging, sickness, death, and separation from the beloved.
“He, by whose merits and glorious splendor the great path can be known— Love, compassion, joy, and equanimity, as well as the absorptions and the types of higher knowledge
If I were not to pass into nirvāṇa and were to remain for a long time, because I would be constantly seen, beings would not create roots of merit.
the transcendent perfection of wisdom;
‘This householder is extremely well endowed with wisdom.
they quivered, trembled, and quaked, wobbled, rocked, and swayed; they vibrated, shuddered, and reeled, rattled, shook, and convulsed; they clattered, rattled, and clanged, boomed, thundered, and roared.
neither cause of involvement in the world nor not a cause of involvement in the world;
No sooner had he recited the mantra than—just like someone emerging from his house—he arrived in the presence of the Blessed One.
Su­bhūti, since all things are unactualized and unoriginated,
“I shall now teach on some aspects of the thus-gone ones’ greatness. Therefore, listen extremely well and keep it in mind.”
Next, the Bhagavān said to that complete saṅgha of bhikṣus,
will either be generated as internal sounds through velar, labial, dental, lingual, and palatal articulation, and so forth, or else
“By myself have I realized this nature— The nature defined as Dharma— Without instructions from others, And so I am the self-arisen possessor of the wisdom eye.
The Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra The Teaching on the Aids to Enlightenment
That sentient beings lack understanding and insight has nothing to do with causes and conditions.
each distinct meaning, word, expression, and way of teaching contained in all the Dharma discourses delivered by as many buddhas as there are in an inexpressible number of inexpressibly many buddha realms.
Venerable Subhūti, when we had the sense of having attained something we rose from our seats and left the gathering.
Then Senior Śāradvatī­putra asked the Blessed One as follows:
They achieve the four assurances, the four unhindered discernments, great loving kindness, great compassion, and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
the inconceivably numerous mantra words concerning teaching the composite,
and the inconceivably numerous designations concerning purification. Those are the four.
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection constitutes great compassion.”
Wielding weapons and striving to kill,
the one who teaches this Dharma teaching, even someone who secretly and deviously teaches it to just one being,
Similarly, if they have not misconstrued the applications of mindfulness, the correct exertions, the supports for miraculous ability, the faculties, the powers, the branches of enlightenment, and the paths,
each entered his own divine Brahmā palace and,
“This meaning cannot be understood through words; Rather it is comprehended through reaching their limit.
He stood up, joined his palms, and prostrated at the prince’s feet.
He teaches the Dharma in the form of Candra to beings who are to be taught by Candra.
They bring happiness to quintillions Of beings through the words of the Dharma. {50}
Desire, anger, and ignorance will all increase.
and those of the pratyekabuddhas, and the roots of virtue possessed by all other sentient beings apart from them, who are engaged in the Great Vehicle.
Homage to Tathāgata Prajñā­pradīpāsaṃkhyeya­prabhā­ketu­śrī.
Then the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Prabhūtaratna offered half the lion throne seat to the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Śākyamuni and from within the great precious stūpa said,
proclaiming hundreds of thousands of sublime qualities.
Moreover, more than two thousand bhikṣus,
primordially stainless, and
just so, Venerable Gautama, are your calmed senses, bright skin color, and your perfectly pure round face.
Next is the third secret.
When he was born, one trillion worlds quaked in six different ways;
I do nevertheless find peace.
So fulfill his wish for disciplined conduct.
“Have the king provide all that is required and I shall try to cure him.
If the flesh at the tip of the nose starts to sag, one will die within seven days.
the all-knowing one,
those with perfect discipline accomplish their practice.
Daṇḍapāṇi placed an iron drum eight times shouting-distance away as his target.
Sūkṣmā said, ‘Brother, the medicinal plants in this forest do not sustain me, so it was I who suggested we go to the edge of town.
Because those whose going forth was allowed and who were ordained under the Early Rite had no preceptor or instructor,
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, when bodhisattvas practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom in that manner
It is the complete and perfect awakening of all buddhas.
They will debate with words that are false And reject the enlightenment of buddhahood. {32}
but the tathāgatas attain manifestly perfect buddhahood with respect to the absence of its defining characteristic.
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya then replied to the venerable Śāradvatīputra,
the one who turns and teaches the sacred and supreme wheel of Dharma,
They maintained this samādhi and comprehended it.
Then the Bhagavān said to the complete assembly of bodhisattvas,
On hearing that, young Candraprabha with great faith Perfectly adorned a great, vast road. {ix}
Similarly, they do not engage with the notion that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness arise, or that they are non-arising.
He also did so in order to declare the results of merit, to teach the results of wisdom,
With his peaceful mind of constant love, He is unstained by afflictions, like a lotus unstained by the water
If you have no other knowledge, why are you proud?
Śrāvakas are born from it
Excellent, O rākṣasīs, excellent!
“You have very good fortune to have a son like this!
“Their realm is one that is always pure. They increase those qualities that are aspects of enlightenment.
consider that all phenomena are empty of intrinsic defining characteristics and equal to space, and
“Why is it the pleasure garden of bodhisattvas?
and straighten up their view. Even for sentient beings stuck in what is wrong
With a delightful voice he spoke:
Harmful intentions multiply in those meditators, as a result of which they cannot pacify their unpacified emotions.
making reasonable those whose passions are excessive;
Signlessness does not set in motion or reverse anything at all.
They do not entertain thoughts of pride, pretentiousness, deceit, attachment, miserliness, envy, or all sorts of [mistaken] views.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech attain the thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment.
the noble eightfold path,
They aim to thereby express the greatness of the Thus-Gone One’s teaching, and so their involvement is not due to a perception of desirable qualities within those fields.
the nine serial steps of meditative absorption,
The inner creates obstacles to liberation.
Moreover, Su­bhūti, any notion of the sensory element of the eyes, [and so forth];
Dharmabala and Sudharmaśūra, And Svabhāva­dharmottara­niścita. {26}
The king rose from his seat and joined his palms.
There dwelt the Thus-Gone One, the foe-destroyer, the completely perfect Buddha Immaculately Renowned King. He lived there, flourished there, and taught the Dharma.
One should make an effigy from beeswax mixed with salt in the shape of the target person, four fingers in size.
They meditate on the essence of the substances arisen from the nine doors,
This Dharma sun throws light on omniscience and increases the fame of good qualities;
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ excellent wisdom that observes the activities of all sentient beings consist in?
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is not to be forsaken.”
“Noble one, have you found such a store of qualities?” “I have attained them.”
Thus, bodhisattvas illuminate.
I shall therefore not be lazy, and I will refrain from indolent acts.
Likewise, I also do not consider those feelings, those perceptions, those formative predispositions, and those modes of consciousness that the transcendent perfection of wisdom could appropriate or become fixated upon.
If he had found such rare ambrosia, he did not share it with us.
Because of this appropriation they engage in virtuous and unvirtuous actions and with the formation of virtuous and unvirtuous karmic actions they go from one existence to another.
The Blessed One is endowed with hairs that grow finely and distinctly, curling to the right.
What will you achieve through the transcendent perfection of generosity?’
We have lived the holy life. We have done what needed to be done.
Conclusion of the fifth chapter, “Ghoṣadatta.”
In order that their benefit will certainly be accomplished, I also will pronounce this mantra. Listen!”
“I, with my sons and wives, entered homelessness In the presence of Jina Śālendrarāja
They do not seek enlightenment as other than form.
One, too, begets sons and daughters, who are, respectively, White Acala, Delusion Vajrī, and so forth.
“They are called ignorance in the sense of obscuring, formations in the sense of forming, consciousness in the sense of causing to know, name and form in the sense of mutual support, the six sense sources in the sense of entryways, contact in the sense of contact, sensation in the sense of experience, craving in the sense of thirst, appropriation in the sense of appropriating, becoming in the sense of giving birth to repeated becoming, birth in the sense of the emergence of the aggregates, aging in the sense of the maturation of the aggregates, death in the sense of perishing, sorrow in the sense of grieving, lamentation in the sense of wailing, suffering in the sense of bodily torment, despair in the sense of mental torment,
“Divine son, it is difficult for anyone who relies on reference points to feel conviction in the ultimate truth.”
he would reveal to these bodhisattvas a counterfeit path to perfect enlightenment
How can it be that we are unable to get him away from the seat of awakening?”
hen they become my saṅgha of śrāvakas And I will reveal myself to them on Vulture Peak.
those of good disposition and easy to purify, those of bad disposition and difficult to purify;
elephant-like in control of his passions,
for all these frightened beings, this son of noble family is medicine.
At that time, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Noble Avalokiteśvara rose from his seat,
You should teach this in every direction In order to benefit the world and its devas.
Similarly, having established them in the attributes of the level of buddha nature, the attributes of the level of eightfold acceptance, the fruit of entering the stream, and so on, up to arhatship, up to individual enlightenment, and up to unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment,
those who suffered from any illness or ailment that arises from disharmony among wind, bile, or phlegm.
Young man, in the future There will be no obstacle to your celibacy
As they send forth emanations in this way, no thoughts or concepts are involved.”
lack the fruit of the noble eightfold path that they do not attain the establishment of the fruits.
how the guidance of the Dharma taught by the Bhagavān is endowed with inconceivable qualities,
This is great bliss, which is three-fold— The natures of development and completion, And the chakra of great bliss.
And the crown of the Teacher’s head was not beheld by any being whatsoever. Such was the play of the Lion among Men while he sat in his seat.
As the milk porridge was cooking, various omens manifested.
Performing a chaff homa will pacify everything.
Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, understood that the Buddha had acquiesced by his silence, and at that moment he vanished.
the bodhisattva great being Siddhārtha­mati,
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings, through the good intentions that arise in their minds,
The nature of inactivity of the body is the same as the nature of inactivity of speech,
The bodhisattva Dāntamati declared,
Was Mañjuśrī, along with many thousands of millions Of heroes who have sublime qualities of miraculous powers, {xxxvii}
a teacher, a tathāgata, an arhat, a perfectly awakened buddha, a knowledgeable and venerable one, a sugata,
Their mouth is without blemish.
If [the transcendent perfections], up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom, were so, they would not be created.
They attract by their generosity those sentient beings who are attracted by generosity.
“ ‘Whatever nature a name might have It cannot be seen or heard,
When I claim to have explained those things which cause obstacles on the path, if some virtuous ascetic, brāhmin, god, demon, Brahmā, or anyone else should insist in this respect that even though one might depend on those things, there will be no obstacles and that that would be impossible, I would correctly disregard that reason for contradicting me, based on their worldly doctrines.
then even if he should pass away, the friends of the father will still accept the son and not reject him.
They never offer leftovers
Gods and humans, numerous as the particles of the buddhafields, developed the mind set on unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
The same goes for all the world systems of the ten directions, as many as the sands of the River Ganges.
“Children of noble family, if you know that the time has come, you may leave.
“You, Rāhula, in a future time will honor, venerate, show respect for, and make offerings to tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas as numerous as the atoms in ten worlds.
The sensory element of sights does not consider the expanse of reality.
After performing rites of veneration over his mother’s corpse, the lad left home.
rose from his seat, removed his robe from one shoulder, and, kneeling on his right knee,
the east sank and the west rose,
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designation of the eyes as calm or not calm constitutes a bodhisattva?”
asked, ‘Preceptor, have you attained any of the store of qualities?’“
Venerable Lord! In that same way we too should cause great bodhisattva beings to delight in the six transcendent perfections.
“Know that they enter The supreme way of peace.
the emptiness of physical forms is not physical forms.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that one is liberated by perceiving the ears, the nose, the tongue, the body, and the mental faculty as entities?”
bodhisattvas, having awoken to complete buddhahood,
One day, a poor man arrived at the sanctuary carrying a bundle of wood
“Kauśika, in this regard, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom should not dwell on physical forms.
To save and carry the many beings
they imagine those things that are non-existent,
they do not preoccupy themselves with stupidity.
The great king Dhṛtarāṣṭra arose, And with palms joined said:
and similarly, any longing [for the other fruits], up to and including arhatship, or up to and including individual enlightenment, is,
“It answered, ‘If you don’t believe me, take the road south and follow it.
All fires were extinguished.
They are skilled in emancipation.
Having made these offerings, they then dedicate these roots of virtue, making common cause with all sentient beings, saying, ‘Through these, my roots of virtue, may the sound of divine music always arise in this buddhafield!’
The completion of the four great continents and Mount Meru can be likened to the perfections of the hearers.
at that time the bodhisattva mahāsattva Sarva­sattva­priya­darśana, in front of the eighty-four thousand stūpas,
Maitreya replied,
Pressing their palms together they said,
Śāriputra, one should be disenchanted with indulgence in passion.
If you ask why, it is because they do not consider the nature of the truth of the origin of suffering.
The bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha is endowed with inconceivable excellent qualities.
Nārāyaṇa, the amount of merit generated by that extravagant offering ceremony and by its results, multiplied by one hundred, would create one of the marks of a great being that manifests on the body of a thus-gone one.
“They will enter homelessness, forsaking home, Conches, gold and jewels, and great wealth;
Similarly, Ānanda,
At that very time, the entire assembly of bodhisattvas had the thought,
and the luminescence of that beam of light passed through 18,000 buddha realms and illuminated this world with its intense radiance.”
Then the Bhagavān said to the youth Candraprabha,
the universe Abhirati and
“Young man, the tathāgata has spoken of four kinds of appellations that are inconceivably numerous because it is not easy to state that there is an end to them.
Even the names of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas do not exist internally, nor do they exist externally, and nor do they abide between these two.
Inasmuch as the real nature of feelings is neither afflicted nor purified, and is neither enhanced nor diminished,
and there are also those who are disciplined after a short period of evolution.
There is no phenomenon that can remain constantly.
Similarly, bodhisattvas who practice inspired conduct, who have not yet gained power, and who are beginners within the Great Vehicle,
This is the true offering to a tathāgata and to the Dharma.
“ ‘When I have heard your words, I will fulfill your command. Son of the Buddha, arise and give me your instruction.
I am practicing the emptiness of external phenomena,
The Blessed One answered Brahmā, master of the world,
that he teaches the Dharma with such profound words,
“However, if applied with knowledge It will lead to the accomplishment of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.
“Gentlemen, to whom does this novice belong?” “He is my son,” his father said.
and knowledge of [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
or all the doctrines of the genuinely perfect buddhas, as many as they are, are subsumed within the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
Bhagavān, we will possess this vast Dharma teaching, and read it, teach it, explain it, and write it out.
If the dish is offered to an ordained monk there will not be any danger from snakes for one year.
Came to make offerings to the self-arisen one. {63}
Through this yearning, the being becomes happy. This happiness produces great joy.
The strength of all the gods in Mastery Over Others’ Emanations is the same as the strength of one Vaśavartin.
“Young man, ask whatever question you wish of the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha,
The same can be said with respect to the Dharma and the Saṅgha.
Young man, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who with the perfect higher motivation yearn for this samādhi
it is so that the five acquisitive psycho-physical aggregates might be understood to resemble an illusory person.
Talk sense into our dear boy Kolita.”
“Is he a god, a demigod, a garuḍa, a kiṃnara, this Buddha? That word, which I never heard before, brings joy and trust.”
Irrespective of where and in which guise he has manifested, he will explain the Dharma to those ministers.
Until it is digested.
Venerable Lord, if the notion of fundamental ignorance as an entity is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of fundamental ignorance as a non-entity become a bodhisattva?
Thus bodhisattvas remain in the application of mindfulness with respect to the points of training taught by the thus-gone ones.
They will lead sentient beings, hundreds of billion trillions in number, to attain final nirvāṇa in the expanse of nirvāṇa where there is no residue of the psycho-physical aggregates.
I will practice the six transcendent perfections by any means until sentient beings resort only to provisions that are definitely authentic, and even the names of the other two provisions—the provisions that are definitely erroneous and the provisions which are of indefinite provenance—are no longer heard.
Children of noble family, ultimately all phenomena are utterly unborn,
He has the diligence by which he will never be cut off from the Three Jewels;
“Father, open the door.”
the four supports for miraculous ability,
(25) Their voice is deep. (26) Their navel is deep. (27) Their navel is well rounded.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ excellent wisdom concerning the characteristics of all phenomena.
Because they will not die, they are thrown into a furnace,
On that occasion, the Thus-Gone One delighted the merchants Trapuṣa and Bhallika tremendously with these verses:
“When Kṣemadatta Emitted these words,
Monks, this is how you should train.”
Because once a bodhisattva is born and has grown up, it would destroy his mother’s heart if he were to renounce his home.
For the sake of the Blessed One’s enjoyment, the area had golden lotus flowers,
the ‘eighteen sensory elements’ are merely conceptualized.
Then, again the hūṁ at the heart Projects a hūṁ syllable that forms into a vajra, Which forms into a vajra tent.
Disheartened, they spoke this verse:
Do they have no wrong views? Do they not have untamed minds? Do they not have uncontrolled senses?
(36) [sense faculties]—the ‘gates to the sense fields’—are excellent. (37) Their face is like the full moon.
the one who is transformed through wisdom in every respect, and the one who displays the great dance of Dharma.
the relative conventions of the world are applied.
They will have a body that will be very white. Those constant ones will travel by horse-drawn carriage.
I warn you, through indiscretion you will come to suffering.”
That in itself will be your renunciation and high ordination!’
likewise those who seek to abide in individual enlightenment,
These sentient beings less elevated than you, however, while not wanting the maturation of virtuous and non-virtuous actions,
“What, then, is the causal relation in inner dependent arising?
The King of Aṅga sent an envoy to King Mahāpadma with the message,
“Noble Saṅgharakṣita, we grew up together playing in the dirt with you, our peer,
At dawn the next day, the Blessed One proceeded to a circular bamboo grove.
It was filled with many nāgas, yakṣas, and asuras, And was gazed upon by many hundreds of devas. {xxiii}
Also the messengers, starting with Yamāri.
“Furthermore, those dishonorable kṣatriyas together with the monastics commit the following fault.
Backed by the kṣatriyas, they may even punish the monastics, robbing them by imposing fines.
If something is taught or to be taught, it should be taught in this way.
The tathāgata, while practicing bodhisattva conduct in the past, was not happy or joyful on seeing beings suffering and in poverty in the three lower existences.
The Blessed One, understanding the bodhisattva great being Padmaśrīgarbha’s request,
“Even a female who hears This sūtra and retains a single verse
It is therefore the bodhisattvas’ extraordinary diligence.
inexpressible,
Are always home to many creatures.
constantly benefits beings.
Moreover, Venerable Lord, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom should not abide in the real nature of phenomena.
“In their dreams they will see the Tathāgata, The Lord with a beautiful voice and the color of gold, Teaching the Dharma to many millions of beings, Radiating thousands of light rays.
Su­bhūti, even enlightenment and the buddhas are neither heard nor seen, owing to the nature of phenomena being inanimate.”
One should prepare one pala of powdered sunn hemp seeds and one pala of red rice, using two cups of milk from a single-colored cow.
“Please have mercy on suffering beings!
it is because the nature of mind is itself non-mind, and inconceivability is non-mind.
if they do not venerate many hundreds of thousands of buddhas,
A single coin of gold from the Jambū River would steal its splendor, Leaving the other gold bereft of glory and brilliance.
“For those who are stuck in their attachment to improper mental placement, the appearance of dharmas is attachment.
“Consider, noble son, the analogy of the moon during the bright fortnight.
“Noble son, I perceive that once they have heard the name of that thus-gone one the seed of irreversible progess is present within them.
Drinking Indian heliotrope mixed with quicksilver and potash
the throne was covered with colorful and fragrant flowers. It was magnificent indeed, glittering with the light of many hundreds of thousands of precious jewels,
Venerable Lord! When all things are gathered in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, how could the transcendent perfection of generosity exist?
then they are merely engaging with mental images
“Evil one, today you will be hurt by the Bodhisattva, Like a lawful king who has lost his kingdom.
“How should they train to be reborn in the god realms of the Pure Abodes, and
It teaches the understanding of the meaning of phenomena and is a gateway to the understanding of all phenomena.
‘Seeing omens such as these
The people who were hungry and thirsty At that time became free of the need to eat or drink.
Their bodies nourished by the flesh of other beings, They begin to fight violently.
“Do not doubt what has been revealed Concerning that protector, The Lord of the World, Amitābha, And you will go to Sukhāvatī. {275}
The realization of this is the entrance into nonduality.”
do not come from anywhere, they do not go anywhere, and they do not even abide anywhere.
The Blessed One is endowed with wide eyes and bovine eyelashes.
and they are not afflicted by the suffering of stupidity.
Observing discipline, it is free from all fears.
they will render irreversible their progress to unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening.”
so knowledge of the mind leads to knowledge of all phenomena.
They are the inconceivably numerous words of innumerability concerning the composite,
The man hears those words and Comes and cleans that place.
Through the name, power, sovereignty, and might of the great king Virūpākṣa, may I have well-being!
It is rather that he is wiser.”
Vairocana is completed with the palace.
Divine One, know first that an inauspicious omen appeared in this Avīci hell,
You are the son of wisdom, who has no body or attributes.
“After that girl had passed away She saw ten thousand million buddhas.
Bhagavān, we have obtained a great jewel;
and similarly, all those [aforementioned] attributes extending from the four applications of mindfulness, up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
She speaks the truth,
It is not in the mark, yet it is also not elsewhere;
“I have nothing to say in reply to the Blessed One’s question,” replied the bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkam­bhin.
“Why is it the correct search for the strengths? Because it is a practice that is not incorrect.
These are their retributions.
In the pursuit of passion, there is nothing he would not do.
until the whole earth was knee-deep in those clouds of flowers.
This one has middling beliefs
“Reverend Śāriputra, for the tathāgatas and the bodhisattvas, there is a liberation called ‘inconceivable.’
It is far removed from all afflicted mental states and opinions.
The nature of the Blessed Lady’s body is great compassion.
There are intelligent beings of good disposition with the potential, fortune, and ability to comprehend the meaning of what the Blessed One says.
And the position pressing the ground;
that those who turn the wheel of the sacred doctrine are discerned in the world,
how could future and present physical forms be apprehended in emptiness?
Then, if the king turns out to be disinclined toward such teaching, one should teach on the magnificence of the thus-gone ones, speaking of their vast qualities.
they will again experience the sufferings of those who frequent the world of Yama, the Lord of Death, for many hundreds of billion trillion years.
The three bad perceptions Never arose in me at any time. {16}
Or one should meditate on the green one,
It is certain that today the victory will be his.
“Noble son, you may wonder how bodhisattvas burn the garbage pit of affliction.
“The one who after my nirvāṇa Upholds this excellent sūtra
They accurately know a mind that is without desire to be a mind that is without desire.
Ānanda, I adhered to the teaching of the qualities of moral conduct, and so I quickly realized supreme, perfect enlightenment and became a buddha.
“Son of noble family, how should bodhisattva great beings exert themselves in the accumulation of learning?
Sa­manta­netra
Ānanda, as long as you hold this Dharma discourse in mind, read it, and teach it, you will never be apart from meeting the Buddha.
‘My dear, are you eager
How do they abide in joy?
He came together with the girl, and had full sexual intercourse with her.
Which is established in their minds. “ ‘Whether one is a friend or a stranger, She nourishes one with alms. If she has such nature, The woman is no other than Vajrayoginī.
Similarly, it has not been revealed so that sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena might be grasped or not grasped.
Son of a noble family, whoever fully upholds this Dharma discourse of the Blessed One will obtain merit that is immeasurable, inexpressible, incalculable and unfathomable.
Intending to oppose it, they defame the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
The same goes for the four applications of mindfulness, and so on, up to and including the noble eightfold path, and the three gateways to liberation.
Then the Bodhisattva wondered, “What is the prerequisite for existence to emerge?
The Blessed Buddha was resident at the Jetavana, Anāthapiṇḍada’s grove near Śrāvastī, when a tīrthika arrived at the Jetavana.
They incessantly eat at the bodies of women.
Even without fire, it would be completely terrifying.
Moreover, it is said that when he was born, he emerged from his mother’s right side without being sullied by any stains of the womb. But how could this be possible?’
who are the specialists in the discipline,
Mañjuśrī, the buddhas should not be seen through form, through dharmas, through characteristics, or through the dharmadhātu.
The aspect of awakening of complete agility is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
by the truth and true words of the teaching, explanation, and enunciation of the 84,000 sections of teachings, may the 404 sicknesses of the person named such-and-such come to an end!
“Noble ones, whoever among you Aspires to uphold this sūtra
With the joy of stainless faith, the cognitions of the body become unmoving—that is the time of the Buddha’s blessing.
Wouldn’t that be dried out as well?
thinking that the bodhisattva mahāsattva Sarva­sattva­priya­darśana at that time, on that occasion, was anyone else?
“He is neither a fool nor a weakling; You yourselves are the fools, so extremely careless.
When those beings who are ill in this way hear such extensive praise of the thus-gone ones’ qualities, they gain trust in them and attend to them.
What is the equanimity of a bodhisattva?
All phenomena are understood That are taught by the word phenomena. {221}
that they comprehend, know, and cognize the worlds also to be empty; and that they indicate as much to [the sentient beings inhabiting] these worlds.
and how do they induce others to attain distinction with regard to virtuous attributes, and
Your Majesty, you are the master and we are the subjects. King, may victory be yours!
They should cultivate an attitude that is free from enmity with respect to all sentient beings.
Bodhisattvas worship and venerate those
“A lack of concern for the roots of virtue is not what bodhisattvas’ minds are like.
The emptiness of perceptions does not generate perceptions.
delight in the pleasant joy of Dharma.
Still, ordinary beings think that such insubstantial things are substantial;
He who holds on to things or lets go of things is not interested in the Dharma but is interested in holding and letting go.
Each chakra is three finger-widths,
Homage to Tathāgata Gagana­pradīpābhirāma­śrī.
“Next, what is the bodhisattvas’ perfect giving of fearlessness?
the entire retinue, and the whole world with its gods, humans, demi-gods, and gandharvas, rejoiced and praised the words of the Blessed One.
Similar to a city of gandharvas.
(2) correct ideation,
“Ānanda! I did not speak of the qualities and advantages that sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage will accrue in this life and in the next life
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designation of eyes as imbued with happiness or suffering constitutes a bodhisattva?”
“Moreover, Mañjuśrī, after I have passed into nirvāṇa, in the later times, in a later era, when the Dharma is being destroyed,
On his right was Ajita, who is named Maitraka, Who has the wealth of infinite qualities,
But his vajra mind cannot possibly be burned By the likes of you, even if you were equal in number to the grains of sand in the Ganges.
Body, feelings, and the cessation of the basis for feelings; Understanding their origin and the like;
‘The service of those who keep to worldly material things Will all be for the benefit of the present life.
They see a tathāgata in this way: ‘The Tathāgata is the fearlessness that is the nature of consciousness.’
They are happy to see their father and say to him, ‘Father, you have returned happily and safely. Free us from this poison or venom that is destroying our bodies. Save our lives!’
“For these reasons, Senior Śāradvatī­putra, the non-arising of physical forms is not physical forms—indeed there is no arising.
wear freshly cleaned clothes, and give rise to devotion.
They will not conceptualize the meditative stability of signlessness or the meditative stability of aspirationlessness.
conforming to destruction is the destruction of nothing whatsoever.
they are skilled in the absolute truth,
Ānanda, even though Prince Puṣpa beat his own body so that
Here, too, you may give generously. Here, too, you may act meritoriously.”
As is natural,
“Why do those who have the ten strengths praise it?
“Venerable Lord!
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess these eight qualities, they will abandon all evil rebirths and not fall into the clutches of sinful associates, but swiftly realize supreme, perfect enlightenment and become a buddha.
Indeed, those who happen to hear this Dharma teaching by the Bhagavān will not become conceited.”
one billion Heavens of Joy,
‘Noble one! Have you found such a store of qualities?’ “ ‘I have.’“
The woman invited the Bodhisattva to stay and have a meal.
Within thousands of worlds
Tell me whatever you need.
“I then pondered what must be absent for birth not to occur and what must cease for birth to cease.
You turned the wheel of the Dharma.
We shall protect the Sage, who is well guarded by merit;
“Son of noble family, certain bodhisattvas who are not truly afflicted in their nature will nevertheless undergo the process of affliction in the three realms in order to bring beings to maturity.
Thus concludes the chapter on magical marvels, the twenty-first in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called “The Sole Hero.”
Moreover, Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings who practice the six transcendent perfections see sentient beings of different colors,
Yet you, or countless beings like you, will never force me away from this tree.”
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of knowledge of birth. What are the four kinds of knowledge of birth?
That is called the emptiness of non-dispersal.
“If there were a man who stood before me And with a frowning face and with malice
“The mind is incapable of conceiving The bodies of the buddhas.
“Furthermore, what does ‘consciousness’ mean?
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas who dwell in emptiness.”
In doing so, he illuminated and sent tremors through the world system.
When one has done 4,000 recitations,
Just as the real nature of the Tathā­gata is unobstructed in all respects, the real nature of all things is also unobstructed in all respects.
One should grind the root of oṣaṇī, the root of black nightshade, and the downy datura seeds in camphor juice.
The Bodhisattva then had this thought:
Their sense faculties will never be deficient.
Venerable Lord! Having trained in this transcendent perfection of wisdom, those who have become followers through faith,
Furthermore, Mahauṣadhi, after seven days the beings bound for the realms of hell come to experience their past actions.
they have no fixation on anything since all things lack any essential nature by which they would become fixated, upon which they would become fixated, or which would become fixated.
Upananda, Sāgara,
There are eight goddesses:
“Similarly, Su­bhūti, if the world system of form and the world system of formlessness were endowed with attributes that are unmistaken, inalienable, incontrovertible, genuine, true, qualitative, permanent, stable, eternal, and unchanging, and
meditate on it with unadulterated meditation, promulgate it, and make it widely known to others.
This awakening was the same as the awakening of Krakucchanda;
Because it brings the tranquility of having analyzed well and analyzed precisely all phenomena.
‘Senior One! Through this path and through this earnest application,
but none of the women had the fortitude to provide that remedy for the bhikṣu.
The Blessed One is endowed with a long and slender tongue.
Humans, maruts, rākṣasas, and yakṣas make offerings With flowers, perfumes, and similarly with music. {46}
“Blessed One, please give us your attention.
and the other ones with the title of ‘great lord,’
You should guard, shelter, and conceal them so that their [activities] are never interrupted.”
It is a wheel without attachment and obscuration.
Mañjuśrī, that which is called empty is an appellation for no attachment and no grasping.
O child of enlightened heritage! You should swiftly attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
We believe we have personal nirvāṇa And have no other wisdom than that.
There, in a land not his own, lived a teacher of brahmins who had mastered the Vedas and all branches of Vedic knowledge.
As youth fades away,
They resolve, struggle, strive, persevere with tenacity, and rightly aspire that virtuous attributes which have previously arisen might remain, might not degenerate, and might flourish, further increase, and reach complete perfection.
“If these two boys offer the monks herbs, flowers, and fruits,
He lives in no country or direction. He is neither good nor evil.
and subsequently obtained the understanding of all the aspects of omniscience.
May there be glory at your left hand,
Their progress is irreversible.
The great sage Supreme One himself felt tremendous happiness, delight, and elation, and achieved indestructible courage. Such was the teaching that was given.
Su­bhūti, it is because the natural expression of the transcendent perfection of generosity, though without entity, is still the transcendent perfection of generosity.
The Blessed One has spared Senior Ānanda this scenario.
They hear infinite sounds, Those of gods and humans And those of the victorious ones’ Dharma.
Then, as they witness the bodhisattva’s death, they will be saddened, and with such sadness they will no longer be careless.
That is the subtle practice.
"བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་སྔོན་འདས་པའི་དུས་ན་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་དགྲ་བཅོམ་པ་ཡང་དག་པར་རྫོགས་པའི་སངས་རྒྱས་ཇི་སྙེད་ཅིག་ལ་ཚན་པོ་ཆེ་ཆེན་པོ་དྲི་མ་མེད་པའི་གཟི་བརྗིད་ཀྱིས་ཡང་དག་པར་རྫོགས་པའི་བྱང་ཆུབ་འཚལ་བའི་སླད་དུ་དགེ་བའི་རྩ་བ་བསྐྱེད་ནས་དེས་ན་ད་ལྟར་འདི་ལྟ་བུའི་མངོན་པར་ཤེས་པ་མྱུར་<tBlessed One, toward how many thus-gone ones, foe-destroyers, completely perfect buddhas in the past did the mighty strongman Vimalatejā engender the roots of virtue in pursuit of completely perfect awakening, such that now he has attained the superknowledges so swiftly?” 
These are the recipients to whom I should give the gifts!’
“ ‘Feeling perfect joy in the Dharma, I cut the flesh to be given from my thighs.
It has not been revealed so that the sensory element of the body, the sensory element of tangibles, and the sensory element of tactile consciousness might be grasped or not grasped.
if they are not free from wickedness of body, speech, and mind,
Then, the young Licchavi Ratnākara, having celebrated the Buddha with these verses, further addressed him,
They will never develop thoughts of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, and of enlightenment.
All meetings end in separation; All life ends in death.
Since I am wholly dedicated to renunciation, I will stay here.”
By merely visualizing him, One is provided with the company of eight yoginīs.
Rather we should adorn the prince.”
“My saffron robes have really aged. Perhaps it would be good if I could find some cloth to cover me.”
Maitreya, at the moment when you attain ultimate liberation, all living beings will also attain ultimate liberation.
Even seeing the multitudes of gods, His sensible mind is not ecstatic.
“How should they be recited?”
“Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings practice the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline,
the samādhi of the display of miraculous powers ,
In one’s sleep, one will perceive one’s past and future births, there is no doubt.
when they do not make assumptions based on physical forms, and they do not make assumptions on account of physical forms;
and those intent on mundane pleasures.
Nor does an individual, or a person.
another ordained bodhisattva, disciplined and with the right inclination, may give a morsel of food to a single sentient being born as an animal.
Because of her attachment she did not want to let me go, so I stopped eating my one meal per day.
Māyādevī surrounded herself with a retinue of goddesses, and
and will bring them good fortune.”
Quick, rescue those beings that have no guide, Through the power of your diligence and the strength of your discipline.
as well as the worlds above, below, and around.
“When that night was over, on the fourth morning, he went back into the capital city of Ratnāvatī.
even the six transcendent perfections would become non-entities,
Everything else should be infused six times. It will then become equal to the light of the sun.
“This is the particular quality of the yogins: That they delight in being alone in the forest.
Following, keeping company with, and serving the spiritual guides in this way, they learn from them the teachings of genuine certainty.
One should drink one pala of the juice of emblic myrobalan with one karṣa of powdered bawchan seed early in the morning.
Having integrated his realization with skill in liberative art, he was expert in knowing the thoughts and actions of living beings.
“Reverend, if a person who has maliciously drawn blood from a tathāgata seeks monkhood,
When this precious gemstone is set in a place where men or women are possessed by non-human spirits,
They crush pride as they think, ‘I have assumed a repulsive look and I wear ugly clothes. My way is different.’
They take as auspicious that which is not auspicious.
To have attained this absence of trepidation is to have attained fearlessness.
yet bodhisattvas do not disturb the characteristics of the realm of phenomena.
When there is no distraction, there will be no attention, no mentation, and no mental intensity.
When he has gained sight
the nadir, and the zenith, numerous as the sands of the River Ganges, maintain the three miracles and teach the doctrine, that is to say
Through the merit of praising you, may we become like you, the lion of speech.”
Ultimately they have abided definitively in non-origination from the very beginning,
However, Su­bhūti, because this world system of desire is imagined, fabricated, and verbally constructed—
Also heard this samādhi, And with the highest joy they entered homelessness. {163}
the female kiṃnara named Satataparigrahadharmakāṅkṣiṇī, the female kiṃnara named Sadānukāladarśinī, the female kiṃnara named Nūpurottamā, the female kiṃnara named Lakṣaṇottamā, the female kiṃnara named Āśvāsanī, the female kiṃnara named Vimokṣakarā, the female kiṃnara named Sadānuvṛtti, the female kiṃnara named Saṃvegadhāriṇī, the female kiṃnara named Khaṅgajvalanā, the female kiṃnara named Pṛthivyupasaṃkramaṇā, the female kiṃnara named Surendramālā, the female kiṃnara named Surendrā, the female kiṃnara named Asurendrā, the female kiṃnara named Munīndrā, the female kiṃnara named Gotrakṣānti, the female kiṃnara named Tyāgānugatā, the female kiṃnara named Bahvāśrayā, the female kiṃnara named Śatāyudhā, the female kiṃnara named Vibhūṣitālaṃkārā, the female kiṃnara named Manoharā,
And do not conceive ideas of contempt and aversion for that universe.
The liberation of liberative art integrated with wisdom consists of the bodhisattva’s dedication of his roots of virtue for the sake of enlightenment, without taking any pride therein, while forgoing all convictions, passions, attachments, resentments, and their subconscious instincts.
“Eminent Subhūti,” they replied,
Someone of immaculate moral conduct attains the result of his physical and verbal actions when he reaches the point of death;
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of birth concerning the kleśas,
At that time, noble disciples experience only feelings that are neither pleasant nor painful
where the hallmarks of suffering, impermanence, emptiness, and non-self are conceived;
their fear of the disturbing emotions is not comparable.”
Monks, long ago during this fortunate eon, when the lifespan of beings was twenty thousand years,
These rites belong also to the second and third root mantras.
He goes here and there for the Dharma; This kind of Dharma is very difficult to find.
recognizes his son as soon as he sees him.
Holders of mantra, who ride elephants and horses,
The devas above, up to the summit of existence; Brahmās and Mahābrahmās traveling in their airborne palaces; And those resting in dhyāna and those who have arisen from it.
it moved, moved strongly, quaked, quaked strongly, shuddered, and shuddered strongly.
Do you accept not to engage in such things?” The newly ordained monk responds: “I will not engage in such things.”
“Gopā, do not shed any more tears! Be happy and rejoice!
since they do not apprehend even that first level, how could longing for it arise?
would those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage accrue much merit on that basis?
Through this giving of the Dharma they do not become arrogant.
While you watch powerlessly, I shall attain awakening.”
One will attain an unequalled purity of speech.
His realm will be most perfect, Excellent, pure, and beautiful,
She has the form of a twelve-year-old girl,
who will not worship it, memorize it, or read it aloud.
“They do not praise themselves or criticize others. They are not upset when spoken to harshly.
Know that sons and daughters of noble family who fail to hear of this absorption, who fail to retain it, read it, master it, and expound it correctly and in detail to others, must be under the influence of demons.
he collects all the necessities for their happiness.
She sits on a moon that rests on a lotus,
Then, transcending the sense source of infinite consciousness, they feel, ‘There is nothing whatsoever!’
They have not been conditioned by feelings, perceptions, and formative predispositions
and when, owing to the emptiness of inherent existence, they neither make assumptions about nor apprehend ethical discipline,
The Tathāgata does not lie.
When it is rubbed on the eyes Of those afflicted with bhūtas, It delivers those seized By the vajra and thunderbolt arrows of bhūtas.
“The thus-gone ones feel great compassion for sentient beings since all phenomena are devoid of a life force and yet sentient beings speak of ‘a life force.’
“So, Mañjuśrī, why do bodhisattvas carry out the practices toward awakening?”
But, restrained by the supernatural power of Mañjuśrī, none of them volunteered to go.
He gives them elephants, cavalry, chariots, infantry, male slaves, and female slaves. He gives them carriages and palanquins. However, he does not give his crest jewel to anyone.
Nevertheless, Mañjuśrī, that great Dharma drum does not have a producer,
He is delightful in his speech. He is lovely in his physical form.
Likewise, the same goes for the powers of the tathāgatas, and in the same vein, [all the other fruitional attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience.
When they are involved with those modes of attachment, they cannot practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom, which is without attachment.
“I made this declaration in the four directions:
the last of the eight syllables
He will not teach the sacred doctrine according to the notions that physical forms are calm or that they are not calm.
“Noble son, a buddhafield of bodhisattvas is a field of living beings.
“It is so, Mañjuśrī, that sentient beings focus on the reflection of the Tathāgata
so instead I shall go forth among the ascetic sons of the Śākya, for they have secured from the king the liberty of a prince.”
one feels aversion for the father and
just as he tread the path of the ten virtues—the three physical, the four verbal, and the three mental wholesome actions—and practiced the forty kinds of correct application.
“To the preceptor, they gave divine ambrosia,
Sixteen years old and displaying an amorous sentiment,
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom, owing to their lack of skill in means,
“He does not associate with śrāmaṇeras or śrāmaṇerīs, bhikṣus or bhikṣunīs, young men or young women, and does not converse with them. He is someone who reveres isolation and always remains in isolation.
Assume tutelage over this maṇḍala! Hūṁ phaṭ! Svāhā!
They retain what they have heard for the sake of protecting those who have truly entered the Great Vehicle, and not for the sake of fame, praise, and glory.
“Imagine the retinue of yakṣas in the fire
When the yakṣa generals Heard Kubera’s words, They went throughout the four directions.
Even when it is explained, it is just that, and even when it is not explained, it is just that.
These sense fields are like a dream, like a phantom, and so forth.
It is unwaveringly attending upon those who have correct conduct.
Imagine a hūṁ becoming a vajra. Above, visualize the syllable maṁ, Resting on a sun disk.
The husband who is of white color— He is called White Acala.
and those of the Bṛhat­phala realms, who have embarked upon unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment
Nor in the afterlife.
Monks, as I now began living without any sustenance, my body became extremely weak and emaciated.
The sun, the moon, and the stars may fall to the ground.
They should not dwell, in an apprehending manner, on the notion that ‘I should attain a body endowed with the eighty minor marks.’
and develop perfect mildness and patience.
Venerable Lord! The transcendent perfection of wisdom is omniscience, so that all afflicted mental states and involuntary reincarnation through propensities might be abandoned.
By meditating on just that and
And through his power Our palaces have become like this?
With unsurpassable wisdom They become unsurpassable buddhas. {66}
the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfect and Complete Buddha with unobstructed brilliance comes to be counted as arisen in the world.
‘Even though they may praise me, I shall not take that as a cause for arrogance or pride.
The vajra ḍākinī offers.
For the latter may think, ‘I must establish this many sentient beings in the transcendent perfection of generosity, but I must not establish that many sentient beings,’ and so [with the other transcendent perfections], up to ‘I must establish this many sentient beings in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, but I must not establish that many.
“What is skillfulness in eliminating transgressions? It is the restraint of the pratimokṣa and the vinaya.
Are radiated as the features of the cause.
I will form a boundary one league in all the cardinal and intermediate directions.
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection constitutes the noble path.”
They will pass genuinely beyond dangers related to lions, tigers, snakes, bears, hyenas, leopards, dogs, foxes, sea monsters, crocodiles, alligators, wildcats, rats, scorpions, centipedes, venomous snakes, kings, and robbers.
Throughout thousands of millions of eons, As I have performed a supreme service for the dharmabhāṇaka.’ ” {37}
Monks, you may think that the rice grains of that time were larger than now, but that is not the case.
Bees buzz pleasantly on the coiling tips of flowering vines.
syād yathedam akrame vikrame bhūtaghoṣe bhūtaṃgame dahani dhadhare dharavare dadhini nikhume khukhume khakha khakha sāraṃgame candre capale halime hale hāriṇi svāhā |
and we have been devoted to them, intent upon them, and dedicated to them.
They saw many millions of buddhas And they honored those great sages. {87}
“Take refuge in him, and you will not meet or experience the fears of the lower realms or the lack of the freedoms;
he grew quickly, shooting up like a lotus in a pond.
When one has accumulated karma through the condition of mental consciousness, the fruits manifest as the results of three types in the three realms.
Householder, which of the four main elements is disturbed: earth, water, fire, or air?
and they are incapable and inadequate, having no way to move, in the same way,
“So, what are those causes?
This teacher is immovable like Mount Meru and provides sustenance like the earth;
Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with these ten qualities remain on a single seat.
Likewise, they do not consider anything as a designation,
He was of fine color and complexion.
“Venerable Lord! How is it that when a gift is dedicated toward omniscience in a non-dual manner,
Day and night they flow into the ocean.
And factors depriving them of divine rebirths.
However, I never had any physical fatigue and I never had any mental fatigue.”
Ultimately they are not without delusion,
Consider, noble son, the analogy of water. Being wet by its very nature, it makes other things wet too.
Kept together with meṣaśṛṅgī The vajra should be killed with the sap of snuhī.
They should train toward the transcendence of suffering, but
The chakra of great bliss is the causal tantra;
“May this come to pass!” The mendicant then took off toward the south while the Thus-Gone One went north.
the state of mind which discerns in all respects that all things are signless in terms of their own defining characteristics
Hearing the noise, the merchants turned round and looked back at them, and when they did so they fell headlong into the water.
He never loses his vision of liberated wisdom, and therefore
Bringing them closer with pleasant words, And maintaining compassion for them; {61}
he is the One Who Has the Hair on His Head Curling to the Right.
As soon as she had poured out his food, the monk suddenly gave rise to immoral thoughts.
And those in Akaniṣṭha, who are free of desire— They all came to see the Lord of humans. {49}
So the monk Vīradatta passed some poison to the girl and said to her,
“That characteristic is the ripening Of a mind in meditation.
It is not proper for me to have these maidens.’
Noble son, listen carefully and pay attention: I shall now explain this.”
In that universe, all the houses,
the samādhi named Entering All Dharmas,
to chastise the enemy afflictions;
“No, Venerable Lord!” he responded.
that is to say, when there is freedom from desires, and freedom from negative and non-virtuous attributes,
Then one will become well.
Homage to Tathāgata Candana­kusuma­tejo­nakṣatra­prabhāsa­śrī.
“Your clan shall meet no sorrow but only extensive delight.
Thereupon, Śakra, mighty lord of the gods, thought,
Like a great nāga, he let the rain of Dharma fall.
when not occupied with their studies, of going to the riverbank to bathe,
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics.”
Millions of gods, residing in the sky, waved streamers, laughed with joy, and made millions of joyful exclamations as they tossed divine flowers in praise of the Blessed One.
Upon hearing these words, another son of Māra became enraged and, with bloodshot eyes, he said:
“Mañjuśrī, those acts of immediate consequence that cause ordinary childish beings to be born in hell
They are beloved by beings, Both the laity and mendicants. {2}
He will become a teacher and a guide who is independent of others and renowned throughout the world.
You know the techniques of enjoyment, so relish them, Like the powerful lord of gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three!
“O! This most secret great tantra Grants great blessings from the start.
Those beings are attached to the five sensory pleasures, and delight in the three realms.
They were sprinkled and scattered over the complete gathering of bodhisattvas. They were sprinkled and scattered over the fourfold assembly.
without voice,
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is not hatred.”
Great bodhisattva beings who wish to attain emancipation in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment should abide in a state of equanimity with respect to all sentient beings.
Then the bhikṣunī Yaśodharā, the mother of Rāhula, thought,
and in the same vein, when they teach the sacred doctrine to sentient beings in order that they might abandon their views [of the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas;
The aspect of awakening of complete absorption is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
Pure conduct, and unalloyed conduct, And maintained noble conduct that was immaculate. {44}
Those who know the nature of that way of meaning Are said to be established in the restraint of the body. {9}
agitation.
May those humans who hear and possess it With a perfect, superior motivation
In front of the painting, from the eighth through the full moon day, one should perform the eighteen-fold pūjā, and recite the mantra.
May you rise, O Victor in Battle! May you shine the light of insight in this dark world!
They said, “If nobody was ever liberated and nobody ever will be,
There were 84,000 gods from the Heaven of the Four Great Kings, 100,000 gods from the Heaven of the Thirty-Three,
“But Mañjuśrī, have you not gained or realized anything from following those blessed buddhas who are more abundant than the number of grains of sand in the River Ganges?”
recite it to others, promote it, proclaim it, chant it, meditate on it with unadulterated meditation,
If you ask why, it is because they do not consider the nature of [these links of dependent origination], up to and including aging and death.
the eight aspects of liberation,
and the one who has perfected tranquility and insight.
They will be profound and bring an end to the aggregates, And be free from fear!
Through unimpeded meditative stability, this individual will develop [insight into] the knowledge of liberation,
One hundred nonillions is called a vivāha.
“As Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara arrived at the city of the pretas, it cooled
Since this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom is absolutely void, it cannot attain anything at all.
As they abide within the illusory absorption,
of whatever kind of flowers may be available,
So now I must depart and search for a better practice.”
Therefore, I shall go elsewhere.”
Nakṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña, in the same way, this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma is like the Tathāgata for all those who have entered the Bodhisattva­yāna.
May I realize the six supernormal powers And reach supreme enlightenment.
it is neither plain nor contoured, it is neither flat nor uneven,
When those who have been born in Kālasūtra, Raurava, Avīci, and in the city of the pretas remember your name, they will be freed from the great suffering of the lower existences.
It is because, monks, they argue for karma, they argue for action,
Moreover, the tathāgatas definitively know through contingencies and causes the maturation of the past, future, and present actions [of sentient beings], and of those who undertake such actions.
Thus, Sublime Being in the World, Self-Arisen One, you are a field of merit for beings.”
how do they not separate from their spiritual teachers,
Then, in the center of a house yard, one should smear cow dung and delineate the altar space.
Saṅgharakṣita replied, “Even if with their good memories they remember them, they still have certain faults.”
are cleansed,
and begging for alms: That is the Dharma that the supreme human teaches. {80}
Here we have arrived at this most excellent mountain To worship the one whose face is like a stainless moon.
The bodhisattva Puṇyakṣetra declared,
The goddess lowered a branch and, as the Bodhisattva grasped it, he was lifted out of the pond.
This will bring lasting purpose, benefit, and happiness to those gods, until they attain immortality.
His having faith in that stūpa Is the cause for it to be rebuilt, {32}
“Śāriputra, all those tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas teach the Dharma to beings through a single yāna,
and his senses were free of delusion, arrogance, and excitement.
“This samādhi is not difficult to attain For those who are diligent, without lassitude, And who are inclined to solitude, established in purification, And continually remain in the patience of selflessness. {19}
“I do not begrudge him in the least. It is just that he’s a shape-shifter.”
this is the time for getting together,
Do they have no disrespect for bhikṣus? Do they have no disrespect for brahmins?
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that one is liberated by perceiving the sensory element of the body, the sensory element of tangibles, and the sensory element of tactile consciousness as non-entities?”
“The bodhisattvas who remain engaged In this samādhi as it has been taught,
And with the final third, The person will also neutralize poison.
And the entirety of this buddha realm Became equally scattered with flowers. {86}
(54) Their orifices are without deterioration. (55) Their palms and soles are red.
the bodhisattva mahāsattva Gadgadasvara teaches beings this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.
At that time the entire world was filled with a bright light, and the sounds of singing and dancing were heard.
The reason is, Great King, that the prince Sarvārthasiddha bears the thirty-two marks of a great being.
All these children are my sons. All of them are dear and precious to me.
and in the same vein, this mind [of the bodhisattvas] is unattached to [the other sensory elements], up to and including the sensory element of mental phenomena.
Monks, as I now lived on only a single grain of rice, my body quickly grew thinner,
“‘Similarly, you should maintain ethical discipline!
they should reflect, ‘Alas! When I have attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, in this buddhafield I will practice the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline by any means until such faults arising from the degenerate morality of sentient beings no longer occur and are non-existent.
the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end,
“ ‘Mother, give us the permission To become homeless renunciants.
In this way, Su­bhūti, do great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of tolerance, acquire the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration.
“Noble son, furthermore, bodhisattvas possessing another tenfold set of qualities are similar to space.
“Lord, do we appear so ugly to you that you don’t share our love?”
Ten thousand celestial maidens appeared with vases of scented water on their heads.
you should give him the layperson’s vows.”
maim or make another person maim,
that this vehicle is styled the Great Vehicle because it remains identical throughout the three times.
Of the teaching of that sugata who had passed into nirvāṇa,
become skilled in all the ways of the Dharma, and will be kind and mindful.
It is not right to bring ill repute upon our family. Do not behave so.”
They scatter them over myself and the śrāvakas And other wise ones who are fixed upon enlightenment.
“Thus I forgive the offense of you girls.
Followed behind the Buddha, the lamp of the world, The lion of men, endowed with compassion, {xli}
The three realms of existence are objectified.
On that occasion, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara rose from his seat
meditate on it with unadulterated meditation, promulgate it, and make it widely known to others.”
Bhagavān, today I have attained nirvāṇa.
who teaches the path to nirvāṇa;
Bodhisattvas are not hypocrites and are not flatterers.
"གཅིག་ཏུ་དཔའ་བ་དང་། ཐུབ་པ་མེད་པ་དང་། གོང་བ་མེད་པ་དང་། མི་སྐྲག་པ་དང་། མི་འཇིགས་པ་དང་། ཀུན་ཏུ་རབ་ཏུ་མི་འཇིགས་པ་དང་། མ་ཁེངས་པ་དང་། མ་དུད་པ་དང་། བརྟན་པ་དང་། མི་<tThey are exceedingly brave, invincible, unexcelled, unafraid, fearless, intrepid, humble, unabashed, stable, and unwavering.
and the Glorious Mahādevī will no doubt abide in the home of this kṣatriya king.”
As soon as the Bodhisattva began to rest in this absorption of playful array,
The seeker then asked, “Gautama, surely you are not telling me that you have become a worthy one?”
“Divine princes! You should uphold [the view] that those who teach my sacred doctrine resemble a magical display, and
One should wrap it with a blue cord and wear it on one’s body.
near Śrāvastī, there was a householder living in Śrāvastī with a clever servant who was industrious,
and I shall gratify you with answers to each and every question you have asked.
Mindfulness of the mind is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings do not assume a body that will be reborn in the animal realms due to non-virtuous past actions, but
Venerable Lord! How do great bodhisattva beings, after abiding in the transcendent perfection of perseverance, acquire the transcendent perfection of generosity?
“The lower realms are pacified, suffering removed, and beings find joy,
In this way they end up being venerated as teachers and masters among the non-Buddhists and their words are kept in mind and adhered to.
So what about the gods of the highest order—those in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three,
One who obtains the nature of the dharmas does not form any elaboration.
I answer him by saying, ‘The afterlife is not different and not not different.’
We pay homage to you, heroic being!
He replied, “This is owing to the non-association of all things!”
Even after the gods and the others had returned to their respective realms, they did not part from the scented water and desired no other scent.
and omniscience is physical forms.
Venerable Lord! Those who would not rejoice in sentient beings who set their mind on enlightenment are inspired by demonic forces.
“Venerable Lord, in what way does that pertain to the relative but not the ultimate truth?” he asked.
while your own strengths and others’ strengths also act as a spur to disenchantment.”
All the Śākyas are worried and keep guard day and night;
Similarly, they discern that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are unceasing, and do not focus on them.
I purified myself of believing in a self
Venerable Ānanda, such a monk is free from excessive pride.
Those fools will then become jackals, Loathsome, one-eyed, and maimed,
It abandons attitudes of flawed discipline and in the aggregate of discipline it is without dwelling.
"བླ་ན་མེད་པ་ཡང་དག་པར་རྫོགས་པའི་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཏུ་སེམས་སྐྱེས་ནས་ལྷའི་མེ་ཏོག་དང་། ལྷའི་སྤོས་དང་། ཕྲེང་བ་དང་། བྱུག་པ་དང་། ཕྱེ་མ་དང་། སིལ་སྙན་དང་། གདུགས་དང་། རྒྱལ་<tAnd what need is there to mention those who, having produced the thought directed toward unsurpassable, truly perfect awakening, make offerings of divine flowers and incense, garlands, salves, aromatic powders, cymbals, umbrellas, and royal banners?
Your command is fulfilled and all is ready. Please look, O lord!”
Thus, the bodhisattva admires and finds joy in the delights of the Dharma.’
“Mother, why did it not fall upon them?
“For these reasons, with the exception of the tathāgata, arhat, completely perfect buddhas, the whole world including the gods should worship this son of noble family.”
Say, on the other hand, some people made a gift of the seven precious substances filling the entire thousandfold universe.
I and my followers will come to hear the Dharma.
It is excellent, Bhagavān Śākyamuni, that you are giving the Dharma teaching The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.
‘Their sameness is a gateway to all dharmas because it is their single taste.’
“They are without desire, or the craving of desire. They abide in the bliss of meditation.
“If it’s gold that you seek, I will shower down a rain of gold;
“Blessed One, I will allow their going forth.”
praised him in verse:
Sensation is pure, owing to the purity of sensory contact.
“Everyone possessed the strength of merit. They were attractive and beloved.
Ānanda, in this world, in a town, city, market, province, or palace circle,
Those are the words that were emitted.
do not cultivate non-entities and signlessness,
—in the same way, Su­bhūti, all the doctrines of the śrāvakas,
Then, after his going forth was allowed, he again requested him,
“Even with the strength of demonic sons Equal in number to the grains of sand in the river Ganges,
Sublime Knowledge Displayed with Luminosity,
while I was dedicated to diligent practice.
They all were filled with joy And asked each other, ‘What is this?’ {73}
When the chapter of the coming and going of the bodhisattva mahāsattva Gadgadasvara was being taught,
Great King, I am elderly, old, and decrepit.
It is the abiding nature of all things.
The change of color and ripening come about as a result of the strength of the fire element.
Perfect Being, your kingdom is wealthy, flourishing with excellent harvests. Full of parks and palaces, it equals the Vaijayanta Palace.
“This posture, known to give complete sexual satisfaction, Is called the squatting posture.
whereas, Su­bhūti, the arhats who are free from contaminants do not dream dreams, nor are they dreamers of dreams.
hen, Ajita, this man, this lord of generosity, this lord of great generosity thinks,
Your wisdom rays could bring lotus-like people to bloom.
“Mañjuśrī, the Thus-gone One does not ultimately base himself on any emanation whatsoever.”
accompanied by kṣatriyas,
Yet their progress does not, because of that alone, immediately become irreversible.
Noble son, the thus-gone ones’ great compassion is endowed with thirty-two features and appears in an inconceivable manner throughout all the infinite universes in the ten directions.
The bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Śākyamuni replied to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Padmaśrī,
Furthermore, they do so without apprehending anything.
The lines of their palms are unbroken.
That is how the element of consciousness experiences merit.
Then the fourfold assembly of bhikṣus, bhikṣunīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās, as well as devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans,
It is non-arisen
“Then, having seized Māmakī, the mother, One should make love to her.
Therefore teaching it will not be of any help.
For twelve thousand years he progressed with great diligence in his practice.
Such people prevent this sūtra from being written down and venerated.
And the position rubbing the thighs.
These are hell beings.
And who is it that goes to heaven?
Fulfilling my wish, today I shall support you,
The buddhas honor it; the jinas praise it. The appearance of the Dharma is a subtle mode. {28}
“Bhadrapāla, it is in just the same way that the consciousness of a dead person assumes feelings, volition, and the element of dharmas on its way to the next world,
or gives them a weapon, sends an assassin to them, pressures them, or extols the merits of death to them,
Reverend Śāriputra, those whose minds are impartial toward all living beings and whose positive thoughts toward the buddha-gnosis are pure see this buddhafield as perfectly pure.”
“Those bodhisattvas who come here From thousands of realms
I shall bring an end to your fear.’
These many virtuous and beautiful verses emerge from the tune of the instruments; By the glory of the victorious ones, they encourage the hero:
Apart from the four gnoses themselves
“Having treated these names of tathāgatas with veneration, one should retain and recite them,
At that time, the Bhagavān, surrounded by the fourfold assembly,
And lattices of golden bells hung on their flanks.
Those who spit in places the saṅgha uses will be reborn in a sal tree forest as insects the size of the eye of a needle for twelve years.
They are fearless due to their perfect full protection,
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Mahā­sthāma­prāpta,
However, unless I begin to practice disciplined conduct and austerities myself in his presence, he will never perceive me as someone special.
countless beings developed the aspiration for complete enlightenment.
Perform the stages of worship. For that, the mantra of the fire offering to be uttered is this: “Oṃ nīlāmbara­dhara oṃ vajra­jvalānala hana sarva­duḥkha sarva­vighna samma kuru­nīlāmbara­dhara vajra­pāṇi chegemo māraya hūṃ phaṭ. “Say this while burning the substances.
Son of noble family, suppose someone were to set the beings of Jambudvīpa on the noble eightfold path and, after having done so,
Relatively, they are like a ruler in order to attract others.
“ ‘The mind’s perfect stability and one-pointedness, The body’s perfect stability as on the level of the āryas,
Bringer of Pleasure, Joy, and Rapture, please come here!
“Conditioned things are like the light of a candle:
All the major royal families and royal lines Were found to be flawed. Considering this,
To illustrate that, Mahauṣadhi, suppose someone with long, well-developed arms were to put on battle armor,
Then one will obtain that village.
These are the features of the maṇḍala:
Aṣṭa­grahāṣṭāviṃśati­nakṣatra­śrī (Glory of the Eight Planets and Twenty-Eight Constellations)
and produces perceptions, formative predispositions, and mental processes.
Within that pore named Amṛtabindu there are many millions of trillions of extremely beautiful celestial palaces completely adorned with divine jewels,
and having arrived they all said in one voice to the Bhagavān,
They do not discriminate between those who are worthy recipients and those who are unworthy.
and read it aloud, as their own master, parent, or child, we too will regard them as our own parents.
Having contempt for my supreme enlightenment,
Here in the Sahā world, the assembled retinue of the Thus-Gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni consisted of monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragās, humans, nonhumans, Śakra, Brahmā, the guardians of the world, and bodhisattvas.
“With fuel of thorny wood, Great wrath is accomplished.
“Utterly devoid of the three stains, you are stainless and pure.
What are those ten? They are humility toward the haughty, no pride when facing the proud, honesty toward the deceitful, truthfulness toward liars, gentle words toward unskilled speakers, loving words toward the vicious, patience toward the aggressive, love toward the brutal, compassion toward the suffering, and sharing when meeting the stingy.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta.
the perimeter sank and the center rose, and the center sank and the perimeter rose.
“My teaching has nine aspects, Which are taught according to the strengths of beings.
Then Senior Su­bhūti addressed the gods as follows:
Those who, of all renunciants, are ‘the most joyful renunciants,’
I, too, shall enter awakening, Shall end helpless beings’ misery.
Venerable Bliss-Gone Dharma Sovereign, Blessed One, you
Beings will have an infinite aroma.
They offer it with veneration, and with their own hands.
Although its scripture and practice manual had declined and disappeared,
At that time, the bodhisattva Kṣitigarbha, who was sitting among the retinue, rose from his seat
Those who have the inconceivable nature of benefiting the world,
Whether they hear praises or slander of the Dharma, they have the intention to attain supreme, perfect enlightenment.
Father, I have seen the power of the secret mantra which you have granted.
First, shamelessness is when, while one remains alone and in private, one’s mind remains desirous, giving rise to thoughts of desire.
the defining characteristic of non-arising,
“Senior Śāradvatī­putra, there is attainment and there is clear realization, but not in terms of duality.
Moving in a fine gait with joints as stable as a diamond— That perfect elephant entered her womb.
The ones who know that preeminence Will have no pride throughout ten million eons. {45}
Oṁ, Envy Vajrī, hūṁ, phaṭ!
it is because they have no hesitation regarding their own level,
They are also truly inspired and extremely happy to worship and venerate, which is transcendent patience.
Therefore, Bhagavān, the man was not a liar. Why is that?
An immeasurable radiance shone in the universe. There fell a great rain of divine incense.
it denotes the interval between the first and second meditative concentrations.
“Blessed One, it would be wonderful if a sign were made such that Mañjuśrī Kumārabhuta, upon seeing it, would wish to return here.
Oh! Oh! Arise, Supuṣpa, with the ten strengths, You who are the wise pilot of the ship.
a yogī consumes the manifest mantra seven times.
emanated from the Dharma, descended from the Dharma, and created from the Dharma.
the utterly unarisen, and the utterly unreal.”
In accordance with these beings’ level of maturation, bodhisattvas will deliver them from the burning house of cyclic existence.
future beings would not be disposed favorably toward me,
Complete the six perfections And dwell on the ten bodhisattva levels.
Such beings will perform negative actions.
it stops their notions of permanence and instead makes them think of impermanence.
It is the joy of exploration of the three doors of liberation,
“Our begging bowls are black with wear.
Avalokiteśvara,
Similarly, they attain the fruit of having entered the stream,
“Consider, noble son, how the sun rises to shine on all beings in Jambu­dvīpa.
that they might cultivate the supports for miraculous ability, and that they might cultivate the faculties, the powers, the branches of enlightenment, and the [noble eightfold] path,
With incanted ash one can cure blindness.
I had this thought,
These sentient beings are also not sentient beings,
You gave away your wife, sons, daughters, body, kingdom, and even your life;
Likewise many hundreds of thousands of bodhisattvas, all of them bound by just one more birth,
like fools who are attracted to a ceramic vase filled with vomit.
The first gesture is to believe in all sorts of phrases and words,
“No, Bhagavān, he would not be,” answered Śāriputra. “Sugata, it is not like that.
At that moment, pleasure is obtained.
even though they investigate and meditate accordingly, they will not be discouraged thereby.
Like dewdrops, they do not last.
“Use all your female trickery and keep persevering with the young prince so that when his mind becomes attached to you, he will not want to leave for the sake of ordination!”
“Alas, my powerful man, who is as strong as Nārāyaṇa, You conquer the hordes of demons.
You have eliminated the fetters and the rigidity of ignorance. Lord of humans, teach me the conduct of a bodhisattva. {8}
They do not become fixated on the first meditative concentration [or on the other meditative concentrations], up to and including the fourth meditative concentration.
Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of [all the sensory elements], starting from the sensory element of the eyes, the sensory element of sights, and the sensory element of visual consciousness, and
In the same vein, they are not fixated on [attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience.
Then, by the power of the Buddha, all the great hearers who were present in the gathering rose from their seats and draped their Dharma robes over one shoulder.
and protect them from those lower realms, establishing them also in the acquisition of calm abiding.
If I respond to them, it will only inflame their anger further,’
and the noble eightfold path. They attain those thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment.
Bhadrapāla, in awe, joined his hands, bowed, and took refuge in the Blessed One.
If a monk thus takes what has not been given, that monk also incurs a defeat and so should not remain.
Similarly, Su­bhūti, this Great Vehicle, too, is neither permanent, nor is it impermanent;
It shows that you, Gopā, shall quickly see me adorned with signs And receiving the praise of the entire world.
“Blessed One, just to contemplate Avaloki­teśvara’s name completely fulfills all one’s aspirations,
the Indranīla jewel appeared in the west.
“Rāhula, go to the Licchavi Vimalakīrti to inquire about his illness.”
One should keep track of air as it enters By counting breaths up to one hundred thousand or more.
there will be śrāvakas who will hear of the practices of the bodhisattva, but they will not think, ‘We are bodhisattvas.’
and they resound with the cries of swans, peacocks, cuckoos, wild ducks, storks, and whooper swans.
With all their strength of merit, discipline, and wisdom, And all their many unrestricted sacrifices, They do not equal even a hundredth of the qualities in a single hair of mine.
the sun, the moon,
When Mañjuśrī Kumārabhuta had given this teaching on the ultimate truth without teaching,
“This, young man, is what is called ‘the purification of the great higher cognition of all phenomena.’ ”
and was transformed into a single flame, at that time this great earth shook.
Uniting the two mouths,
That are attractive and extremely beautiful, And this supreme samādhi will soon be attained. {i}
For their sake, Guide, I ask you this question. {59}
It produces the auspiciousness of peace For those born as animals, The fruits of trees, Or anything else that bears the incantation.
and they should also praise and rejoice in others who attain omniscience, manifestly perfect buddhahood.
The beautiful city of Kapilavastu is the most suitable birthplace.
And a pair of earrings on one’s ears.
Weeping, crying out, and wailing, they went back into the capital city of Ratnāvatī.
“It is certain that the one with the power of merit, The powers of knowledge and wisdom, And the powers of forbearance and diligence, Will render Māra’s factions powerless.
The third sense field of mastery [refers to the miraculous perceptual transformation that] ensues when one who perceives inner formlessness regards blue external forms, blue colors, blue appearances, and blue reflections, such as the blue [form], the blue color, the blue appearance, and the blue reflection of the flax blossom or excellent blue cloth from Vārāṇasī. In the same way, one who perceives inner formlessness regards blue external forms, blue colors, blue appearances, and blue reflections, [and understands these forms, having attained mastery over them, and sees them, having attained mastery over them].
They will not fall away from concentration.
You yourself know the self as it is.
the bodhisattva mahāsattva Sarva­sattva­priya­darśana said to the all-inclusive assembly of bodhisattvas, and the assembly of the great śrāvakas, and the devas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, humans, and nonhumans,
Extending his hand, he said to the bodhisattvas:
They have belief and conviction in what they have heard. Yet still they do not pass beyond suffering in the interval period.
The people who lived in the villages surrounding the area where I was practicing began to say,
He must be smeared with a red fragrant paste
Jñāna­mati
The second meditative absorption ensues when one achieves and maintains the second meditative concentration, that is to say, when there is an intense inner clarity, free from both ideation and scrutiny, the absence of ideation and scrutiny being due to one-pointed mental focus, while the joy and bliss that arise from meditative stability are present.
“Whoever comes with his parents’ consent,
The entire Dharma has one taste—the one taste of liberation, freedom from desire, cessation, and the ultimate wisdom of omniscience.
the samādhi named Great Brilliance,
many bejeweled lion thrones of silver and gold,
“The four distortions are a cause of affliction.
This is to venerate him, the Leader of the Śākyas, who has gone to the king of trees.”
“Young man, I have entered homelessness in the presence of many buddha bhagavāns.
In the presence of the Lord of the World, I will pronounce the punishment For the yakṣas and rākṣasas That dwell throughout the cardinal and intermediate directions, And for the grahas that dwell Deep underground, on the earth, In between, and in the sky:
“I had become of royal caste.
“Their bodies will be perfect, Adorned by the primary signs of a great being.
They cannot succumb to demonic forces, or to the gods within the realms of demonic forces.
Mañjuśrī, for the bodhisattva, the world consists only of living beings, and sickness is inherent in living in the world.
in order that, at a later time, during a later life, a similar teaching of the Dharma, protected by your supernatural power, will spread in the world and will not disappear.
and this is the time for the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
How can I say anythingIn front of such a great being?’
See that self and purity are nonself and impure. Meditate and become a lord of men. {102}
they should dedicate the merit to unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, without engaging in the notion that the setting of the mind on enlightenment is singular, or the notion that it is dual, or the notion that it is plural.
Bodhisattvas speak what is meaningful. Their measured words bring joy to sentient beings.
I came for the sake of the Dharma, not for the sake of a chair.
through wishing for this highest, complete enlightenment,
As Māra’s body started to sweat, his splendor disappeared and his face grew pale;
Come, and together with you we shall go into the presence of the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Jala­dhara­garjita­ghoṣa­susvarana­kṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña­, in order to see the Bhagavān, pay homage to him, and honor him
This samādhi is not difficult to attain For those who are established in all good qualities. {16}
Since showers fall in the abodes of the sun and the moon, and a soft breeze blows,
“In this regard, you may wonder, what are the absorptions?
They become heirs of the thus-gone ones and obtain all that they need.
circumambulated him seven times, and gave the string of pearls to the Bhagavān as an offering.
You should also keep this sūtra as having the name The Samādhi, the Revealed Equality of the Nature of All Phenomena.”
As soon as the monk Stainless Light had eaten, he and his monastic companions, together with Youthful Mañjuśrī, left for the abode of the Bhagavān. Upon entering his presence,
He had five hundred sons Who were handsome and beautiful to see. {11}
“And if those wishing for merit Were to offer to the jinas Every kind of music, light, food, and clothing
Now the mind of the nāga Anantaka was completely pacified; he became endowed with the awakened mind, through which the minds of all the nāgas were completely pacified.
“He will have unimpeded eloquence And will know many Dharma definitions.
having strict control of their mind and giving up all forms of mental misbehavior;
These arts and skills were also mastered by the five hundred sons of the five hundred ministers.
Although both pleasure and pain are abandoned when the buddha-qualities are fully accomplished,
When a house is set ablaze by lightning
“I strongly wish to see the beautiful eyes and face Of the one who has virtuous eyes, loving eyes, Who has the eyes that have special method and wisdom, And has compassionate eyes and loving eyes.
Ānanda, these bodhisattvas are diligently upholding the sacred Dharma of many hundreds of thousands of buddhas.”
“He always has understanding through the great higher knowledges,
and the sensory element of mental consciousness are themselves omniscience,
I shall cause a great light, so that bodhisattva great beings shall come to me and ask for a great Dharma teaching.”
Ambrosia and so forth has already been explained.
Baselessness.
“Great excellent one, who describes wisdom through parables,
touched him with his foot.
‘It is difficult to see the guides.
Oh! Oh! You completely cure all illnesses. With compassion you accomplish the benefit of beings.
It is comprised by voidness,
and mātṛkā have taken root among gods and humans, we nāgas were born into this cursed state with fallen forms!
constant timidity and weariness with objects;
Focused in supreme and precious all-pervasive concentration.
“Noble son, similarly, once they have heard the name of that thus-gone one, those sentient beings possess the seed of irreversible progress.
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings [skillfully] practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
and similarly, when they establish, cognize, and become fixated on the notion that [the sensory elements] from the eyes to mental phenomena are imbued with suffering;
an unsurpassed guide who tamed beings, a teacher to gods and men,
does not pass beyond.
“All phenomena are the Buddha’s Dharma. They who have learned the nature of phenomena,
Next two of the Śākya boys, then three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty
Knew the intention of the king’s dreadful, cruel brother
incinerating their lips, destroying their teeth,
Non-mind does not dedicate merits to non-mind.
Similarly, the feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness that are void constitute the nature of sentient beings, who are also void.
Some are to be converted by nāgas.
Monks, being the master of phenomena, I will teach you the Dharma. Come, listen and understand.
“The buddhas, as numerous as the Ganges sands, Present in the ten directions, to whom humans and devas make offerings,
thin hair will become thick.
teach correctly the buddha qualities and praises of the Tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha,
Young man, they are the samādhi, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena.”
And are held by many people.
In this way, with a single recitation,
They are holders of the treasure of the Dharma and great realization; They are holders of the treasure of omniscience.
Then, consequent on this understanding, they do not make assumptions based on dreams,
They should arrange various flowers.
“What is the knowledge of assigned names? It is the understanding that names are without reality.
When I finally managed to get up with great effort and wipe my dust-covered body with my hands, my body hair, its roots rotten, came out of my body.
Who traveled to endless hundreds of realms. Following him were those in the śrāvaka saṅgha:
Since from the beginning they have not arisen They do not arise and they do not cease.
They should not become infatuated by their merit, since it is the eternal, unending true nature.
What is this transcendent perfection of wisdom,
When he said the letter ṣa, out came the statement: ‘Destroying the six sense bases and obtaining the superknowledges and wisdoms (ṣaḍāyatana­nigrahaṇābhijña­jñānāvāpti).’
The moon that delights the lotuses of the night? “Your face is like a blooming white lotus; It is as tender as a young blue lotus.
a virtuous support is the whole, the unadulterated, the complete, the pure, the totally purified holy life, but
“Senior Śāradvatī­putra, I do not hold that attainment will ensue on the basis of things that are non-arising nor do I hold that anything will be attained on the basis of things that are arising.”
they will understand all things’ uncompoundedness, lack of existence, lack of occurrence, lack of origination, lack of emergence, absence of marks, and absence of characteristics. They will understand that no phenomenon comes, goes, or remains. They will understand that phenomena are inherently pure, inherently luminous, inherently beyond suffering, like space, and inherently free of affliction.
It is praising correct conduct. It is condemning incorrect conduct.
and if he were also to reveal in each of these hells with their sentient denizens many thousands of bodhisattvas and many hundreds of thousands of bodhisattvas,
these great bodhisattva beings would know, ‘Alas! This is Māra or a man conjured up by the evil Māra who would separate me from unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment and dissuade me from the path of enlightenment!’
But later, after the Blessed One had said, “If someone approaches you, wishing to go forth, wait seven or eight days,”
or of all tīrthikas such as the Carakas, Parivrājakas, and Nirgranthas, and so forth; or of any others, down to the roots of what is wholesome of those stuck in what is wrong; it is through having the Tathāgata as their basis and support that they grow and become sizeable.
In previous births I have endured hundreds of sufferings— Imprisonment, slavery, beatings, threats—all on account of desire. While my mind was fixed on conditioned things, I could not gain liberation.
This concludes the chapter on meditation, the ninth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called “The Sole Hero.”
“Secondly I, and the many millions Of these guides who have come here,
Therefore the earth is not damaged, nor are any beings harmed.”
“Within that, arrange the secret mantras.
They should praise and rejoice in others who cultivate the understanding through which individual enlightenment is actualized.
“When they have attained this stainless samādhi of peace, Desire can never cause them harm.
Śāriputra, purification and pacification are also one’s own doing.
Many millions of trillions of nāgas such as Nāga King Sāgara, Nāga King Anavatapta, Nāga King Takṣaka, and Nāga King Vāsuki guard the ground.
Mañjuśrī, likewise, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas suffuse all sentient beings with compassion and attend to them with equanimity.
Because I myself was then, at that time, Prince Puṣpa.
Please tell me where I can find a lake, a pond, or a pool. Somewhere with cool, clean, clear water. Anything that can cool me and pacify my thirst. Please show me the way.’
descended to the levels of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, and failed to enter into the maturity of the bodhisattvas.
Nārāyaṇa, this was the third introduction to the absorption that encapsulates all merit.
Who are now surrounded by precious spiritual friends, Who relinquish evil deeds and adhere to the teaching of the buddhas Are fruitfully auspicious to behold.
To him they said,
“Yet, Mañjuśrī, from the body of the Tathāgata, adorned with hundreds of thousands of marks, during all the empty postures of a tathāgata,
And free from all distractions,
My own failure to get consent to go forth was due to my birth into a high family such as mine.’“
‘Now come along and let us return home.’
By offering one’s hands, one will gain respect.
Su­bhūti, the nature of phenomena is entirely singular.
“ ‘Forsaking the kingdom and the royal capital, Jewels, gems, pearls, gold, and wealth,
[The fourth aspect of liberation ensues when] the perceptions of physical forms have been transcended in all respects,
how could they possibly apprehend the attributes that are the aspects of enlightenment!”
The Blessed One replied, “Monks, during this fortunate eon, when the lifespan of beings was twenty thousand years,
and they question, counter-question, and venerate those lord buddhas.
It was perfect, supreme, abundant, unsurpassed, and unexcelled.
Should he take up residence with another?”
Su­bhūti, it is because, commencing with the reality of illusion, this is in fact the reality of all things. Su­bhūti, so it is that great bodhisattva beings are said to don the great armor.
It is a long time since they have seen me, And I say it is rare to find the jinas.
saying, ‘O child of enlightened heritage, you should not train in this!
Similarly, you should cultivate wisdom!
It also becomes aware of the thought, ‘Whatever actions I have done determine what I am.’
they will never be belittled among human beings. They will never become impoverished, and if they do possess a corporeal form, they will not acquire a body that is censured by the worlds of humans, gods, and antigods.
May the constellations in that direction Protect you!
for voyagers to the other shore, like a boat;
O Sage, you previously paid homage to hundreds of thousands of buddhas,
the Thus-Gone One was spotted by some carakas, parivrājakas, vṛddhaśrāvakas, gautamas, nirgranthas, ājīvikas, and others as well.
If the King of Aṅga has been crowned and anointed a kṣatriya king
When a child is seized by Kaṇṭhapāṇinī, The throat (kaṇṭha) is obstructed.
Monks, Māra, the evil one, did not pay heed to Sārthavāha’s warning.
By applying earwax with honey to the eyes, one will cure night blindness.
Through the truth, the true words of that, may my arm be restored as it was before.
In the same vein, do you think that [the other causal attributes] up to and including the noble eightfold path are one thing, and that illusions are another?
They are children of the buddhas. They are children of the Śākya.
cultivate wisdom, and have abandoned all non-virtuous attributes, and remain firm,
That music was heard coming from the sky, But compared to that the Sugata’s speech is inconceivable. {52}
Ah! Arise, you who have escaped from the prison of existence.
Those same great bodhisattva beings in their former lives, too, will have studied this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, asked questions and counter-questions about it, retained it, mastered it, and been attentive to it in the appropriate manner.
The Blessed One said to the bodhisattva Padmaśrīgarbha,
Having seen countless glorious buddhas You will reach enlightenment and become a lord of Dharma. {2}
It will know no unfree states or lower realms.
So the monks asked the Blessed One about it, and he said,
The best and foremost among speakers.
They hear the highest Dharma from Amitāyus And attain the acceptance of the nonorigination of phenomena. {69}
So what need is there to mention that you will also be born in the pure buddha realms!”
Reciting the mantra, taught before, upon the stock, And so teaching the consecration through mantra to merchants,
Going out to greet him, he said, “Welcome, elder, welcome.”
‘My mind is not dull,’ ‘I am handsome,’ and ‘I am powerful.’
Wherever they stand, or wherever they sit, Or wherever those heroes makes their bed,
Yet please engender love and compassion,
used their respective complexions and powers to bathe Vulture Peak Mountain in bright light,
“You should accept the Vajra Holder!
is signlessness as a gateway to liberation.
They say that those in my retinue have many desires, and that their desires are great.
‘Homage to Fierce Great Anger. Kill, kill! Culu, culu! Remain, remain! Bind, bind! Bewilder, bewilder! Strike to kill, strike! Hūṁ phaṭ!’
How should they cultivate the four applications of mindfulness?
May the names of the tathāgatas be heard!
“Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings practice their generosity,
Lamp of the Light King,
And your extensive spiritual teachings that lead to immortality Make themselves heard throughout the whole reach of space.
That is the sūtra that has been taught in this world For a long time by previous masters of the world.
Ānanda, I did not abandon any sentient being in any way, and so
In this way, divine princes, great bodhisattva beings, from the time when they first begin to set their mind on enlightenment, should abide in the transcendent perfection of wisdom because it cannot be heard and it cannot be expressed.”
Such is the bodhisattvas’ abundant contemplation of dependent origination.
The strength of all the gods in Delighting in Emanations is the same as the strength of one of the kings of the gods in Supreme Emanations.
so it goes without saying that hearers and solitary buddhas do not possess such diligence.
The monastic community of this bodhisattva who has attained enlightenment will be estimable,
This is the perfection of strength.
Śāradvatī­putra, if great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom
thus their unsurpassable and complete buddhahood becomes certain.
virtuous or non-virtuous, specified or non-specified, contaminated or uncontaminated, mundane or supramundane, conditioned or unconditioned,
Pressing his palms together,
“Friends, when the gods of the blue class gave us four stone alms bowls,
Divine son, although one indeed makes the exaggerated claim,
So too one can practice with a paṭaha drum, a mardala drum, a lute, and so forth.
Although you act harmoniously in accord with worldly law, You are in no way attracted to the world.
Because it eliminates all bad qualities, accomplishes all good qualities, and brings liberation to all beings.
They are the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of ignorance concerning the composite, the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of ignorance concerning teaching the composite,
They had perfected the samādhi of stainless light. They had perfected the samādhi of bright, stainless light.
Having found relief, he gives relief to others;
“Noble sons, go ahead if you think it is the right time. But, lest those living beings become mad and intoxicated,
they will encourage, secure, and establish sentient beings, one hundred billion trillion in number, in the transcendent perfection of perseverance.
That was filled with a variety of beautiful flowers And attended by flocks of varieties of birds. {3}
those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage will more swiftly attain final nirvāṇa by means of the pristine cognition of genuinely perfect buddhahood,
Similarly, Śāradvatī­putra, when persons who follow the vehicle of the bodhisattvas, even after dispensing generosity, and similarly maintaining their ethical discipline, cultivating tolerance, undertaking perseverance, achieving meditative concentration, and cultivating wisdom over many eons,
In that cool grove of trees
foremost,
For what reason has there been This emission of a vast light ray? {52}
had perfectly attained all the powers of the mind,
This, Maitreya, is how the bodhisattva mahāsattvas have excellent loving kindness.
There they should make the following resolve: ‘The thus-gone ones undertook ascetic practices in order to remedy the afflictions. So now, while I stay at this temple, I will strive by all means to eliminate the afflictions.’
The children, hearing of these kinds of carts, Become eager and make haste.
There is only one yāna; there is no second, And there is never in the world a third. {54}
In the same way there is no difference between beings But there are those who become tathāgatas because of their aspirations.
“Oh my! Should I first take refuge and adopt the precepts or go forth?”
Is the essence of innate joy.
not to gain anything, not to garner respect, not to prolong their lives, not for clothing, not for food, not for bedding or cushions, not to be cured of an ailment, and not for medicines.
In this way, son of noble family, the bodhisattva great beings who genuinely uphold the component of discipline will not end up in these four dangers.
all things are evanescent,
Some scattered excellent bracelets, Some scattered armlets inset with jewels,
You should absorb yourself in contemplation in such a way that the thirty-seven aids to enlightenment are manifest without deviation toward any convictions.
When they heard this teaching, five hundred bodhisattvas within the gathering gained acceptance of the non-arising of phenomena.
Like a fire, he was shining.
His sons who have deluded perception praise their father, saying, ‘Father, you have returned happily and safely. Heal us!’ but they do not drink the medicine.
“Maitreya, how do such bodhisattva mahāsattvas have skill in their methods?
It is not due to a combination of one’s own skill and another’s skill.
That is the origin of suffering.
In the south, one should draw A yellow sword, inlaid with a jewel.
one burns even the five inexpiable actions.
and if they engage in the same manner with feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness,
Blessed One, please teach the sūtra called The King of the Array of All Dharma Qualities!
(23) Their lips are red like the balsam fruit. (24) Their mouth is compact.
unlike them, they exclusively strive for and maintain unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
All the beings who have appeared in the past Who have cherished their own bodies,
On their limbs these sources of wealth are adorned with flower garlands;
meritorious deeds originating from generosity, meritorious deeds originating from ethical discipline and meditation, merits endowed with service, merits endowed with skillful means,
The gatekeeper went before King Śuddhodana with folded hands and said,
They are in a state of transgression and will be deprived of any happiness of the god and human realms.
Bodhisattvas who possess continuous diligence will give up all harmful, negative, and unvirtuous factors that present obstacles to the path of awakening.
They will not deviate from recollecting the Buddha.
“What? Your wet nurse or the woman who gave birth to you?”
One of his arhat wards entered into meditation to find out where his preceptor had been reborn and
The seventh great merit results in becoming Vaśavartin, the king of gods.
“Young man, the sound of those words was heard in all the worlds in the trichiliocosm.
owing to the emptiness of inherent existence,
(51) Their body hairs are bluish black. (52) Their body hairs are clean. (53) Their eyes are wide.
“Venerable Lord! Furthermore, when great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom are engaged in the investigation of these phenomena,
I will now explain how the bodhisattva great beings can attain all these particular qualities as well as others.”
“These two processes are respectively said to follow and reverse the sequence in which the twelve links of dependent origination arise.
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, if great bodhisattva beings who abide in the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
In this regard, Su­bhūti, no one will attain emancipation by means of this vehicle.
Ānanda! There are buddhafields that accomplish the buddha-work by means of bodhisattvas, those that do so by means of lights, those that do so by means of the tree of enlightenment, those that do so by means of the physical beauty and the marks of the Tathāgata, those that do so by means of religious robes, those that do so by means of food, those that do so by means of water, those that do so by means of gardens, those that do so by means of palaces, those that do so by means of mansions, those that do so by means of magical incarnations, those that do so by means of empty space, and those that do so by means of lights in the sky. Why is it so, Ānanda? Because by these various means, living beings become disciplined.
and who are alive at present, even now teaching the sacred doctrine,
“Your voice has all the qualities of pure speech. Your beautiful voice is a gentle lion’s roar.
This completes the sixteenth chapter from “The Transcendent Perfection of Wisdom in Ten Thousand Lines,” entitled “Conceptual Notions.”
Such are the faces of the approaching army.
“Thus when they experience the feeling of pleasure, it is unaccompanied, it is not accompanied by experiences.
Death, bondage, or fear—
Su­bhūti, because the transcendent perfections of ethical discipline, and so on, up to and including the transcendent perfection of wisdom, are not entities,
For a hundred and eighty billion eons,
These childish beings fall, like moths flying into the candle flame.
the tendons in their bodies will shrink.
One should not listen to them. One should not retain them.
who wish actually to behold the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas
they do not steal that which is not given,
In that way they will see the buddhas in their bodies, With their śrāvakas and other offspring of the buddhas, The bodhisattvas who are dwelling alone, And those teaching the Dharma among crowds.
Devi Sarasvatī came from his canines,
the brahmins and householders without particular devotion toward the Buddha’s teachings
That’s why my body has become cold.
Merely by this single method of exquisite pleasure,
all mountain ranges and forests as well as the central mountain,
none that are arising,
the monks went to make their bed in forests and at the foot of trees;
‘O! You are a thief! A fool! An idiot! A robber!’
undiminished mindfulness; undiminished absorption;
Sixty-four thousand Kumbhāṇḍa pretapūtanas Dwell in the south And perpetrate harm Against those who appear there.
Whoever does so will become a great master of riches.
“They each arranged their own throne And taught upon it this very sūtra,
Similarly, they achieve and maintain the mind that is endowed with loving kindness, its volition permeating a single direction of space because it is vast, extensive, non-dual, immeasurable, free from enmity, free from harm, without rivalry, perfected, and well-cultivated.
The Blessed One said, “No, son of noble family, it will not.
“The buddhas have the characteristic of space,
“If you ask what are the ‘eighty minor marks,’ they are as follows:
Those who commit this transcendent perfection of wisdom to writing
They made offerings of flowers, incense, garlands, ointments, lamps, parasols, victory banners, flags, monastic robes, ornaments, garments, praises, songs, and cymbal music.
bereft of any false dharmas.
What do I see? I see gods.
shelter to the homeless,
Because they might be able to end up in the realm of Brahmā, but still will be left with afflictions.
And aspires to purity, even if he be bedecked in jewelry, That is a brahmin, an ascetic, a monk.
he accomplished supreme, perfect enlightenment.
the Teacher then pronounced these verses:
“The intense hardship That I now intend to engage in Will consist of austerities, discipline, and adversities That no god or human can perform.
And here and there they will hear This unsurpassable sūtra. {50}
From each pore of the Sugata There shone hundreds of thousands of light rays
“As an analogy, a lotus grows in water,
Even though they may have undertaken perseverance, they have not conceptualized it.
It is like a boat for those crossing to the opposite shore.
Hence, the Thus-Gone One has no preference for any phenomenon at all.”
“Blessed One, the Tathāgata’s skillful means and methods that bring beings to spiritual maturity are many.
their insight will not diminish,
He was honored as the merchant among merchants because he demonstrated the priority of the Dharma.
If you ask why, Su­bhūti, it is because the [great bodhisattva beings] who act accordingly are engaged in perfection.
I should attain omniscience,
Su­bhūti, that which confines all things by the limits of the past and the limits of the future is definitively calm and excellent.
you may wonder how bodhisattvas pacify the torments of affliction.
Wherever that may be, If on a day of fasting One mixes this with milk, and drinks it
Venerate this guide of humankind,
he taught Saṅgharakṣita how Dharma practitioners conduct themselves and made him recite the Four Āgamas.
Mañjuśrī, when the bodhisattva follows the wrong way, he follows the way to attain the qualities of the Buddha.
This bodhisattva will attain the extrasensory powers, and that one will not.
of the meditation of signlessness, consummated in the purification of all compounded things;
It is a recitation that eliminates desire, anger, stupidity, and the sufferings of saṃsāra.
and who wish to enter into the deathless expanse—all of these should train in this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom.
he is free from all characteristics;
“In that way it has been taught that this, Which is preeminent, has the most excellent merit.
Moreover, they also establish others in the same training.
“Su­bhūti, just as a man who has committed an inexpiable crime
May all illnesses from wind, bile, Phlegm, and their combination Be quelled, And may I be safe From all perils and misfortunes! Svāhā!
“So this is what the renunciants who come to live here in Rājagṛha are like.
This is the fruit of sloth.
they encouraged Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī to take on this task.
And those who devote to this teaching of the Dharma their tolerance, their zeal, their intelligence, their discernment, their vision, and their aspirations,
A homa offering, mantra recitation,
Thus, bodhisattvas are objects of worship.
One should enclose quicksilver inside a cowrie shell and place it in one’s mouth.
during which time they chose a name for the girl.
may these roots of virtue sharpen my intellect.’“
When he came I committed the evil action of having him slain, And because of his death I am going to fall down into hell. {v}
Together with King Glorious Splendor, the two beings then went before the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha King of the Golden-Hued Lion’s Play.
That is called great loving kindness.
the Bhagavān has praised the skill in methods of the tathāgatas,
The sage Asita went before King Śuddhodana and told him,
son, daughter, family, kinsmen, relatives, kindred, wife, and so on,
“What is the knowledge of the various rebirths of beings? It is the knowledge of the different states of the five kinds of existence.
If so, reverend, what then has caused you to smile?
And were at that time to guide The bhikṣus who are my śrāvakas
“Similarly, the transcendence of fundamental ignorance is always without fear,
After speaking these lines, the Bhagavān arose from his seat.
Thus, the inaction and non-involvement of all things is the entrance into nonduality.”
and also gives away their own body, spouse, sons, and daughters as offerings.
It is for these reasons, Su­bhūti, that this supreme vehicle, the Great Vehicle, accommodates countless, innumerable, and limitless sentient beings.”
He had a thousand sons, and five hundred daughters.
The Blessed One replied to Senior Ānanda as follows:
“There he heard the sound of the wailing Of many millions of devas in the sky.
If this mantra is written on a leaf and placed by the door, the leprosy will not come.
were it too assiduous they would become stressed,
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, actualize the extrasensory power of realizing the cessation of contaminants,
Thinking, ‘I should exclusively dispense generosity on a large scale toward all sentient beings!’
Finally, they are fearless due to their perfect mastery in never straying from the omniscient mind and avoiding the influence of other vehicles while accomplishing the true purpose of all beings.
the inconceivably numerous words of nonmovement concerning teaching the composite, the inconceivably numerous words of nonmovement concerning the kleśas,
A monk of ten years may allow going forth, may grant ordination,
They possessed a mind with great tolerance and without animosity for any sentient being.
Similarly, the emptiness of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness is not consciousness [and the other aggregates].
“Consider, noble son, how the fragrance of the lotus permeates the place where it grows.
“King Śrīghoṣa, who was keeping the eight poṣadha vows, was in the middle of his harem of queens, with his court before him, seated on the roof of his palace.
“What is joyful conduct? It is the contemplation of virtuous qualities.
During the third week,
If you remain ignorant of amorous passion And fail to enjoy these young girls, who have come of their own will.”
if, neither conquering ignorance and the craving for existence, nor producing knowledge and liberation,
he proceeded to the seat of awakening where the Bodhisattva was sitting. As a way to venerate the Bodhisattva, he sheltered the entire area with a single jewel parasol.
Mañjuśrī, attaining acceptance is not to involve oneself in mundane things.
Then one should anoint him as before.
The ḍāka is the moon disk,
The Blessed One asked, “Śāradvatī­putra, are you inspired to say that?”
“Son of a self-immolator, even that view you hold, which views all forms of self as unable to endure, does not itself endure.”
their teaching knows no limit, and is assimilated as realization.
It is having a mind like a mountain. It is being unshakable.
“ ‘Then I developed the intention That I would provide the food for the bhikṣu,
If, in turn, that merit were multiplied by ten inexpressibly many times then that would be enough to manifest the hair between the eyebrows, which is more radiant and delightful than a thousand stainless full moons.
hose who cultivate with profound wisdom The eloquently taught truths of the noble ones And consider giving away even their bodies Never encounter the eight perils.
“Evil one, today you will be terrified by the Bodhisattva, Like a jackal by a lion.
Such was the result of the words spoken by the One Who Always Speaks the Truth.
What is the root of the false concept?
“Su­bhūti! The transcendent perfection of wisdom gives rise to the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas, and it instructs them.
The sixteen uncontrolled things, The eighteen elements, And the twenty-five pains I eliminated while sitting at the center of the earth.
Those of us who could not bear this piled wood, straw, and dried dung and set fire to the monastery,
"བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་གཟི་བརྗིད་དང་རྫུ་འཕྲུལ་གྱི་མཐུས་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་སེམས་དཔའ་ཆེན་པོ་དང་། ཉན་ཐོས་ཆེན་པོ་དང་། ལྷ་དང་། ཀླུ་དང་། གནོད་སྦྱིན་དང་། དྲི་ཟ་དང་། ལྷ་མ་ཡིན་དང་། ནམ་མཁའ་ལྡིང་<tBlessed One, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas, the great śrāvakas, gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas, kings, ministers, brahmins, householders, monks, nuns, and male and female lay vow holders have gathered here in great numbers through the strength of the Tathāgata’s majesty and supernatural powers.”
The space element performs the function of not obstructing the seed.
“Young man, in the past, uncountable, vast, immeasurable, inconceivable, innumerable countless eons ago,
On the relative level, the power‌s are a gateway to conquering all disturbing emotions.
Having spoken thus, the gods approached the Bodhisattva, strewing him with divine flowers.
thoroughly cultivate these attributes owing to all the [aforementioned] aspects of emptiness.
will become denizens of the hells, animals, or individuals frequenting the world of Yama, the Lord of Death.
Similarly, it has not been revealed so that the eyes might be grasped or not grasped.
“Thousands of millions of parasol standards Made of the seven precious materials are erected.
Sunanda therefore asked the Blessed One,
and does not hold negative views.
cannot be turned back from unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment by the evil Māra.
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of the individual concerning purification. Those are the four.
These are called indications.
Those who attack the dharmabhāṇaka,
“Here are many flowers, such as jasmine, blue lotuses, coral jasmine, and campakas, And fragrant garlands with masses of fine blossoms.
eight were nursemaids,
They are like a hallucination that has come about through false thinking.
stealing that which has been offered to the local saṅgha or the saṅgha of the four directions, or
Yet the thus-gone ones do not err and do not express themselves in meaningless ways.
And then when they are within their last bodies They will attain this supreme enlightenment.
“ ‘Give the precious gift of the supreme Dharma And always maintain patience.
majesty of body, and their minds will be radiant.
But always bring benefit and maintain the Dharma, Such people are explained as having the first patience. {1}
(40) The pores of their bodies all emit a pleasant odor. (41) Their mouth is fragrant.
searching for food, Here and there crying in pain and weeping.
the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Prabhūtaratna could be seen, his whole body withered, seated cross-legged and upright on a lion throne as if he was in meditation.
With miraculous birth their consciousness will be free of dullness, and when their consciousness is free of dullness they will recollect the succession of their lives.
You array the wealth of a noble one as you please.
Is it physical or mental?
Those who leave the mundane in this way are called “truly renunciant.”
They provide medicine to the ill, food and drink to those suffering from starvation and thirst, and a shelter for those who are exposed to winds, storms, and the sun.
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva Gadgadasvara teaches this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma to beings, teaching some in the form of an asura, some in the form of a garuḍa, some in the form of a kinnara, and to some in the form of a mahoraga.
hear the Dharma from the mouth of this holy man and, enticed by the perfume of the virtues of the buddha qualities, proceed to conceive the spirit of enlightenment.
he perfected millions of qualities.
perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness,
“Venerable Lord! This transcendent perfection of wisdom is the infinite transcendent perfection.”
The bound person will then become free from his bondage.
“Venerable, your faculties are clear and your complexion lustrous.
As soon as the Bhagavān had taught this foundation, this understanding of the Dharma, to those bodhisattvas,
There is the meditative stability named Pure Sanctuary.
“Similarly, emptiness is not something other than the eyes; nor are the eyes something other than emptiness.
In a movement like a great elephant in rut, The Bodhisattva grabbed hold of the great elephant with his big toe
They illumine the infinite and endless world realms of the ten directions with continuous garlands of lightning that flash in boundless colors.
If someone, at the time when the sacred Dharma is degenerating,
and, because he has no wishes, he does not destroy compounded things.
They will know the great secret of the supreme beings And they will soon be in meditation upon it.
What deity has manifested this power?
They notice certain beings who are involved in negative acts with body, speech, and mind.
Seeking to listen is a gateway to the light of the Dharma, for it enables one to investigate the Dharma precisely and in the correct manner.
produced two streams of cool and warm water to rinse the Bodhisattva’s body.
Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with insight will search for spiritual teachers,
or an invalid who has been delivered from all his ills,
Even those who do so once with a distracted mind— They will all of them attain enlightenment. {96}
Awakening is the nature of the realm of phenomena, yet that nature cannot truly realize that nature.
Similarly, they neither associate the ears, the nose, the tongue, the body, and the mental faculty with the limit of future time, nor do they disassociate them therefrom.
Bodhisattva Maitreya asked:
‘All phenomena are like the moon on water, Illusions, bubbles, mirages, and lightning. {2}
The whole of Śrāvastī is your field and fatherland, so seek out alms and live on them.”
“The bhikṣu was gentle and mild, Honored by a hundred thousand beings,
Such is the bodhisattvas’ diligence that does not deprecate.
that assembly were bodhisattva mahāsattvas and śrāvakas, the lord of devas,
The birds were joyful and content, and they each sang happily.
Beginning their search, they asked, “Who shall we ask to come?”
This, Śāradvatī­putra, is called the armor of the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, offered by Great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
They are like the children in the parable who come out of the burning house because of their longing for a goat-drawn cart.
Sitting down, he crossed his legs, held his body erect, and rested in mindfulness.
owing, Venerable Lord, to the fact that an illusory person has no concepts,
With control of their own minds they gain control of all phenomena.
As they arrive, they roar like bulls.
Gods, thus can one discern the aspiration of the tathāgatas of the past and be in perfect agreement with it.”
Unproduced and non-arising,
Therefore, son of noble family, in a distant future the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, perfect Buddha Amitābha will also pass into nirvāṇa.
The description of its benefits even in as many eons As there are grains of sand in the Ganges. {17}
I answer him by saying, ‘An afterlife neither exists nor does it not exist.’
Is the number of sand grains In sixty Ganges Rivers.
in the same way, Śāradvatī­putra, great bodhisattva beings perceive all things distinctly but do not become fixated on all things as entities.
mastery of aspirations, as one displays complete awakening at whichever time and place it may be desired;
Fulfill your solemn vow, you with the dynamic power of truth!
just as the claws and fangs of the four noble truths were extremely sharp.
Dwell in the forest, avoiding crowds, And always meditate with a loving mind. {2}
Waiting until midnight, With mustard seeds placed on the top of her head, Inspired by Brahmā, she should recite, ‘What was manifested by Brahmā.’
takes a seat on the Dharma throne, and teaches the Dharma.
“ ‘Agitated by the evil of sensory pleasures, I set forth in the pleasurable company of my wives,
Su­bhūti, (1) great bodhisattva beings imbued with renunciation, who dwell in solitude, maintaining detachment and remaining in a state of cessation, should cultivate the support for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of resolution with the formative force of exertion.
Mundane things are conditioned, and since anything that is conditioned is impermanent,
When practicing the transcendent perfection of generosity [and so forth],
the swoop of a swan.
Gentle one, explain to me today The reason why you came here. {iv}
As counteraction to interferences devised by kākhordas or vetāḍas, a man or a woman who has fasted for a single day and night and been ritually cleansed and well adorned should strew the ground with flower petals, scent it with various fragrances, light a fire from khadira and jujube woods, and scatter seeds throughout the four directions. The seeds should also be scattered into the fire.
In perfect pursuit of the welfare of others, they engage in the many preliminary practices for accomplishing merit and wisdom.
he felt satisfied and happy, and he cheerfully rejoiced.
He then spoke a verse of the Blessed One’s:
His final request to him was to serve as the monk who inquires into confidential matters.
But you are a religious person who has practiced a lot of Dharma.
Their defilements have ceased. They have no kleśas.
“Quick, go get beautiful nāga flowers, fine and sweet-smelling cloths, pearl necklaces, Ornaments and bracelets, powders, and our finest incense.
Oh! Oh! You make all those beings Happy, healthy, and reach nirvāṇa. {xxi}
Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is empty.”
“To women, however, instead of the crown empowerment,
The Buddha then said to the venerable Aniruddha,
and in the same vein, are [the other sense organs], up to and including the mental faculty, free from contaminants and not included within the three world systems, owing to the emptiness of inherent existence?
The lord Black Acala deeply kissed and firmly embraced Hatred Vajrī, and said:
When practicing generosity by offering perfumes, fragrant powders, and ointments,
His beloved kinfolk and retinue abandoned him, their faces cast down, while he stood aside and brooded.
“Young man, you should train by thinking, ‘I will engage in completely pure conduct of speech in that way.’
Crowned with Amoghasiddhi.
But in order to make all sentient beings happy,
Noble ones, the Tathāgata says to beings with various aspirations, few roots of merit, and many kleśas,
Therefore, divine son, through such a method a bodhisattva great being with disturbing emotions can awaken,
“Chanda, I am miserable, for I had been showed a treasure. Yet now, since it is like my eyes have been gouged, restore my sight!
and similarly, when they establish, cognize, and become fixated on the notion that the eyes are non-entities;
Because it is the meditation on impermanence, suffering, and emptiness by those who have the higher motivation of desiring to attain nirvāṇa.
“Maud­galyā­yana, to the east, beyond as many worlds as there are grains of sand in the river Gaṅgā,
One is permitted to observe the conduct of wearing the six adornments.
Venerable Lord! What will be the essential nature of the minds of those great bodhisattva beings who have conviction in and concur with this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom?
and his possessions had dwindled, prompting the thought,
“They know the particular sūtra with the definitive meaning, Such as the Sugata’s teaching on emptiness.
So now you should absorb it, preserve it, and cause it to be retold.
Similarly, are [the other non-existent sense objects], up to and including non-existent mental phenomena, unattached to non-existent mental phenomena [and the rest]?
“The thus-gone ones feel great compassion for sentient beings since all phenomena are devoid of location and yet sentient beings believe that they are present at locations.
“Thus, noble sons, the bodhisattva does not destroy compounded things and does not rest in the uncompounded,
“Su­bhūti, can unconditioned phenomena then be eradicated?”
This wise one, with insight into ultimate reality, Gazed at the supreme tree of awakening for seven nights.
“ ‘You are the refuge for those beings reborn in the lower realms, And for beings who are falling into the great Avīci hell.
“King Śuddhodana belongs to a royal family.
“Previously I made a wholesome act of giving; It was an unstinting act, and you are my witness.
‘You can take from my branches but not my leaves,’ or
They take as pure that which is not pure. “However, if I now attain mastery in the prescribed practices and austerities, all the opposing views will become suppressed.
To the single-minded beings who have assembled, And to the bhikṣus and bhikṣunīs.
do you think, Su­bhūti, that this man would be able to rise from his bed unaided?
and this is the time to rest inwardly.
“May your daughter be given to my son!”
With the aggregate of absorption, this mind does not dwell anywhere.
He was lauded by the nāga king Kālika, and he accepted a bundle of auspicious golden-colored kūśa grass from a grassmonger.
Mañjuśrī, it is good that you think to ask the Tathāgata about this matter.
On the relative level, in order to individually discriminate the wisdoms of the buddhas, the bodhisattva great beings meditate on the truths without meditating.
“Dṛḍhabala was extremely pleased, And, accompanied by one billion six hundred million beings,
Similarly, ‘I identify with the fruit of entering the stream.
The Blessed One replied, “Mahauṣadhi, suppose some poor person were to find a precious, wish-fulfilling jewel.
If a noble son or daughter writes this Dharma teaching down, commissions it to be written, memorizes it,
Substances such as poison, blood, and black mustard seeds Should be gradually known.
‘The thus-gone ones are profound and hard to fathom,
Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the applications of mindfulness are one thing, and that illusions are another?
so will they be, precisely and without any difference, for the Blessed One, the thus-gone Supra­tiṣṭhita­guṇa­maṇi­kūṭa­rāja.
The mantra holders show That anyone who transgresses Mantras, medicines, or incantations Is defeated.
“In the expanse of space, visualize the letter āḥ, And the first moon, the letter hūṃ Blazing with great light.
They will adopt the body that they take on and which they will experience in keeping with karmic conditions and according to their particular state of life.
and others shed tears, wiping their faces with their garments.
Just as in the case of the fruit of entering the stream,
The transcendent perfection of wisdom, and similarly, the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, the transcendent perfection of perseverance, the transcendent perfection of tolerance, the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, and the transcendent perfection of generosity are all absolutely void.
The gods who have great magical powers Spoke to the One with Elongated Eyes like a Blooming Lotus:
because they do not apprehend anything at all, they do not condition anything at all.
the Bhagavat said to the youthful Mañjuśrī:
This is called the knowledge that is definitive.
meditate on it with unadulterated meditation,
their fruits are conceived—in such buddhafields, those bodhisattvas will attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment,
nor is it unrevealed;
So what knowledgeable person would feel any desire with respect to objects that are like a dream?’
Yet how can eating solid foods and leading a comfortable life be of any help? What an ignorant and childish man!
He is going to sit upon the lion throne of the Dharma.’
And so it is that boys and girls are born when those three circumstances are present.
so is the venerable Su­bhūti unimpeded with respect to the sacred doctrine.
All those beings, having heard those words from the air, while remaining in their worlds
Maudgalyāyana, say every being in every universe had the wish to awaken to complete buddhahood and
These are called uncommon phenomena.
Prepare chariots for the girls.
So if bodhisattvas apprehend some phenomenon or the essential nature of some phenomenon, they disappoint the thus-gone ones, the foe-destroyers, the completely perfect buddhas.
The mind that has no nature of its own Has names-and-form with that characteristic. {13}
Divine son, relatively, all phenomena continuously emerge
he should train himself by thinking,
“Similarly, they should be attentive to the notions that physical forms are calm and void.
Hasn’t he robbed us of our livelihood?
Similarly, within the wilderness of cyclic existence bodhisattvas will, as great caravan leaders, make sentient beings who are tormented by roaming through the afflictions journey along happily and free from weariness.
“He is an immaculate light, free of stains, The sunlight of wisdom free of darkness,
Sarva­tathāgatābhiṣiktā (She Who Was Empowered by All Tathāgatas)
They should not, in an apprehending manner, dwell on the notion that ‘I, having attained manifestly perfect buddhahood with respect to all things and in all ways, should renounce all afflicted mental states and involuntary reincarnation through propensities.’
“They who are focused on gain and honor Will speak in this way concerning us:
May you become skilled in the formation of syllables!
The guardians, with their pure lotus-like hands, then lifted up the supreme horse;
Like Mount Sumeru, he was unshakable.
Venerable Lord! How do great bodhisattva beings, after abiding in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, acquire the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline?
“Have you properly lived the holy life?”
Noble son, think of a jewel that has not been polished and another jewel that has—both are jewels and both are categorized as jewels.
“I never felt any reluctance to give away The loveliest things that gave me pleasure.
They offer large quantities of excellent gifts with delight, joy, and elation.
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, even omniscience is non-existent and non-apprehensible.
In the same way, the heroes, while in this world, Will smell the divine flowers that are above, Which are the coral tree, the spider lily, And the night-flowering jasmine flowers.
reached unexcelled, perfect and complete awakening, attaining the threefold knowledge.
for those fighting against Māra, like armor;
“O gods! The Elder Su­bhūti does not emulate physical forms. He does not emulate the real nature of physical forms.
May all living beings come to have miraculous powers just like those of the noble Licchavi Vimalakīrti!
Consciousness itself is voidness.
The ocean nāgas, in the guise of brahmins and householders, then gathered there and he taught them the Dharma.
The garuḍas that live at the ocean’s shore Came, having transformed into the appearance of brahmins.
He then gave the girl the letter.
Likewise, all buddhas are a single buddha.
Similarly, for the bodhisattvas, when all the afflictions entirely disappear that time is referred to as the exhaustion of defilement.
The one with great wisdom, the learned one, The dharmabhāṇaka,
A light of merit has certainly appeared!
How so? They recollect that the Thus-Gone One has taught,
Your heart is thumping and your every limb is shaking.
it quaked, quaked strongly, and quaked intensely;
“You may wonder, noble son, how bodhisattvas remain in the application of mindfulness with respect to wealth, honor, fame, renown, and praise.
The gods bestrew you with them, yet they are not mixed together.
Flocks of birds came to the palace from the Himālayan mountains, the king of mountain ranges. There were pattraguptas, parrots, mynas, cuckoos, swans, curlews, peacocks, wild geese, painted snipes, nightingales, pheasants, and many others. The birds had beautiful and delightful wings in many colors and sang in melodious sounds.
When he began to search among the denizens of hell,
What are these three?
Su­bhūti, for these reasons this supreme vehicle, the Great Vehicle, too, accommodates countless, innumerable sentient beings.
that is to say, the vehicle of the śrāvakas, the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas, and the vehicle of the genuinely perfect buddhas have been extensively taught.
This aspiration that you repeatedly voiced Is now fulfilled, and you will liberate all beings!
likewise, they do not consider whether feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness have aspirations or are without aspirations.
knowing that the attendants of the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas had all arrived,
and therefore have gained miraculous powers.
‘I will bring those beings to the stage of forbearance.
“That restraint of the mind through which wise ones Do not associate with evil people and those with wrong views,
“Those who are malicious toward each other Will not be protected by correct conduct, or by learning.
“Senior Śāradvatī­putra, I do not hold that non-arising things arise.”
Just as the cord, cut and burned, Was restored once more,
Some made the chains on their hips shake and twinkle.
Su­saṃ­prasthita,
Sitting on their respective lotus anther seats, they were absorbed in the meditative concentration of brave progression.
I beg you to resound like a lion, O You of Drum-like Voice!”
“What is speaking little? It is the attainment of śamatha.
“He is firm with abundant knowledge, diligent and detached;
However, it is an even greater wonder if, even for just a moment,
“Beyond that pore there is the pore named Sūryaprabha, in which many millions of trillions of bodhisattvas dwell.
the snakes, the abuse hurled at them, the bad that befalls them, or the
The preceptor then says: “This is the procedure.”
He is not low, nor middling, nor high.
You are the protector who grants fearlessness to beings.
He has great love, great compassion, and great joy, and is possessed of a noble mind by virtue of its equanimity.
It can be conceived of as being like the essence of rice.
When grasping ceases, there is the cessation of becoming.
will once again be reborn and again they will proceed from great hells to great hells.
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who possess such attributes, indications, and signs are revealed to be irreversible.
Similarly, the nāga king Apalāla, Palms together, bowed to the supreme individual
Dejected, with his head hung low, he wrote on the ground with a stick, “He has gone beyond my range!”
Hārītī with her children and retinue of servants
And this is known By all the beings in the ten directions. {219}
Homage to the seven perfectly and completely awakened buddhas, along with their śrāvakas—those who have perfectly gone, and those who have perfectly entered!
These childish beings are tied up and run in circles, like dogs kept on a leash.
that is counted as tantamount to stealing, no matter how much he has stolen,
Should draw a beautiful maṇḍala.
The prince then smiled, laughed, and spoke these verses to his maternal aunt:
The thus-gone ones know no forgetfulness, their faculties are flawless, and their minds are free of any disturbance.
And how is the world of Brahmā?
“I have been a supreme royal son, so rich in power! I have been a universal monarch, ruling over the four continents.
Svastika, if it were possible to hand awakening to another being By making awakening into a lump of alms food, I would surely grant this to everyone! When I attain awakening, you should know that I will distribute immortality.
the bull among men,
and on that account are no longer subject to rebirth, while they also correctly introduce, secure, and establish others in these meditative concentrations, immeasurable aspirations, and formless absorptions,
Lose their body hair, and be very weak.
Śāriputra, at that time, the bhagavān tathāgata Padmaprabha will have a realm named Virajā,
“Mañjuśrī, that emanated great Brahmā looks upon all the classes of gods, as far as the class of the gods of the Four Great Kings.
He will discover the Dharma That will illuminate beings.”
and he went to see Śakra, lord of the gods.
“Here those enduring deceptions of mine Have at long last ended in destruction.
Similarly, ‘I possess the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of both external and internal phenomena,
In those two hundred thousand million buddha realms there were no villages, towns, market towns, districts, countries, or capitals.
“Since the mind is the cause for the arising of wisdom,
He is neither true nor false,
Su­bhūti, it is because the emptiness of internal phenomena never exists and is non-apprehensible. This being the case, how could they possibly come or go?
In sight of all the bodhisattvas, he turned his face upward and was gone, and they saw him no more.
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who train in this signlessness
and accompanied by the goddess Vasudharā. He is of golden color,
in the same vein, those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage will have auspicious dreams of this type
“Reverend Śāriputra, do not say that the buddhafield of the Tathāgata is impure.
Because ultimately they are utterly unarisen.
seventy-two thousand gods gained the immaculate and stainless Dharma eye with regard to phenomena.
Possessing every wealth, rich in qualities,
Oṁ, you with contorted face, when breaking the enemy’s army, break, break! Immobilize, immobilize! Bind such and such together with his army with a noose, bind! Hūṁ phaṭ! Khaḥ gaḥ, ha hā, hi hī, pheṁ pheṁ! Oṁ, Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ!’
Sanction for the begging bowl.
“ ‘May all the beings in the three existences, The devas and the humans,
Abiding therein, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom
The eyes do not turn yellow, nor is their vision distorted. When the person sees the forms of tathāgatas, confidence and faith arise.
for ignorance is undefined, incalculable, and beyond the sphere of thought.
When birth ceases, old age, death, grief, lamentation, pain, despair, and turmoil also cease
The world with its gods, humans, and antigods cannot turn them away from unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment.
Then the great sage Asita returned to his own abode by magically flying through the air.
He did not consider that understanding to be inside physical forms, nor inside feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, or consciousness.
He has no protection, refuge, or sanctuary, and nowhere to go.”
If stūpas were made from precious divine gold for tathāgatas, arhats, and samyaksaṃbuddhas equal in number to atoms, and if in one day they were all filled with their relics, the result ripening from that would only equal the result that ripens from one syllable of the six-syllable mahāvidyā, which has inconceivable qualities and brings liberation.
Seeing the hosts of gods, suspended in space calling out, “Buddha!”
Then they will enjoy the betel.
Replete with his treasures A foremost teacher, a lord of wealth,
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Have no fear of falling into unfortunate existences,
it quaked, quaked strongly, and quaked intensely;
In that regard, the expression ‘endowed with a girth like the banyan tree’ means that the width of his body is proportionate to its length, and its length is proportionate to its width. That is designated as a ‘girth like the banyan tree.’
In the village of Kāṣṭhavāṭa,
and saw they would be captivated by disciples.
They are not aware that the house is burning, they have not understood it, do not know it, have not realized it, and
“If these great bodhisattvas do not adjourn before noontime, when are they going to eat?”
Enlightenment abides at the reality-limit.
and they teach the perfection of wisdom.
Thus, the disciples can never appreciate those qualities.
What good can come from the death of the serene youth Kolita?
Self-awareness‌ is secret in the wisdom-gnosis initiation.
Bhagavān, since that time until today more than forty years have passed.
After hearing the Dharma, they provided visiting monks and wanderer monks with all the supplies they needed.
Eight hundred children, headed by Chanda, have been born to the servants.
when [the other transcendent perfections], up to and including wisdom, are dedicated toward omniscience in a non-dual manner,
The thought then occurred to him, “When there is no existence, birth does not take place.
Those bodhisattvas then asked the Licchavi Vimalakīrti,
There were colors of blue, yellow, red, white, violet, crystal, and silver,
Su­bhūti, when certain great bodhisattva beings, lacking the transcendent perfection of wisdom, over eons equal in number to the sands of the River Ganges, offer their generosity, maintain their ethical discipline, practice tolerance, cultivate perseverance, become equipoised in meditative concentration, and cultivate wisdom, do you think that they would generate many merits on this basis?
was seven hundred and sixty thousand million years.
they are fixed in the six places.
Venerable Lord! If all things are empty of inherent existence,
The incantation disclosed by Gautama Is like a razor blade.
Su­bhūti, it is impossible that great bodhisattva beings, who have first begun to set their mind on enlightenment, after entering upon the unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment with higher aspiration, should adopt the ways of the ten non-virtuous actions!”
In this way, Su­bhūti, do great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline, acquire the transcendent perfection of perseverance.
Bhagavān, what qualities will a bodhisattva who comprehends, upholds, perfectly masters, and honors this Dharma discourse, obtain in this very life?
Through the adamantine meditative stability that comes from that extrasensory power,
this refers to the world system of desire, the world system of form, and the world system of formlessness,
the body-consciousness-base,
the samādhi named Many Attendants,
and prostrates to the saṅgha that has assembled to ordain him.
like the track of a bird in the sky;
They thought, “Whom shall we ask about this great miraculous sign revealed by the Bhagavān?”
"ཡེ་<t“You who have attained supreme wisdom and have vast, pure vision, With senses calm, you have achieved sublime, transcendent tranquility;
Pillars that were made from precious materials, With beautiful strings of beads that shone like light—
When they abide in the genuine, they will please the genuine spiritual guides, so that they can follow, keep company with, and serve them.
When they were washing the bowls, some visiting monks arrived and asked the monks,
Hence venerable Śāradvatīputra, in the form and appearance of a buddha, said to Māra Pāpīyān, who likewise was present in the form of a buddha,
“Then in that instant I had this thought: ‘The time has come for me to teach the highest Dharma.
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings practice the transcendent perfection of tolerance,
Bodhisattvas are expert at uplifting the mind out of such states, at engendering joy, and at placing the mind.
Because the Blessed One, the thus-gone, worthy, completely perfect Buddha Śākyamuni, gave up all the many perfectly pure buddha realms and, through his aspirations and great compassion, manifested in that afflicted buddha realm. Because he undertook austerities,
Then the gods reflected, “The Bodhisattva is having a heartwarming conversation with us.”
When he arrived he bowed his head down to the feet of the Tathāgata,
but foolish folk do not see whether its form is black, yellow, white, or orange.
the gods of the Heaven of Joy, such as Saṃ­tuṣita;
You declare what is empty as empty,
What is the causal condition of existence?”
On the ultimate level, things are not as they are expressed in words.
“With respect to non-arising and non-cessation, Mañjuśrī, mind, mentality, and consciousness do not come about.
“I teach the Dharma to beings Without departing from the dharmakāya.
Their hearts are excellently adorned with the śrīvatsa motif.
without torment, free from torment;
how could past physical forms be apprehended in emptiness?
“Good, Mañjuśrī, good!
“There are four other deeds of Māra. These four are:
When engaged in their activities within villages, cities, towns, regions, districts, or royal courts, bodhisattvas
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Jñānadarśana,
Mañjuśrī, sentient beings perceive the voice of Dharma due to the maturation of previous karma, according to their individual aspirations and interests.
Through the vajra lotus, you gain the spiritual accomplishment of traversing the sky.
I will reveal my body, the sight of which brings happiness to all beings, to the bhikṣus or bhikṣunīs, the upāsakas or upāsikās who possess such a sūtra as this, who write out such a sūtra as this, who seek for such a sūtra as this, who read such a sūtra as this, and who in the later times, during the later times, in the last five hundred years of the Dharma, are dedicated to walking, for the sake of this Dharma teaching, for three weeks—twenty-one days.
A group of troublesome monks, types of persons,
Guide, you have developed compassion. You who know the ultimate truth, release your voice! {64}
With the pure action of speech that accords with the truth, others will do as one says.
and he proclaimed, “I will now eat solid foods, such as molasses, pea soup, lentil soup, porridge, and rice!
[How can] they accomplish all their aims with an indefatigable attitude, and thus attain the untaught diligence?
and then move on to conquer the west and the north.
“They go to the buddha realms. They see many millions of buddhas.
stirred the vast oceans,
they had great undiminishing diligence throughout countless eons;
Maitreya, if bodhisattvas possess these five qualities,
Their minds are always like the wind, Knowing no attachment to pleasure or displeasure. {16}
He does not perceive differences, and therefore
He dedicated himself to the practice of keeping it, reading it, and meditating on it.
“What is not forsaking the qualities of purification? It is being stable in commitments.
And how long ago was that?
Then, Senior Śāradvatī­putra replied to the Blessed One,
So, father, please, let us all turn back.”
They are profound and immeasurable, And therefore the buddhas are inconceivable. {31}
by thinking, ‘This person is disciplined, so I will be generous to them
great bodhisattva beings who are diligent, alert, and mindful,
It is the seat of joy, because it is joyfully devoted to the bliss of the Dharma.
The homes of the lords of the gods, nāgas, yakṣas, rākṣasas, and humans were illuminated.
let alone bodhisattva mahāsattvas with bodhisattva followers as numerous as the grains of sand in thirty Ganges Rivers,
Will with dedication listen to a child of the jinas Who with enthusiasm teaches this Dharma.
Always lovingly protected by Brahmā and Vāsava, And by those free of outflows whose minds are liberated, And also by the nāgas and yakṣas,
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings should themselves comprehend the noble truth of suffering.
As I understand the meaning of the words spoken by the Blessed One,
Padmaśrīgarbha, any woman who hears the account of how the Blessed One, the thus-gone King of the Golden-Hued Lion’s Play, passed into nirvāṇa, and who hears the name of these two future buddhas, will no longer have the identity of a woman
Until this person has put on genuine clothes that are durable and everlasting, indestructible and unbreakable, then though many eons pass, one after another, he will either have to wear such temporary clothes or throw them away.
Pay homage to him and touch their heads to his feet.
“Venerable Lord! If all phenomena are empty of inherent existence,
apply the powers,
If you ask why, O child of enlightened heritage, it is because physical forms are without desire and are not an object of desire.
Having seen the nature of phenomena They have no intention of being reborn. {51}
“What is the twelve-line praise with one hundred and eight names that is renowned as being stainless?
for it does not seek out holes or egresses.
such as his skills in arts,
One could never be able to know their number Even if one were to count with divine knowledge for eons.
The non-perception of touchable things is to have no abode.
A pure and immaculate light, much brighter than those of the sun and the moon, appeared and produced mental and physical pleasure.
Since I can now clearly perceive this precious, divine wheel, I must certainly be a universal monarch!
Noble sir, the family of the tathāgatas consists of all basic egoism; of ignorance and the thirst for existence; of lust, hate, and folly; of the four misapprehensions; of the five obscurations; of the six sense-media; of the seven abodes of consciousness; of the eight perverse paths; of the nine causes of irritation; and of the paths of the ten sins. Such is the family of the tathāgatas.
With the intention to travel beyond the four rivers,
Similarly, one who wishes to attain emancipation in things without defining characteristics merely wishes to attain emancipation in the real nature, and
They have no desire for the deva realms And they do not pray to be there. {17}
and the inconceivably numerous kinds of engagement concerning purification. Those are the four.
The perfected presence of precisely that
“ ‘This is the teaching of the level of eloquence. It is the strengths, the liberations, and likewise the powers,
limitless mansions of suns, moons, and stellar bodies; the realms of the devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas, as well as the realms of the four Mahārājas;
the Ṛgveda, the Yajurveda, the Sāmaveda, and the Atharvaveda;
they forsook all royal enjoyments and
“Do not look at their errors, But see the essence of enlightenment.
the second turns his back as he seeks to memorize the Madhyamāgama,
Through the word ‘going’ there is the absence of going. That is given the name samādhi. {8}
Hero, now the time has come to renounce this perfect city.
“Noble ones, what do you think? Should someone who has used such a skillful method be called a liar?”
The fourth retention is of what is known concerning the teaching of all infinite purifications.
having heard from the Bhagavān this kind of Dharma that they had never heard before,
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings who train accordingly will turn the wheel of the sacred doctrine, repeating it in the three times and in its twelve aspects.
The daughter of the nāga king offered it to the Bhagavān,
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty constitute a bodhisattva?”
They are the Sītā, the Ganges, the Yamuna, the Indus, the Pakṣu, the Sutlej, the Chenab, the Ravi, the Sumāgandha, the Himavatī, and the Godavari.
and she will have developed the aspiration to attain the highest, complete enlightenment in order to protect all beings.
the other kings heard him and were relieved and comforted.
Thus, eight thousand bodhisattvas,
like an unsurpassed person,
Others had eyes that were gouged out, eyes that were ablaze, or disfigured eye sockets.
The yellow Kāmadeva.
Ānanda, those are the skillful means through which the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya, by adhering to them, through the easy vehicle, the easy entry, and the easy path, perfectly accomplished supreme, perfect, and complete enlightenment.
The sovereign of the Dharma, the all-knowing lord‌ of sages‌,
Because the thus-gone ones have completely relinquished the afflictions along with their imprints,
Bodhisattvas recognize that through the vows of individual liberation alone
“Young man, those are the four inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of apprehensions that are taught to be inconceivably numerous.
Hundreds of thousands of gods joined their hands and bowed down.
Whatever accumulation of merit I have produced through the three kinds of action,
Noble ones, in brief, all the dharmas of the Buddha,
With vajra eyes one will see, like an āmalaka fruit in the palm of one’s hand. Buddhas equal to grains of sand in the Ganga residing in their vajra realms,
the form-base, and
Seven small particles is one water particle.
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that one is liberated by perceiving the gateways to liberation, and in the same vein, [all the other aforementioned attainments], up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, as non-entities?”
He holds a gathering of the royal family, The citizens, and many merchants.
(25) There is the meditative stability named Crest of Power. (26) There is the meditative stability named Pursuit of the Stream.
Similarly, owing to their utter purity, they do consider the non-arising of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness.
Someone whose motivation is not pure
It is the transcendence of matter. It is the understanding of sounds.
“The ten masteries are as follows:
“Blessed One, how are the vast bodhisattvas, how are those with pure mind, and how are those who are free of doubt?
‘I teach the Dharma and do nothing else.
the non-specific four primary elements
“The wise who have heard this sūtra, The teaching on the disciplines of mendicancy,
and, having forsaken those two [modes of attachment], will no longer be subject to rebirth.
“No, Venerable Lord!”
By this truth may there be well-being here!
And flowers made of beryl, Of crystal, and of silver, {149}
Responding to all questions, they satisfy others and bring them expertise in miraculous displays beyond edges and center.
“Oṁ, Hatred Vajrī, hūṁ, phaṭ!
One becomes knowledgeable about the aggregates, knowledgeable about the constituents,
“Holy being, all thus-gone ones will always grant you the opportunity to speak.
A yogin should place the woman in front
will be performing the great Dharma-sacrifice.
“For example, Su­bhūti, space comprises neither the attributes of desire, nor the attributes of freedom from desire, and in the same vein, it does not comprise the attributes of [the other aspects of the three poisons], up to and including the attributes free from delusion.
Pure Being, you are elevated, Like the ring of surrounding mountains.
“As the hooves of Kaṇṭhaka— Covered with gold, silver, and precious gems—struck the earth,
Some will, after eight lifetimes, Become jinas with infinite vision.
No deva, yakṣa, rākṣasa, preta, pūtana, kṛtya, or vetāla that seeks to harm those dharmabhāṇakas and seeks for such an opportunity, will be able to find such an opportunity.
Homage to Tathāgata Praṇidhāna­sāgarāvabhāsa­śrī.
It does not apprehend desire and dispassion.
Do not generate desire for the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, and the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities!
The Blessed One declared that if, initiated by that monk’s extolling the merits of death, the time comes that it happens,
They remain in that nature of phenomena And perform bodhisattva conduct without being disheartened. {22}
“They meditate on the empty nature of all phenomena And they are never in any way inappropriate.
“Those who control their bodies thus control all physical faults; Those who control their speech never confuse their words;
So it is that they should not dwell, in an apprehending manner, in the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
yet all dharmas are described through names.
in the final age when the Dharma will vanish, the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who possess this sūtra will be without envy, or deceit, or fraud.
Śāradvatī­putra, all that denotes physical actions, verbal actions, and mental actions that are tainted with the inadmissible transgressions.
born suddenly;
and when they are established in the five extrasensory powers, the thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment, the gateways of mnemonic incantation, the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four assurances, the four unhindered discernments, great loving kindness, great compassion, and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas,
“On learning of emptiness, of the field of activity of the buddhas, If it is not rejected, that is a treasure that has been found.
Or the sun effacing a firefly, The Bliss-Gone One will obliterate our army.”
from maligning the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha;
You have made billions of offerings, as many as there are grains of sand in the Ganges,
He considers misery, but he reincarnates voluntarily.
“For example, Su­bhūti, space makes reference neither to the first setting of the mind on enlightenment, nor does it make reference to the second, the third, the fourth, the fifth, the sixth, the seventh, the eighth, the ninth, or the tenth setting of the mind on enlightenment.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain the thirty-two primary signs of a great being.
When someone with infinite vision appears in a world Then sometimes this kind of Dharma may be taught. {135}
Through the power of the Guide’s light ray. {65}
The wind of the anus is concealed within wind.
and will soon manifestly and completely awaken to unsurpassable, perfectly complete enlightenment.
It is like a machine held together by bones and sinew and adorned with flesh;
Oh, woe is me! I have just violated all that is contained in the Buddha’s great teaching of moral conduct!
Do not abandon those who suffer without protection; leave your home.
Monks, the Bodhisattva then thought to himself,
The Buddha then said to the venerable Pūrṇa­maitrāyaṇī­putra,
The mantra chain recited from the tongue Is seen to fill the trichiliocosm.
But again, Bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkambhin asked the Bhagavat,
The strength of ten Śakras, lord of the gods, is the same as the strength of one god from the Heaven Free of Strife.
“King Śrīghoṣa spoke these verses to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Kṣemadatta: “ ‘These beings have cried out
The Teacher is not one thing, and the transcendent perfection of wisdom another.
hung with precious yak-tail whisks, and covered with strings of pearls, a net of pearls as a rear adornment,
There is the meditative stability named Consecrated.
who had engaged in proper conduct for a long time.
This concludes “The Glorious King of Tantras That Resolves All Secrets.”
“Noble son, those pores cannot be perceived,
Monk, did you engage in your passionate act with that mind?
I give the teaching of the three yānas, Which is my supreme skill in methods.” {21}
Maitreya, how do such bodhisattvas have excellent application?
They [will pass genuinely] beyond the danger of not being extolled, renowned, famous, acclaimed, and eulogized.
One will see far into the triple universe.
which of these two would have the greater merit?”
“Bhagavat, every bhikṣu will remember these words of instruction given by the Bhagavat and will keep the pratimokṣa vows,
To fulfill his prayers, he does not rest in the uncompounded,
For as long as he lives, he offers them clothing and food,
such as when they are hit, slapped, beaten, wounded, or abused by others.
whose stock of merit is acquired through [making offerings] to the tathāgatas, but lack the transcendent perfection of wisdom, are reborn among the gods and among human beings.
when the bodhisattva mahāsattva Sarva­sattva­priya­darśana saw that the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Candra­sūrya­vimala­prabhāsa­śrī had passed into nirvāṇa,
Moreover, saying the root mantra will accomplish all.
Mañjuśrī, Brahmā is empty, dependent,
“ ‘Yet if a person joins his palms
If one is able, one should honor her physically, If not, one should do so verbally or mentally.
will be known to be a stūpa containing relics,
“Until I see the Bodhisattva with all his good qualities again,
As blessed buddhas know the time for a meaningful inquiry,
like the appearance and disappearance of a bubble of water;
Having trained therein, the royal class, standing out like a tall sāl tree, is discerned in the world.
With venomous snakes for arms, with horrible poisonous eyes,
They firmly engendered the intent set on supreme awakening.
the love that accords with reality because it is the very same in all three times;
“You must abandon your dominion and the sports of love, And the seven riches on the four continents.
Great King, (30) Prince Sarvārthasiddha’s body is rounded, (31) very smooth, (32) straight, and (33) well structured.
I declare to you, and reveal to you,
nor do they go anywhere
How do they keep their smiling face free from frowns of anger?
Later, at another time, this person is finally told that these clothes, being old and moth-eaten, are dirty, upon which he realizes that they should be thrown away, and thus he gets rid of them.
Therefore, these are explained as being the causes for the appropriation of form.
He witnessed its pure water and beautiful bathing areas and saw how trees and groves adorned the riverbank and the surrounding village.
Will attain the highest enlightenment without difficulty. They are the prophesied holders of the Dharma in the future.” {30}
He may follow the ways of the solitary sages, yet he is inspired with great compassion in order to develop all living beings.
Upon her death, she was born among the gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three.
Within the circles that surround buddhas and bodhisattvas, as well as within all the realms of wandering beings,
As soon as these verses were heard, the venerable Mahā­maud­galyā­yana rose from his seat,
What are the aggregates?
“They who know that these phenomena have no substance Perfectly hear and remember the entirety Of the Dharma that the lords of humans have taught
‘‌Noble son, do not think that this is Indra!
“Oṁ, Blessed Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, together with your retinue, come, come! Jaḥ hūṁ vaṁ hoḥ!
for with it one is not deceived.
With a carpet of various kinds of flowers, And with rivers adorned by blue and red lotuses. {iii}
When the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha, perfect in wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the unsurpassable guide who tames beings, the teacher of gods and humans, the buddha, the Bhagavat Krakucchanda, appeared in this world,
for hundreds of thousands of great aeons with the scent of perfume and flowers from the human and divine realms,
Śāriputra, they don’t prick the ears of men but only those of women.
when I went to beg my food at the house of the Licchavi Vimalakīrti in the great city of Vaiśālī,
I remember a time in the past When there appeared Bhīṣma­garjita­svara­rāja, The guide of devas, humans, yakṣas, and rākṣasas.
venerable Śāriputra,
Through learning, one will gain nirvāṇa.’ ”
They will also smell the many different scents of animals, namely, the scents of elephants, horses, oxen, goats, sheep, and cattle.
“A man who is inside a canyon
Bhagavān, we have sought and requested nirvāṇa alone, just like that daily wage.
Then the bodhisattva mahāsattva Nakṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña said to the Bhagavān,
“Bhagavān, the accumulation of merit of those beings who write out this Dharma teaching is like that,
And will make him fall into Avīci Hell,
Similarly, they neither associate [the other links of dependent origination], up to and including aging and death, with omniscience, nor do they disassociate them therefrom, and so on.
From the left side, Sarvacaṇḍāla said:
and use even their own body and life to perform vast actions of making offerings to a present tathāgata or to the stūpa of a tathāgata who has passed into nirvāṇa.
having been nurtured, nurture in return.
Neither does the sun reject those foul smells and go away.
"སེམས་ཅན་དམྱལ་བ་དང་། དུད་འགྲོའི་སྐྱེ་གནས་དང་། གཤིན་རྗེའི་འཇིག་རྟེན་དང་། མི་ཁོམ་པ་དང་། ངན་སོང་དང་། ངན་འགྲོ་ལོག་པར་ལྟུང་བ་ཐམས་ཅད་དང་། སྡུག་<tliberate beings from all the hells, animal births, the world of Yama, downfalls into inopportune existences, unfortunate destinies, bad rebirths, and all suffering, even though these tathāgatas might belong to different world systems,
the samādhi named Illuminating Everywhere,
‘O child of enlightened heritage!
Regardless of whether they possess a sundial, when they estimate that the time has come,
The residence was immaculate since all weeds, stumps, brambles, small pebbles, and gravel had been removed.
When a bodhisattva gathers roots of virtue and dedicates them to omniscience, such a bodhisattva is endowed with skillful means.
the light encouraged the bodhisattva, the great being, Gagaṇagañja, who resided in the Varagaṇā world of the Thus-Gone One Gaṇendra’s buddha realm.
For example, even if all the households in the four continents built monasteries of gold and jewels and built a thousand stūpas inside each of those monasteries, and in one day inserted relics in them all,
How does consciousness follow the body?
They will not delight in disputes concerning the Dharma. They will not engage in Dharma disputes.
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of words of inconceivability. What are the four kinds of words of inconceivability?
As birth in that buddhafield will always be miraculous, Everyone there will be free from birth in the womb.
and afterward gave them magnificent great carts.
The bodhisattva Sunakṣatra declared,
I saw it, Lord!
That multicolored banner, Akṣayamati: “Listen to the conduct of Avalokiteśvara.
Blessed One, how are bodhisattvas’ words to be accepted?
They are always on the Bodhimaṇḍa, Which is the result of giving the Dharma. {43}
So that night when everything became quiet, he left his own quarters and entered the quarters of King Śuddhodana.
the 21,000 kinds of conduct related to anger,
“ ‘For as many eons as have passed Since the very beginning,
But he came to see that those austerities would amount to nothing.
Nonetheless, until one possesses the qualities of nirvāṇa in the realm of nirvāṇa without remainder, one will still be subject to sorrow.
By so doing, one will achieve the ultimate retention of semen.
Mañjuśrī, you have already been in innumerable hundreds of thousands of buddhafields throughout the universes of the ten directions.
do not consider whether or not they engage in union with physical forms,
do not speak falsely inasmuch as they profess to benefit all living beings.
[All other attributes], up to and including the understanding of all phenomena, are pure, owing to the purity of the applications of mindfulness [and so forth].
Who is this who reprimands, rebukes, or targets with malice?’
the five extrasensory powers,
“Young brahmins,” replied Kakuda Kātyāyana, “this is how I see it and this is my philosophy:
such beings may call out the name of the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha,
“What is having a mind without fixation? It is having unsullied faith.
Ecstatic and elated,
That is called great compassion.
Eight thousand gods purified the eye of Dharma regarding phenomena so that it became cleared of dust and immaculate.
They are vajra-like diligence, inalienable diligence, diligence free of the two extremes, vast diligence, blazing diligence, continuous diligence, pure diligence, extraordinary diligence, diligence that does not deprecate, and diligence that is free of conceit.
I abide For the benefit of the world.
“This same refrain should also be applied to the sensory element of the eyes, the sensory element of sights, and the sensory element of visual consciousness.
“Gods, do not think like that, do not say such things.
and gave it to the incarnated bodhisattva.
“When might the god Ratnavara awaken to unexcelled and perfect buddhahood? What might his buddha realm be like?
It is like the appearance of the reflection of a face on the surface of a well-polished mirror. The face has not shifted onto the surface of the mirror
Humans with inferior aspiration and lacking knowledge Will not believe us if we say, “You shall become buddhas.” {121}
Mañjuśrī, what is called attaining acceptance is a reference to what is genuinely true.
“Reverend Saṅgharakṣita, we were disciples of the perfectly awakened Buddha Kāśyapa.
“ ‘Enlightenment is perfectly realized neither by the body nor by the mind.
It is not permanent because the sprout and the seed are different. The sprout is not the seed. The sprout does not come from the seed after it has ceased, nor does it come from the seed while it has not yet ceased. Rather, the sprout is born precisely as the seed ceases.
In order to ask about the Dharma
some are on the second bhūmi;
Monks, then the Bodhisattva gave the pleasing items to the girls according to the order of their arrival.
The mendicant who is neither bound nor liberated does not experience any like or any dislike and thus he enters nonduality.”
When those tathāgatas have passed into nirvāṇa,
They are without a self, sentient beings, living creatures, lives, individuals, humankind, and human beings.
Similarly the transcendence of the sensory element of the nose, the sensory element of odors, and the sensory element of olfactory consciousness; the sensory element of the tongue, the sensory element of tastes, and the sensory element of gustatory consciousness; the sensory element of the body, the sensory element of tangibles, and the sensory element of tactile consciousness; and the sensory element of the mental faculty, the sensory element of mental phenomena, and the sensory element of mental consciousness is not the sensory element of mental consciousness [and the rest].
With reverence and for a long time
Physical forms indeed are not the expanse of reality,
“What is standing up to welcome gurus and presenting them with a seat? It is overcoming pride and not being lazy.
The whole world, including the gods, forever reveres them as teachers.
Su­bhūti, it is because the natural expression of their present circumstances, though without entity, is still physical form.
The fourth in the sibilant group Is positioned atop the syllable of fire
In the center, place the wrathful syllable. In the second, the syllable of the wealth holder. In the third, comes the vajra. “In the fourth, place the first syllable of water. In the fifth, place the ṇi. At the four borders, write the essence mantra for killing the target. These are the inner sections.
They will be overpowered by arrogance and carelessness. Their goal will be gain and honors. {21}
Their navel is well rounded.
“If bodhisattvas who are irreversible— Not a few, but as numerous as the Ganges sands—
With compassion for others, He practiced for their sake as well.
In that same era, king of gods, there was a universal monarch called King Ratnacchattra, who reigned over the four continents and possessed seven precious jewels.
do so through having trained in this same transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Nirmadakarā (She Who Humbles)
One should heat it up at night in the embers of a funeral pyre until the wax has melted.
“The level of unequaled samādhi Is peaceful, subtle, and difficult to see.
to analyze with insight yet be without concepts;
"རྣམ་པར་ཐར་པའི་སྒོ་གསུམ་མངོན་<tTo realize directly the three gates of liberation;
Oh! Oh! You continually with the sound of the DharmaAwaken beings who are asleep, deeply asleep.
In what way is the mind set on enlightenment not associated with thoughts of dedication?
They do not make assumptions about the sense field of the eyes,
“Friends, whoever applauds a Dharma teacher expounding this Dharma teaching of The Play in Full will attain eight purities of speech.
That which is at peace cannot in any way be prophesied.
there are no particulars at all with respect to any things.
That is to say, although bodies conducive to merit might result amongst gods and humans,
those of the Nirmāṇa­rata realm, those of the Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin realm, those of the [Mahā]brahmā realms,
“He is called the one who is like Brahmā, the one whose path of a religious mendicant is exceedingly calm,
Then the bodhisattva mahāsattva Bhaiṣajyarāja rose from his seat,
Then the great sage Supreme One bowed his head to the feet of the Blessed One, the thus-gone one, the foe-destroyer, the completely perfect Buddha known as Immaculately Renowned King.
They are beloved by millions of beings. Those are the benefits of being without avarice. {5}
which would be greater, the amount of water that has been extracted or the water that remains?
established countless, innumerable beings in the cessation of defilements, in arhatship,
It is a recitation of dhyāna, liberation, samādhi, and samāpatti.
I have fulfilled my duties. I will not experience other rebirths apart from this one.’
the earth element is empty of the earth element.
and in addition to them, a multitude of renowned fully ordained monks,
To which the person wishing to go forth says: “It is excellent.”
Tiṣya, you should know this today: You may search in all ten directions,
And at all times guarding the conduct of a mendicant: That is the Dharma that the sage, the preeminent human, teaches. {78}
Similarly, owing to the utter purity of all things, they do not apprehend the ten powers of the tathāgatas, and they do not apprehend [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
and also explain the reasons for [the emergence of] their [noble forms].
the second turned his back as he sought to memorize the Madhyamāgama,
They will still not have attained unimpeded wisdom, But this is what will presage it.
After entering inside he established nine hundred and ninety million beings irreversibly in the Dharma.
Noble son, listen very carefully and keep in mind what I say. I shall explain this to you.”
they do so attentive to the omniscient mind,
In the evening, one should wipe the top surface of the maṇḍala disk and
“Padmaśrīgarbha, if any woman hears this Dharma teaching, she will immediately be transformed from the state of a woman,
There is no present life. There is no afterlife.
and truly held those correct views. Because of those causes, after they died they went to the higher realms and were reborn in the paradises.
“Thereupon, reverend Śāriputra, if you are interested in the Dharma, you should take no interest in anything.”
If you do not abide by this teaching, Then it is not the fault of the teaching.
Such is the meaning of “impermanence.”
When Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī saw that nobody could move the ornaments, she thought,
The Blessed One said,
then, Bhaiṣajyarāja, you should know that this individual who is following the Śrāvakayāna is conceited.
Venerable Lord! For these reasons I state that those who would don the great armor and seek to attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment for the sake of sentient beings, are actually seeking to liberate space.
“In future times there will be those Who are intent on the result of worldly dhyānas.
Therein there is no dream or a dreamer of dreams.
Monks, it felt as if someone was striking my skull with a sharp spear.
one does not get burned when walking
with defective faculties,
He is neither a field of merit nor not a field of merit;
The thus-gone ones have prophesied that they will be reborn in Sukhāvatī.
It must be peerless.
he became frightened, paralyzed with fear, with the hairs on his body standing on end, and was filled with remorse.
‘Why did you commit this offence against a bhikṣu Who maintained correct conduct without a fault,
in the same way in the south,
We are just human beings, so we are not able to achieve that state.
For these reasons, Senior Śāradvatī­putra, the non-arising of physical forms is not physical forms.
On arriving, they set their loads of wood off to one side,
or an isolated place, any place in which this Dharma teaching is heard will be kept under the care of the thus-gone ones.”
Their path was uninterrupted, and they were entirely free of obscurations, hindrances, or disturbances.
It is because they will be remaining in a state of happiness.
They have reached the domain of the five higher cognitions, Great wisdom, and the retentions. {271}
Su­bhūti, for this reason I will also explain other more subtle limits of attachment. So listen well and be attentive!
“Saṅgharakṣita, you shall go on this journey across the ocean and face your fears along with what provokes them.”
“The size of the maṇḍala Should be one cubit, two cubits,
If so, then reverend, by what measure may we say that a follower of another tīrthika order has a sense of reverence?”
should know that they will have nothing at all to fear.
The group of six, who awoke from their sleep on a piece of dry ground, said,
Knowing what had been done for him, he gave the physician sprigs, flowers, fruits, and sticks of neem.
They were free from impurities and afflictions,
For so long, with great skill, he has paid respect and listened to the Dharma, understood it, memorized it, recited it, caused others to understand it, ascertained the meaning and the words, and with a mind of humility offered refuge to beings faced with old age, sickness, and death, and respectfully explained the Dharma to them, so
The five disciplines, and the fast.
Furthermore, reverend Śāriputra, at the wish of this good man, to this house come the innumerable tathāgatas of the ten directions, such as the Tathāgatas Śākyamuni, Amitābha, Akṣobhya, Ratnaśrī‌, Ratnārcis, Ratnacandra, Ratnavyūha, Duḥprasāha, Sarvārtha­siddha, Prabhūtaratna, Siṃhanādanādī, Siṃhaghoṣa, and so forth,
King Śuddhodana also gave twenty thousand girls to the Bodhisattva to serve and honor him.
And is purifying his own realm.
Furthermore, O gods, do you think that if someone were to say that such and such is the defining characteristic of space, they would be speaking correctly?
They will eat the alms food of arhats And criticize the enlightenment of buddhahood. {30}
The dharmabhāṇaka Brahmadatta Became my teacher at that time. {2}
“At that time there was a prince, Puṇyamatin, who had faith and trust.
At that time I had taken birth as a brahmin and heard this Dharma teaching, which I then taught to others.
what is it to have no abode?
So it is, Su­bhūti, that great bodhisattva beings know that all things are without defining characteristics,
As they wish, they teach the Dharma In millions of realms to millions of beings.” {50}
They should offer benedictions and greetings to all sentient beings with sweet and gentle words.
Many ferocious yakṣas, venomous snakes, Kumbhāṇḍas, and pretas are living here.
Or would you say that it is similar to the color of madder, or of a crystal?
Its warmth and digestive action constitute the fire element.
“Today the palace will be filled with wonders:
“Mahāpratibhāna, in the eastern direction, beyond countless thousands of worlds,
hear this king of samādhis, the revealed equality of the nature of all phenomena, obtain it, and meditate on it,
Some showed off their firm and voluptuous breasts.
At one point, after the teacher Sañjayin had fallen ill, Upatiṣya asked Kolita,
When there is no thinking, no conceptualization, no imputation, no movement, no arising, no ideation, no mental involvement—
Nārāyaṇa, consider how every spring, pool, pond, river, stream, lake, and waterhole is gathered together and included in the ocean.
While this exegesis on the real nature was being delivered, the minds of twelve thousand fully ordained monks were liberated from contaminants, without further grasping [that would lead to subsequent rebirth].
If one were to ask why, Venerable Lord, it is because all things are empty of all things. Manifestly perfect buddhahood will not be attained with respect to anything at all, or indeed by anything at all. All things being empty, anything with respect to which manifestly perfect buddhahood would be attained, anything by which manifestly perfect buddhahood would be attained, and anything on the basis of which manifestly perfect buddhahood would be attained is non-existent and non-apprehensible.
“What is irreversibility? It is the unimpaired six perfections, and the continuous vision of the buddhas who reside in other worlds.
it is because they do not consider any things that are without lives and without sentience.
Similarly, the emptiness of sights is not sights.
“With completely pure wisdom They teach the Dharma correctly.
“Śāradvatī­putra, when great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom do not consider the nature of the transcendent perfection of wisdom, and,
“Divine son, ultimately all phenomena are utterly unborn, utterly unarisen, and utterly unreal.
Su­bhūti, the mundane gift of the sacred doctrine, with which great bodhisattva beings are endowed,
“Gods and humans are thirsty, lacking the qualities of the victorious ones;
When the all-knowing Kauṇḍinya arrived, he thought,
“Physical forms are not one thing, and non-arising another.
the liberations, the samādhis, and the samāpattis, and they teach a variety of Dharma teachings.
In the same vein, the same refrain should be applied extensively here, just as has been presented above.
Nor, if someone should denigrate the Dharma, will they respond in a nonspiritual manner.
He had love and compassion for the world and wished to help. His protection and coat of mail was diligence.
It is good that those who are arrogant have departed.
outside there is utter peace.
or a preta,
“Noble son, you may wonder how bodhisattvas grow the qualities of goodness.
“Within that space there are some who have the perception, Believing what their mind perceives,
the treasure of unfailing recall because of not forgetting,
Some are to be converted by kings.
They are all taught in the one word meditation, And in the one word buddha. {22}
they will fall into inferior realms, and be reborn in the hells.
taught King Glorious Splendor perfectly how to gain expertise in the mode of Dharma known as the boundless seal,
I pay homage to the protector of beings, Glorious Vajraḍākinī, Universal sovereign of the ḍākinīs, the very essence of the five wisdoms and three bodies.
You are free from effect and cause,
being without selfish reticence in teaching the Dharma;
“Mañjuśrī, whenever not much rain falls from the atmosphere and the sky above,
However, for the one who is killed, there is detriment.
without a master,
not to cling to the component of discipline as supreme;
But the great compassion that is free of involvement with sentimentally purposive views does not exhaust the bodhisattva in all his reincarnations.
Their wisdom is liberated. They are thoroughbred stallions. They are great elephants.
Śāriputra, the tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas have obtained that which is a supreme marvel.
“Bhagavān, I do know that.” The Bhagavān asked,
this denotes the intrinsic defining characteristic of physical forms, which is the capacity to assume physical forms;
Each identified by her own individual function.
Gives up concern for his body and life And recites this sūtra for a single day and night.
“As an analogy, Mahauṣadhi, if fire does not arise, its form, warmth, and color shed no light.
What is the meaning of tantra?
Later still, the translator Zhönnu Pal edited it by comparing it with the Sanskrit edition that had been in the possession of Chojé Chaglo.
The prāṇa, located in the heart.
Those dharmabhāṇakas will teach the beautiful Dharma exactly as it was spoken by the Tathāgata.
they have no notions regarding self, they have no notions regarding non-self, and they have no notions regarding the buddhafields.
whether they are absorbed in meditation or arising from meditation.
Son of noble family, even if one were to gather all of the hearers, solitary buddhas, and bodhisattvas of the Blessed Amitābha,
I pray that you, with your saṅgha of bodhisattvas and saṅgha of bhikṣus, will assent to eat your meal tomorrow at my home.
“Ānanda, those individuals are not said to be superior but utterly debased.
‘Then I went in search of Daśarathaputra, one day in the form of a beggar,
Chanda, don’t vacillate or delay!
(6) correct effort,
and conclude in nirvāṇa.
If, beyond that, such merit were multiplied by a quadrillion inexpressibly many times, it would yield the crown of a thus-gone one, which is raised above everyone else, imperceptible, and adorned with the crown protrusion.
“It is my resolve to board that ship and cross the ocean of cyclic existence. Then I will ferry innumerable beings across this ocean, This sea of suffering so hard to cross with its waves of anger, Monsters of passion, and maelstroms of enmity.
They both take the material for the Dharma robe called the ceremonial robe in their hands,
“Śāriputra, the name of that eon will be Adorned by Great Jewels.
If it is compounded in nature, it is the same as the superknowledges of the outsiders.
When abiding in liberation with respect to all phenomena, they are irreproachable.
Because it is the benefactor that provides the precious Dharma that is difficult to find.
Even the names of the sense fields of mastery do not exist internally, nor do they exist externally, and nor do they abide between these two.
and the samādhi named Holding the Dharma.
childish ordinary beings have given rise to attachment, hatred, and delusion.
"བདག་གིས་སེམས་ཅན་ཐམས་ཅད་ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་དང་། ཐེག་པ་མཆོག་དང་། ཐེག་པ་མི་མཉམ་པ་དང་མཉམ་པ་དང་། <tmay I include all beings in the Great Vehicle—the supreme vehicle, the unequaled vehicle, the unsurpassed buddha vehicle that is the foremost, sublime, and most excellent vehicle!’
We shall hold it, read it,
“Ānanda, the Dharma of the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Sāgara­vara­dhara­buddhi­vikrīḍitābhijña will remain after his nirvāṇa for twice as long as his lifespan.
It is just as you have spoken.
What are those ten? They are abundant contemplation of repulsiveness, abundant cultivation of love, abundant contemplation of dependent origination, abundant expertise with regard to flaws, abundant contemplation of emptiness, abundant contemplation of the absence of marks, abundant cultivation of yogic training, abundant and continuous contemplation, absence of regrets, and perfect discipline.
Then may that truth cause my hand To be instantly restored as it was before! {21}
Then Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta said to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya and the complete assembly of bodhisattvas,
If someone comes to me and asks, ‘Is there an afterlife?’
They can move directly through mountains, without impediment, as if they were moving, for example, through space.
not turning away from the inferno;
How does it appropriate one among the hell-dwellers?”
We will also protect those who hold, read aloud, and master the dhāraṇīs,
Noble son, [F.60.b] there are four deeds of Māra that create obstacles to the endeavors of writing this Dharma teaching down, reading it aloud, and propagating it.
Nor does the element of consciousness think, ‘I produce the name and form of the body.’
“Bhikṣus, then those fifty hundred thousand quintillion Mahābrahmās, speaking as one voice, recited these verses to the Bhagavān:
The constellation Puṣya as well, with his retinue,
They are cooled by the pleasant sprinkling of water cool to the touch
And know that phenomena are the same as space, Will also not be burned by fire. {13}
having bowed down one hundred thousand times at the feet of the Lord:
“He is inconceivable, imponderable, essence-less, and not possibly an essence.
Today the time has come, So please consider leaving home.
As they examine all phenomena they comprehend the sameness of all phenomena.
This concludes the fifth chapter, on setting out.
they do not cultivate wisdom for the sake of a limited number of sentient beings.
“They who know the peace that is the nature of phenomena Have wisdom as high as Sumeru, Constantly for a hundred trillion eons,
and serve them with all resources.
But those who have witnessed it in their body have no pride; They are those who are freed from all such pride. {29}
It also entails the completion of great loving kindness by [understanding that] sentient beings are not sentient beings.
As an analogy, when an unripe fruit ripens, it changes color.
The gods and demigods play their millions of drums and instruments,
Bodhisattvas should be replete with the perfections.
They might be able to end up at the summit of existence, but they still will be left with afflictions.
All the Śākya factions, with King Śuddhodana leading the way, went ahead of the Bodhisattva.
He will totally destroy us.
and to generate, out of the multitudes of seeds and elements, all the grass, thickets, medicinal herbs, and trees on earth,
Then at that time Brother Śāriputra addressed these verses to the Bhagavān:
Seven lice eggs is one mustard seed.
“Why did you take life?” “To instill fear.”
After agreeing to do just that, Saṅgharakṣita departed.
Conquering all māras and opponents, he remained unblemished by any mundane qualities.
I have attended to many millions of trillions of tathāgatas, but I have not obtained the six-syllable queen of mahāvidyās.
Oh! Oh! Arise, Puṣpacandra, the hero Who accomplishes the benefit of beings.
And ten million vultures live inside, And similarly pigeons and owls.
at that time, in order to protect this Dharma teaching,
“Ānanda, at that time and in those days, many people detested sūtras like this.
He would then fill them with high palaces made of precious vaśirāja gems
They attain those three doorways to liberation.
“Mañjuśrī, this is excellent, most excellent!
He was self-controlled and restrained. He had pure conduct, and his eyes didn’t wander but looked down ahead at a distance of six feet. His behavior was beautiful and exquisite, as was the way he walked.
Without being timorous, in the center of the assembly They will always give the teaching of the Dharma
and installed his son in the house, saying, “I myself will sleep on a cot by the door.”
They do not attach importance to generosity.
“Reverend, indeed I have.”
Hence, the objects of cognition must also be considered to have no form.
In this web of existence, there are many types of birth. Likewise all beings appear from conditions, With no self or person who transmigrates.
The wise practitioner should visualize Their respective divine forms deeply in his mind.
Noble son, every aspect of the thus-gone ones’ conduct is carried out by means of distinct absorptions.
Women, boiling with afflictive emotions, should not be kept company with.
He arranged a hundred thousand precious seats.
In the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end is not discerned.
Their vehicle is the unexcelled Mahāyāna,
freedom from elaboration is stainless;
The first aspect of liberation ensues when corporeal beings observe physical forms.
“For example, Su­bhūti, space is neither blue, nor yellow, nor red, nor white, nor crimson, nor pale yellow, nor golden, nor multicolored.
Their great income is pure practice, And it is dedicated to the supreme enlightenment.
visualizing its complete garland as the nature of speech emerging from the syllable oṁ in an unbroken stream.
The monks asked the Blessed One about it,
“It teaches the elimination of all transmigration with respect to phenomena and is a gateway to the absence of wishes with respect to all phenomena.
King Śūradatta had eighty-four thousand women in his harem.
In the middle of those mountains there is a precious jewel named Padmāvabhāsa.
If, Su­bhūti, sentient beings knew that all things are empty of inherent existence,
when beings are pleased and delighted to see me or hear me, you can be certain that they are friends who have accompanied me for multiple lifetimes.
“May the quarters be safe for you! May you not incur evil! May you be protected by all deities, And may you return wealthy!
forty-two thousand people, the harem, and the ministers, they all went into the presence of the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Jala­dhara­garjita­ghoṣa­susvarana­kṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña­.
‘Reverend Śāriputra, those who absorb themselves in contemplation in such a way are declared by the Lord to be truly absorbed in contemplation.’
to keep an impartial attitude toward both friends and enemies;
The authentic is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
“Blessed One,” they replied, “since the two sons of the venerable Ānanda’s younger sister were orphaned,
Next he took seven steps toward the west and,
“on the first ground, bodhisattvas attain the body of sameness.
He is surrounded by his wife, sons, and daughters.
Such is the expertise of bodhisattvas with regard to the mind.
One should drink, together with honey, country mallow, Indian mallow, white sugar, and sesame. Then one will become pregnant.
Therefore, Mañjuśrī, it is said that all dharmas are the same as nirvāṇa.
for travelers to the higher realms, like a staircase.
When he bowed to the feet of the Bliss-Gone One, The god became delighted.
Good sirs, these living beings here are hard to discipline.
has been explained to you, Magnificent One!
When the Blessed One used the analogies of the Daharopama Sūtra to subdue Prasenajit,
They respectfully listen to the sacred doctrine from others and
Bhadrikarāja, and similarly Kauṇḍinya; Ānanda, and similarly Sthavira Rāhula;
Blessed One, before long they will themselves become vessels of such greatness of the thus-gone ones.”
“In their dreams they will forsake a kingdom, And their harem, and likewise crowds of kinsmen;
With this knowledge they thus see The buddhas as the supreme among humans. {6}
“With miraculous powers in these worlds, And equally throughout the ten directions,
One should place the right shin, with ease, Above the left shin—
Thus, in that buddha realm even the words “listener” or “solitary buddha” are unheard of, as are the names of their respective vehicles.
ndications include sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles and mental phenomena.
While there, they would beg for food, implore others to beg for food,
When consciousness ceases, name and form cease.
By the banks of the ponds grow jeweled trees of the seven radiantly beautiful jewels: gold, silver, beryl, crystal, rosy pearls, emerald, and coral.
In the eastern direction there is the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha named Akṣobhya in the realm named Abhirati and
His mother went to the court scribe and said,
They will not succumb to doubt, and they will not be deluded.
harbor doubts, hesitation and disillusionment with regard to it.
“ ‘I have committed an evil, sinful act. I have slain the supreme dharmabhāṇaka.
Hear of my inconceivable lifespan, They do not reject it.
In her left hand, one should place a human skull,
Thus, bodhisattvas are free of trembling.
Thus, they will perceive their instructors as preceptors, and be happy, faithful, and delighted.
I have abandoned my sweet companions and come to live all alone among the denizens of hell. Now I see no way to higher rebirths.
Ajita, it was just like how these buddha realms are illuminated now.
It neither bestows nor withholds omniscience.
‘When you are staying In the interior of a house,
The buddha realm of such a bodhisattva will be completely pure and such a bodhisattva will quickly awaken to unexcelled and complete buddhahood.
When they die, twelve tathāgatas will come and reassure them, saying,
and after that you will attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.”
Yes, it is good, eminent, excellent, perfect, supreme, and unexcelled.
“We do not wish to be present at Mañjuśrī’s Dharma teaching, either.
Because there is ultimately no scorching, there is said to be peace.
do not generate desire for physical forms! Do not generate desire for feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness!
Oṁ, the four-armed and six-faced one! You with a contorted face! Please summon Karṇapiśācī! Hūṁ phaṭ!
“Ultimately, all phenomena are the same in that they are unarisen.
Why do you say that a bodhisattva is not anything other than the real nature of physical forms
Su­bhūti, since it is unfabricated and unconditioned, there is no one at all who can attain manifestly perfect buddhahood.
“It teaches the absence of distraction with respect to phenomena and is a gateway to tranquility with regard to all phenomena.
When they know this, the wise will be free.’
“Awakening, Mañjuśrī, is a basis of non-division.
These are called the five powers.
That bodhisattva now went to the south and, in a southern world realm named Vimalā,
Noble son, such are a thus-gone one’s marks of enormous merit.
Bhagavān you know the thoughts of all beings, and
When great bodhisattva beings become equipoised in the meditative stability of signlessness as a gateway to liberation,
Whenever a bodhisattva brings forth this perspective all the realms of the demons are deeply shaken,
What need is there to say more?
This wheel is inconceivable because it is beyond the realm of conceptual mind. This wheel is unequaled because it is beyond equality.
The rain of the sublime teaching will refresh those who are tormented by the flames of desire, anger, and stupidity.
It is being content with occurrences. It is never being satisfied with the good actions one has done.
the childless couple, badly wanting a child, propitiated Śiva, Varuṇa, Kubera, Śakra, Brahmā, and others.
your liberation being the same as the equality of the uninterruptible sins, you are neither liberated nor bound;
“Father, I wish to visit the village of Nālada, for there lives a brahmin Tiṣya whose son is called Upatiṣya. I shall go to see him.”
“What is the knowledge of all language? It is correctly teaching the Dharma.
And I shouted aloud to you, Gopā, ‘Your beloved is about to leave, get up!’
and then, having made it into a volume of scripture, honor, venerate, respect, and make offerings to it with diverse flowers, and so forth, up to and including ribbons and diverse musical sounds.
“Son of noble family, whenever a bodhisattva no longer practices awakening to come to an end, to be born, not to come to an end, or not to be born, nor with the conceit of being perpetually at an end or unending, nor disturbed at being perpetually unborn, then a bodhisattva who so practices is carrying out the bodhisattva practices.
Translated and revised by the Indian paṇḍitas Jinamitra and Dānaśīla, and by Yeshé Dé, the translator and chief editor.
If you ask why, Su­bhūti, it is because in [a modality without] a self, going or coming is non-apprehensible.
No, Venerable Lord!
“At that time, Devadatta
“Bhagavān, how should one view the seven branches of enlightenment?”
Quickly make a bier with a casket
When they speak, their mighty voice generates understanding, however exalted sentient beings may be [within the trichiliocosm].
Unless you sleep with me, I will die.
which illuminated the immeasurable and innumerable worlds throughout the ten directions.
“Divine son, relatively, in the hands of those who offer the sacred Dharma to all beings.”
He is smashing the four Māras.
The beneficial and harmful results of the task one has in mind will be revealed.
Non-essence of a sentient being is non-division.
Nor does the sprout think, ‘I am formed by these conditions.’
“Great bodhisattva beings who are skilled in means turn miserly sentient beings away from miserliness, and cause them to engage in the transcendent perfection of generosity.
Mukhamaṇḍikā is in the form of an owl.
those who are struck by a disease or who are afraid of diseases;
“Those who make them from the seven precious materials, Those who make them from copper and bronze,
the samādhi named Eternal Calf,
Your Majesty, may the bow be brought here! I would like to test it.” When the bow was brought to the assembly,
who desires wealth should increase charity;
Senior Pūrṇa, physical forms which resemble dreams are neither fettered nor liberated.
he had the bell sounded in the city of Kapilavastu and announced the following decree:
Be a home for the homeless.”
is this mind [of the bodhisattvas] unattached to [the other fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas?
“When you dream that the trees are uprooted And you cut off your hair with your right hand,
who spoke this panegyric:
Udāna in the area of the throat,
Has the elder been in liberation for quite some time?
the transcendent perfection of wisdom possessed by great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline.
“Tadyathā: adaṇḍe daṇḍapati daṇḍāvartani daṇḍakuśale daṇḍasudhāri sudhārapati buddhapaśyane sarvadhāraṇi āvartani saṃvartani saṃgha­parīkṣite saṃgha­nirghātani dharma­parīkṣite sarva­sattva­ruta­kauśalye kauśalyānugate siṃhavikrīḍite anuvarte vartani vartāli svāhā.
Bhadrapāla, the pristine cognition of the Tathāgata is uncontrived;
Everywhere, always and invariably, I will be within his sight.
the arhat, the perfectly awakened Buddha, the knowledgeable and venerable one,
Sentient beings, numerous as the particles of Jambu­dvīpa, comprehended the sacred doctrine, that is to say, the immaculate, pure, and untainted eye of the sacred doctrine, with respect to all things.
“Supreme human, tell us About these many hundreds of thousands Of quintillions of infinite bodhisattvas Who have never appeared before.
In this time I do not pass into nirvāṇa, But will continue to teach the Dharma here.
yakṣas, yakṣiṇīs,
“Thus, Mañjuśrī, all the dharmas are known by the Tathāgata to be, from the very beginning, unborn, non-arisen,
“ ‘It stems from illusion and is emptiness;
They are not attached to the three gateways to liberation.
The path has been interrupted;
this supreme vehicle, the Great Vehicle, does overpower and attain emancipation from the world with its gods, humans, and antigods.
He had realized that all phenomena are like an illusion, a mirage, a dream, a moon reflected in water, an echo, or an optical illusion.
“Noble son, bodhisattvas possessing ten qualities will have their words accepted.
They have no concern for their fathers, no concern for their mothers.
maintain ethical discipline, cultivate tolerance, undertake perseverance, and become equipoised in meditative concentration.
When he said the letter dha, out came the statement: ‘The wealth of the noble ones is sevenfold (dhanamāryāṇāṃ saptavidham).’
saying, ‘Come! Child of enlightened heritage, you should retain this transcendent perfection of wisdom, and so forth.
Monks, at that time the Bodhisattva uttered these verses in order to bring even more joy to the assembly of gods:
there were numerous gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas, as well as Śakra and Brahmā and the guardians of the world, who were eager to make offerings to the Bodhisattva. They arrived calling out in joyous voices.
and recite this very transcendent perfection of wisdom, and are attentive to it in the correct manner, honoring, venerating, respecting, and making offerings to it with flowers, garlands, perfume, unguents, robes, parasols, victory banners, ribbons, and diverse musical sounds,
We should be supreme universal monarchs and guardians of the world, “Or vajra holders like Śakra, or the chief god in the Heaven Free from Strife, Aspiring to experience the bliss of meditation in the realm of Brahmā.
with palms placed together, come to listen to this Dharma teaching from Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara:
Apart from a bodhisattva in his final existence, no other being anywhere could ever receive such garments.
When this teaching was given, the minds of eight hundred monks were liberated from defilements without any further appropriation.
This brought them joy and satisfaction,
In that Vairocana­raśmi­prati­maṇḍitā world realm
“Venerable Ānanda, are all phenomena essentially like emanations?”
Then that man says to the rishis,
In your heart, on a moon, is the mantra chain.
Those [bodhisattvas] who are irreversible and those in their final rebirth are also stable.”
places with excellent trees, flowers, fruits, and leaves;
When Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara left the palace of Bali, lord of the asuras,
Similarly, bodhisattvas do not become angry at those who harm them, nor do they become attached to those who do them good.
Vāyu came from his mouth,
“Practicing the transcendent perfection of generosity, they never preoccupy themselves with miserliness.
It is forsaking bad actions through a sense of shame, and dedicating oneself to seeking good qualities.
With their thoughts on the profits derived from killing
“Master, allow us to go forth. We pledge to live the holy life under your guidance.”
Trillions of gods joyfully descend into the river and infuse the waters With perfumes and scented powders so the Sacred Being can bathe.
And so his wife, with the help of relatives and by her own industry, fed and nurtured their son as he grew.
Continually, day and night, His thoughts are of sadness over his son.
this denotes the great deeds of the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas.
one should fasten the root of umbrella tree to one’s head,
To Yaśodatta you offered kuruṇṭa flowers, and food to Satyadarśin.
We have witnessed the army, as terrifying it was, Vanquished by the strength of your insight, merit, and diligence.”
“That which is detachment is taught To be detachment from conceptions.
Abiding in this acceptance, they perfect the understanding of the aspects of the path.
They are fixated on the applications of mindfulness, and in the same vein they are fixated on [the other causal and fruitional attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.”
Mañjuśrī, you have spoken well and explained, without explaining, the acts and non-acts of bodhisattva great beings.
This signifies the destruction of the ten non-virtues That emerge from ordinary body, speech, and mind.
“The accumulation of merit from paying homage to and possessing the names of buddha bhagavāns as numerous as the grains of sand in sixty-two Ganges Rivers, and that created by paying homage just once to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara and possessing his name,
Rather, bodhisattvas’ minds sustain all beings with the result of liberation at the seat of awakening.”
“In the discernment that there is no birth, it intentionally takes birth in order to ripen sentient beings;
‘Those who have miraculous powers and reside in the four dhyānas, Who are overjoyed to hear the teaching of emptiness, And who radiate thousands of light rays Are said to be the great trees.’
But another bodhisattva may believe in this Dharma teaching and
“How, you may wonder, do they not acquire things through improper avenues?
Blessed One, how does consciousness emerge from the body and quickly take rebirth?
They are not delighted when they hear themselves praised. Recipients of alms will have that contentment. {81}
This dependent arising is the dharmakāya of all the tathāgatas.
let alone this samādhi, as their natural result.
“ ‘It is the seat of generosity, because it has no expectation of reward.
The Saṅgha defeats the non-Buddhists,
“ ‘Someone may be able to catch all the sounds In the entire world and put them in a box,
and together they sported, made love, and indulged all of their desires.
It would not shine or gleam, but lose its beauty and glow;
Śakra and Brahmā went in the front, showing the way.
In the same way, Su­bhūti, when other individual followers of the vehicle of the bodhisattvas who are endowed with faith, tolerance, confidence, higher aspiration, willingness, volition, and renunciation,
that sound of Dharma occurs to pacify all the misfortunes, troubles, and afflictions of the gods of the Thirty-Three,
“What is being gentle? It is being beneficial to others.
One should dry out and pulverize the root, bark, leaf, flower, and fruit of Malabar nut, sweet flag, Indian pennywort, and long pepper, and
Noble son, any place where this discourse is kept will become worthy of homage.
the student,
“And Mañjuśrī, the awareness jewel of the Tathāgata is completely pure in its intent, and is fixed at the top of the banner of great compassion.
Su­bhūti, it is because the natural expression of the four applications of mindfulness, though without entity, is still the four applications of mindfulness.
and who were bound by one more life
Through turning the wheel of the Dharma They teach the Buddha’s Dharma. {14}
It cannot be disturbed by the world with its gods, humans, and antigods.
“Those various beings who are blind fools, They proceed toward death.
Even the names of the branches of enlightenment do not exist internally, nor do they exist externally, and nor do they abide between these two.
who have no genuine faith or trust in the sūtras spoken by the Thus-Gone One.
relinquish even their own lives for the sake of acquiring the sacred doctrine,
We bear witness to this.
for we are born, we age, we die, we deteriorate, and then it all happens again.
He will share a teaching of pure conduct, which is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end.
Thereupon the Bhagavān taught the following to the bhikṣus:
Then the Bhagavān, seeing the thoughts in the mind of Pūrṇa Maitrāyaṇī­putra, said to the complete saṅgha of bhikṣus,
One will remedy this by shaving.
Embraced by Hatred Vajrī, and so forth.
to be fully convinced about the absence of persons;
“Mañjuśrī, bodhisattva mahāsattvas are always seeing phenomena in that way, and by remaining in that state, they maintain the bodhisattva mahāsattvas’ field of activity.
Conclusion of the thirtieth chapter, “Tejaguṇarāja.”
“What is skill in methods? It is being skilled in confession, rejoicing, supplication, and the dedication of the roots of goodness.
“Similarly, they should not dwell on the notion that ‘I should persevere in whichever meditative stabilities are desired.’
“Having attained this peace, this stainless samādhi, Those wise people will never have Sorrow, pain, or mental anguish,
So, too, are all phenomena:
When the priests stood before Queen Māyā, she said,
and so [with the other aspects of emptiness], up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities, which is empty of the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities.
“The king renounced his kingdom And entered homelessness in that Jina’s teaching.
In this way, Su­bhūti, do great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of perseverance, acquire the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Śāradvatī­putra, the non-arising, non-affliction, and non-purification of the eyes are without foundation.
Then, by the power of the Buddha, venerable Ānanda asked the Blessed One,
If one recites the mantra seven hundred times,
you should apply yourself to this point without alarm, without fear, and without hesitation.
Once, when they were behaving like this, the monks asked the Blessed One about it,
and similarly, that the [remaining] designations made with respect to sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena, up to and including their designation as entities or non-entities, do not constitute a bodhisattva?
“Sir, what is your approach to the Dharma? What instructions do you give to your students?
karma functions as the field for the seed of consciousness.
They journey through all buddhafields In order to bring benefit to living beings, Yet they see those fields as just like empty space, Free of any conceptual notions of ‘living beings.’
“They themselves should perfect the transcendent perfection of generosity.
He was liberated through the transcendence of wisdom.
Evil one, I will not pass away until all four of my assemblies become restrained, lucid, proficient, and courageous, and can teach the Dharma in conjunction with miracles.”
Su­bhūti, it is because after the irreversible great bodhisattva beings have generated the attentions associated with the world system of desire,
When the bodhisattvas then feel that the non-Buddhists have become close students, they declare,
Gadgadasvara arrived in the sky at the height of seven palm trees, leading a retinue of bodhisattvas,
This body is like a ball of foam, unable to bear any pressure.
Then Great Top-Knotted Brahmā said to Śakra, lord of the gods,
Rather, bodhisattvas think, ‘What sort of insightful person would make their own diligent activity the grounds for looking down on others?’
Among them, internal phenomena are empty of internal phenomena because they do not endure and they do not disintegrate.
She must have an excellent figure, an excellent name, and excellent proportions.
All around him are his trusted people. Some are counting wealth and money,
In time, the young nāga saw monks of pacific bearing diligently practicing meditation, recitation, and yoga.
And if for countless millions of eons
Noble son, bodhisattvas who possess ten such qualities fulfill the command of the thus-gone ones.
Making a homa offering of salt and black mustard, or a chaff homa
One will become very strong.
“I contemplated that meaning in this way, And the other buddhas in the ten directions
Venerable Lord, it is because all things are non-apprehensible in terms of those who would be discouraged, the agent of their discouragement, or the object of their discouragement.
the body of the perfections, The powers, and the masteries
“Mañjuśrī, there is no Tathāgata.
By some of the bodhi trees they also prepared a lotus throne, or a throne made of fragrant substances, or a throne made of various precious materials.
Is this true? Is this true?
there is no one, human or nonhuman, who is capable of undergoing such hardships.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of speech attain the three doorways to liberation.
Kāśyapa, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the perfectly enlightened Buddha teaches the Dharma in that way.
‘There have been no buddhas in the past, Nor will there be any in the future or now in the present,
and I saw these different samādhis of Bodhisattva Samantabhadra and others.
The Dharma of the buddhas was not heard
Ānanda, if this precious gemstone were immersed in turbid water, the water would become clear.
and some are made of crystal.
Thinking of the bhikṣu Puṣpacandra, He could not join in amusements or be happy. {93}
the precious quality of skillful means, and merit.
The Blessed One replied, “Bhadrapāla, in that regard, there is an inner form and an outer form.
free of factors connected with evil deeds and nonvirtues,
Finally, the divine son Maheśvara, the twenty-eight great yakṣa generals, the thirty-two great yakṣa warriors, and Hārītī with her sons, all with their entourages, each took a divine parasol, offered it to the śrāvakas, then sat, fanning them with chowries.
When he said the letter ja, out came the statement: ‘Transcending old age and death (jarā­maraṇa­samatikramaṇa).’
I have been thinking of this over and over, and he has arrived here!’
You must give the excellent light of sacred knowledge,
"དེ་ལ་འདི་སྐད་<tRegarding this, it is said: 
It is through meditation on the path that they are liberated.
and thirty-two thousand gods, who had all genuinely entered into unexcelled and perfect awakening.
Such were the words that arose in the presence of the maṇḍalas of the assembly, throughout all these buddhafields!
they stood in front of these houses
the level of the tathāgatas—all these levels are [identical with] the real nature of phenomena,
The Secret Guardian of Bliss destroys the afflictions.
“A thirsty person traveling At noon during the summer
wealth, countries, palaces, retinues, sons, daughters, or spouses.
“A householder.”
His nose is elegantly high.
They sport in clairvoyant powers.
The thorough cognition of the body is to be ungraspable.
It is likewise when there are demeritorious formative factors.
“In order that they might gain relief And that they would not turn back, he says,
Without attachment they are skilled in teaching and the meaning of words; Without attachment they teach in the middle of the assembly. {29}
Who were diligent, with unimpaired conduct, Had faultless conduct, and were like precious jewels. {69}
in order to bring all beings to maturity and in order to liberate all beings, they continue to do nothing but roam in those three realms.
For isn’t the Supreme Being A worthy recipient of the best of offering rites?
They know the activities of all beings.
In that same way a tathāgata, arhat, perfectly enlightened buddha saves from all dangers, all violence, troubles, harm, suffering, unhappiness, the darkness of ignorance, the obscuration of the dark of blindness, and being in bondage.
This concludes the fourth chapter, on the gateways to the light of the Dharma.
making sure that they stay there, joyful, comfortable, unharmed and uninjured;
This was the fourth omen.
When that is known there is no loss, And the king attained the acceptance of birthlessness. {41}
And the voices of all the buddhas of the ten directions could be heard proclaiming their teachings of the Dharma in all the worlds, the sounds reverberating in the space beneath the great precious canopy.
Similarly, when demons or demonic gods see a bodhisattva they will be utterly and completely terrified.
I will inspire the unbelieving with faith, and I will guarantee my help and protection to those who believe and uphold the Dharma.”
nor will they believe in the karmic maturation of generosity. They will only be concerned with the happiness of this life.
“In this way, in the teaching of the guides, This skill in methods, which is most excellent,
By dressing a wound with this oil alone, the wound will heal. All these things can also be achieved by ingesting this oil.
the samādhi named Being Patient,
Even up to the Palace of Brahmā, The news went out from person to person: “The Protector of the World Has turned a stainless wheel.
One gives rise to the notion that non-happiness is not happiness and that non-suffering is not suffering.
Surrounded by priests, townspeople, merchants, householders, ministers, local lords, gatekeepers, local people, friends, and kinfolk,
As soon as Dhṛtarāṣṭra arrived, he began to circumambulate the city of Kapilavastu. Stopping in the east, from where he had arrived, he paid homage to the Bodhisattva.
then the accumulation of merit of all those bodhisattvas on the tenth bhūmi would then equal the accumulation of merit through that alms giving.
in the abdomen of the effigy of Gaṇapati made of clay from an anthill.
They delight always in generosity: They give away their possessions and give happiness. {197}
humankind, human beings, agents, actors, petitioners, instigators, experiencers, experiencing subjects, knowers, and viewers is without foundation owing to the absence of knowers, viewers, and so on
With 100,000 homas of bilva fruits,
“He is a refuge for the frightened,
should come And listen to the true Dharma.”
Left, right, above, below, the gates, and so forth
These are to attain a supreme body, supreme strength, supreme retinue, supreme presence of mind, supreme renunciation, supreme purity of thoughts, supreme level of meditative concentration, and supreme manifestation of insight.
“Friends,” he said, “look upon the body of the Bodhisattva, adorned as it is with the signs of a hundred merits.
Monks, I then had the knowledge that I had fully awakened to unsurpassed and perfect buddhahood.”
Just as a flame extinguished by the wind Cannot be taken up and counted, So do the sons of the buddhas Become indemonstrable Once they have discarded all fetters.
through the wisdom of skill in methods he teaches three yānas in order to free beings from the three realms, which are like a dilapidated house with its roof and rafters on fire.
Nothing at all would happen to one’s body, Aside from the effects of previous actions.
It reaches and enters everywhere. And still,
Like a stainless jewel, your discipline has been pure;
Become those who save many beings From the hells and from bad karma. {7}
The Dharma that is taught in all worlds by The Buddha who has the signs of hundreds of merits,
“ ‘You did not listen to that saṅgha of bhikṣus. Why, venerable one, did you come to the town?
they also encourage all sentient beings, establishing them in the acquisition of the six transcendent perfections.
the subsequent knowledge,
this brahmin boy’s insight would surpass my own.”
These are not the [real] most extensive discourses!’
While reciting this mantra, one should direct one’s angry gaze into the sky.
It is like a palmyra tree: if you were to lop off its crown, it would no longer be green, nor would it flourish, grow, or expand.
Thus, consuming their alms in this way they can pursue virtue.
and virtuous in the end.
If I too have been crowned and anointed a kṣatriya king,
who accepted them and offered them to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the Samyaksaṃbuddha Amitābha,
bodhisattvas present there—all those who are practicing austerities, all those who reside at the seat of awakening, all the buddhas who have attained complete buddhahood, and all those who turn the wheel of Dharma.
the one who grants offerings perfectly, the one who accomplishes disciplined action,
nor do they consider doing so.
said another.
Or bow their head for just an instant, Or similarly bow their body just one time; {95}
the monks filed in, each carrying his own begging bowl, and sat down in order of seniority.
Noble son, even the tathāgatas do not know the six-syllable mahāvidyā, let alone the bodhisattvas.
One should surround it with an outer garland of lotuses, and, on the eighth or twelfth day of the month, using a jar containing five types of jewels, one should take it down. Having washed and worshipped it, one should recite the mantra one hundred and eight times.
the complete assembly, and the world with its gods, humans, demigods and gandharvas rejoiced and highly praised what had been proclaimed by the Bhagavān.
What is the causal condition for formations?”
“Here, once I attained the threefold liberation,
the purity of phenomena is not subject to involuntary reincarnation due to the absolute purity of [all other attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience, which does not pass away.”
If you are a human you don’t seem to be one.’
Kolita’s relatives again entreated him, a second and a third time, saying each time,
and their great teachings resounded like the lion’s roar throughout the ten directions.
Noble son, I know that there are innumerably many buddhas who have now passed beyond suffering whom the goddess A­martyā inspired, encouraged, and caused to arouse the mind of awakening.
“Everything is without existence, without words, Empty, peaceful, and primordially stainless.
Great King, do you see these two boys?’“
rostrations to the tathāgata Jinendra, buddha of the north
There one could hear the calls of geese, peacocks, cranes, ducks, cuckoos, ospreys, parrots, grouse, pheasants, partridges, nightingales, and wild ducks.
Rejoices, and recites just one word of it
who has a hundred thousand arms;
They should nonetheless focus on the most distinguished doctrines among the most distinguished doctrines.
In order to complete the accumulations for their awakening they engage in excellent conduct.
‘Now that you have been given to me by Māra, you should all conceive the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.’
Disoriented, they could not find their way, and without resting place or protection, They fled like birds seeing a forest fire.
“Reverend Saṅgharakṣita, you are fatigued from your travels, so eat now.
and I was very much ashamed.
By offering 400,000 homas of whatever flowers may be available,
Venerable Lord, whatever is subject to afflicted mental states is not liberated.”
“Then the goddesses, saluting Vimalakīrti, said to him,
Since his sphere of wisdom is not disturbed regarding the authentic limit, he is known as the one who speaks the truth.
“Young man, at that time, within that assembly there was a bodhisattva mahāsattva named Kṣemadatta.
“He will not teach the sacred doctrine according to the notions that physical forms are past, that they are future, or that they are present.
I never say anything to them Of these my endless activities.
“In the future, when the lifespans of beings last one hundred years,
Su­bhūti, there are no sentient beings whatsoever among the five classes of living beings who are categorized as sentient beings, who can conceive of or estimate genuinely perfect buddhahood, the nature of the tathāgata, self-origination, or omniscience.
They do not carry out the practices toward awakening out of a desire for gain, praise, or eulogy, nor for the higher states, wealth, followers, fame, renown, or honor.”
“All those shortcomings ensue from monks granting ordination into the monkhood to persons who have not yet reached twenty years.”
similarly, when they teach the sacred doctrine to sentient beings in order that they might abandon their view of sentient beings,
Bliss and Joy bring accomplishment
Similarly, this mind [of the bodhisattvas] is unattached to the applications of mindfulness,
“Friends, alas, the sentient beings of this world called Endurance are suffering!
‘This is not the sacred doctrine. This is not the Vinaya.
You should not have conviction in the emptiness of internal phenomena, and you should not have conviction in the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities.
In the southern direction,
Completely abandon thoughts and recite this.
it is because resting is non-apprehensible, and so all things do not come to rest.
like a concentrated person,
They were:
“ ‘They are not afraid of poison or weapons; They are not afraid in the middle of fire or water.
It has arisen; destroy it, destroy! Jvālājihvā, destroy it, destroy! Wherever it has arisen—destroy it, destroy—there you should go—destroy it, destroy! Svāhā!
Then the goddess requested the lord:
We will be dedicated to enlightenment And preserving what you have bestowed on us.
His lotus ponds were emptied of water and dried out.
To sow hatred among others,
Has practiced wholesome conduct for a thousand eons and now sets out for the Bodhi tree.
Also present were some five hundred fully ordained nuns, laymen, and laywomen, all of whom had seen the truth.
Su­bhūti, if one were to ask in what way great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, encourage, secure and establish sentient beings, one hundred billion trillion in number, in the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration,
it is because dreams, and similarly, echoes, optical aberrations, mirages, magical displays, or phantoms are the erroneous [misconceptions] of ordinary people,
Similarly, those who are diligent, alert, and mindful, after eliminating worldly covetousness and sadness without apprehending anything,
To as high up as the summit of existence; That is what their physical eyes will be like.
“Son of noble family, if a minister commits any of the five root transgressions he will forfeit all previously generated roots of virtue, and will be in a state of transgression.
When the thorns of yellow saṃkuca are gathered And hidden in the wilderness home,
noble ones, those other tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas whom I have previously mentioned, beginning with Tathāgata Dīpaṃkara, and the passing into nirvāṇa of those tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas, were my emanations, noble ones, in order to accomplish the teaching of the Dharma through skillful methods.
“Vajrapāṇi, listen well!
A bowl with white flowers, another one with milk, another with perfumed water, and another with rice—
Candrakāntā, Brahmaduhitā,
If perchance a wanderer from another tīrthika order should come,
Similarly, the non-existent ten powers of the tathāgatas remain unattached to the non-existent ten powers of the tathāgatas,
I accurately understood the precise identity of contact, the source of contact, the cessation of contact, and the path leading to its cessation.
It is hard to make your bed in distant forests, at the foot of mountains, and in remote places.
the butcher is known to be yellow.
For so long he has circumambulated parents, monks, priests, spiritual teachers, worthy people, and memorials with relics of the thus-gone ones,
“The Tathāgata is the natural result of merit.
He replied, “This is owing to the voidness of phenomena associated with the emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics!”
They should not develop attachment for being wealthy.
emancipation in the perfection of wisdom.
They do not engage with the notion that physical forms are imbued with happiness, or the notion that these are imbued with suffering.
I have never before Seen an omen such as this.
and similarly, those who apprehend the notions that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are the emptiness of internal phenomena, and so on, up to the notion that these are the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities
It would leave his spiritual practice in tatters, leave him ruined, wrecked, fallen, and defeated.
“The one meaning of the differing words Of the sūtras that have been taught by me
Like the core of a plantain tree, they have no strength.
1) unhindered discernment of meaning, (2) unhindered discernment of the doctrine, (3) unhindered discernment of etymological definitions, and (4) unhindered discernment of inspiration.
The area was so splendid, so beautiful to behold, so filled with ornaments, and so enchanting that all the gods of the desire and form realms came to think that their own homes seemed like charnel grounds in comparison.
When Upatiṣya and Kolita had prostrated at the feet of Aśvajit, they left and went to where the Blessed One was.
When they hear about the Bodhisattva entering his mother’s womb in such a pure way,
Is it your aspiration
and who consequently have actualized great compassion,
Their ankles are inconspicuous.
and if he were to conjure up and reveal them being burned, cooked, and boiled by the fires of hell, experiencing unbearable, strong, and excruciating sufferings,
You should also remember it as Youthful Mañjuśrī’s Instructions.”
When they die, the thus-gone one Akṣobhya will bring them relief, saying, ‘Come. Enter the realm of Sukhāvatī.
the samādhi named Gaping Lion,
Similarly, the moon-like bodhisattvas are always adorned with the ornaments of excellent qualities.
“Śāradvatī­putra! In the same vein, do you think that the anything other than the real nature of [the other sensory elements], up to and including anything other than the real nature of the sensory element of mental consciousness, constitutes a bodhisattva?”
When he reached the universe Sarva­gandha­sugandhā, he bowed down at the feet of the Tathāgata Gandhottama­kūṭa and said,
They will quickly attain the highest complete enlightenment and be samyaksaṃbuddhas.
Therefore in order to protect beings I am going to the city and the supreme palace.’ {14}
are not attracted to profit, veneration, and eulogistic verses.
How so? Because it is free of all negative tendencies of speech.
and causes entry into the path to the vision of the tathāgatas’ wisdom.
struck fear into their hearts with the sound of conchs and war-drums.
Oṁ, Green Acala, accept this flower! Hūṁ phaṭ!
On the other hand, if he were to leave his home and go forth as a renunciant, he would become a thus-gone one,
“The thus-gone ones feel great compassion for sentient beings since all phenomena are beyond wishes and yet sentient beings make aspirations.
“Su­bhūti, the minds of those great bodhisattva beings
relying on reality and not insisting on opinions derived from personal authorities
Then they circled around the Bodhisattva and his mother three times before departing.
and the Thus-Gone One will liberate them.
“Then, noble ones, when the Bhagavān taught King Śubhavyūha by speaking excellently about the Dharma,
Venerable Lord, it is because the roots of virtue of any who make offerings to a mustard seed-size relic of the tathāgatas who have passed into final nirvāṇa will not come to an end—
Whoever applies the excrement of the musk shrew Together with bdellium will, merely by doing so
Conclusion of the fifteenth chapter, “The Elucidation of the Buddha’s Smile.”
Emerging from that great celestial palace,
offer gifts and make merits.
and the porticos should be scented with various fragrances to the right and left.
If they engage with the notion that entities exist in physical forms, or that entities do not exist therein,
‘The Licchavi Vimalakīrti bows down one hundred thousand times at your feet, O Lord,
It does not dwell on [the causal and fruitional attributes], from the applications of mindfulness up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
All attain unequaled, inconceivable enlightenment Through having trained in this samādhi.” {35}
‘Then, brother, should you attain even the slightest store of qualities, you must come share them with me.’“
“Blessed One, did these holy beings attain this illusory absorption here in this world?
You cut off the view of ‘self.’
From these descriptions, Nārāyaṇa, you should understand how those beings who form the resolve toward unsurpassed and completely perfect awakening come to possess all merit.
All this you should know.
Thus, bodhisattvas bring the qualities of buddhahood to maturation.
due to the many various ways of listening to the teachings, having objectives, and having aspirations.
Free from elaboration, and untainted.
Such Dharma teachers should be regarded as thus-gone ones themselves.”
They called out, “May the king thrive!”
“Mañjuśrī, what is the gateway to the utterly unborn?”
When he awakes he does not see those pleasures. He knows that it was a dream. {11}
to the buddhas and bodhisattvas three times during the day and three times at night,
and the utterly unborn on the ultimate level is also ultimately the same as the dharmas of those who are no longer training.
Ajita, the accumulation of merit through generosity and establishing beings in arhathood that was previously described does not equal a hundredth of the merit, of the good karma, accumulated from that rejoicing.
“What is the elimination of the āyatanas? It is renouncing the āyatanas as being like hallucinations.
Oṁ, svāhā to Sukhendra!
When I finally managed to get up
“Mañjuśrī, is there a method by which a bodhisattva great being who is forgetful can rest in equipoise?”
"ཐབས་དེ་ལྟ་<tIt is such skills that enable the thus-gone ones to manifest on their bodies all thirty-two major marks of a great being as well;
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that one is liberated by perceiving the ears, the nose, the tongue, the body, and the mental faculty as entities and non-entities?”
“ ‘Always relying on the Dharma of emptiness, Maintaining fearlessly the power of correct conduct,
The lifespan of that jina Will be the same as twelve intermediate eons.
The king replied with tears filling his eyes,
Ānanda, it is because the irreversible level of great bodhisattva beings and the [other attainments], up to and including unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment,
“Śāriputra, that buddha realm will be filled by that kind of bodhisattva.
“So it is, Su­bhūti, that great bodhisattva beings who wish to attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment should not lack the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Śāriputra, those bhagavān buddhas also praise my inconceivable qualities.”
likewise, they do not consider whether the ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty are afflicted or purified.
Gone Far, Unwavering, Perfect Understanding, and Clouds of Dharma. {i}
they should certainly know that eminently powerful gods, endowed with great occult power and great miraculous abilities, will have arrived to examine this [book of] the transcendent perfection of wisdom, and to hold, retain, venerate, make offerings to, and respect it.
nor anything that could be designated a cloud.
In the same vein, [it is in this way that] they should refine [all attributes and attainments], up to and including omniscience.”
Similarly, you must complete the perfection of conduct, the perfection of patience, the perfection of diligence, the perfection of meditation, and the perfection of wisdom.
“They will utter praises of wisdom But will have no interest in wisdom.
Venerable Lord, if the notion of sights as empty is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of sights as not empty become a bodhisattva?
Noble ones, have faith and certainty in the true words that I, the Tathāgata, will speak.
Who benefited beings appeared in the world, And he was known by the name Ghoṣadatta. {12}
In future times will be zealous And make offerings to the supreme among humans. {8}
“Reverend, heed me. I, [postulant’s name], will henceforth,
and they will quake, quake more intensely, and quake with utmost intensity.
They will have no gratitude, be divisive and violent— Yet will say, ‘I am a noble practitioner of bodhisattva conduct.’ {42}
“You may wonder how bodhisattvas are objects of worship.
a hundred thousand buddhas will extend their hands toward them.
Just as a celestial spirit delights in the offering of celestial flower garlands, and is satisfied with the body of the person it possesses,
Similarly, by offering 400,000 homas of any type of flower,
It is born of reality. It is born of conscious awareness.
“Oh no! You are the essential being and your commitment is strong.
Every day he delivered to the people teachings that were eloquent and agreeable,
I experience the most sublime happiness There, in that circle of bhūtas. My attendants there, moreover, Are endowed with all the best attributes.
They are to give up negativity, to bring about positive qualities, and to be skilled in dedicating merit.
So quick, shine the light of wisdom.
What is a congenital hermaphrodite? One who is born neither a female nor a male.
“Alas, my dear one with a beautiful nose, beautiful eyebrows, And the stainless circling hair between your brows.
“They will all have the same name: They will be renowned in the world as Ratnaketu.
They do not see phantoms and they are not viewers of phantoms.
Since they possess the lineage of Dharma, they will also be prosperous.
Do not leave, you must stay.”
Bodhisattvas, similarly, move in a stream of virtuous qualities and their movements are guided by virtue.
Lord, when I heard this teaching, I was astonished
And conceive of themselves as arhats.
From seeing her all the time, he gave rise to lustful intentions toward the girl.
They strike with the blows Of the great vajra of the meaning of emptiness. {83}
When they die, they will be reborn in other hells.
“They harbor the notion that those who are not genuinely perfect buddhas are genuinely perfect buddhas, and
This is how the thus-gone ones have fully awakened to unexcelled and complete buddhahood in the past, this is how they do so now, and this is how they will awaken in the future.
“I will walk in front, while you will carry his horse.
and they will encourage others also to assume all these virtuous attributes,
“Young man, there are ten benefits for bodhisattva mahāsattvas from maintaining patience and being kind. What are these ten?
“Such a person would be difficult even to look at— how could he ever be praised?”
Those bodhisattvas will swiftly abide on the irreversible levels.
a stride that suppresses evil opponents with their doctrines, a stride that removes the cataract of darkness and disturbing emotions,
If he is opposed to a shrewd person, he will not be able to think effectively.”
king of the Śākyas,
Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that sights constitute a bodhisattva
like the moon on water, like hallucinations, like reflections, and like space.
Some are to be converted by pratyekabuddhas.
The four precious trees were complete with flowers and leaves.
Roll the five into pellets the size of mustard seeds.
“After he transmigrates at death away from this Sahā universe, a bodhisattva must have eight qualities to reach a pure buddhafield safe and sound.
whenever they do not engage with the notions that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are with signs or that they are signless.
Similarly, countless Parī­ttaśubha devas, Apramāṇaśubha devas, filled with joy,
Śārisuta, if I were from today to describe For an entire eon the harm that comes To those who reject this sūtra,
It is neither a support nor is it supported.
Should be praised by you As the doorway to the power of retention. {52}
With his palms together, he bowed toward the Blessed One and supplicated him as follows.
You will become distracted and unable to develop nonattachment. You will not enter into the state of cessation
If bodhisattvas obtain a heap of jewels as large as Mount Meru they will accept that, just as they will also accept some inferior thing that they might obtain.
From the right side, Subuddhi said:
This concludes the deity chapter, the fourth in the glorious Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa tantra called “The Sole Hero.”
When free from pride, conceit, and arrogance, they are free from evil.
“Mañjuśrī, whoever has the confidence to see all phenomena as unproduced by virtue of their being intrinsically unproduced has the faculty of faith.
The earth of the trichiliocosm trembled in six ways.
You will not be separated from that which is beloved and pleasant, and will not encounter that which is disliked.
Carrying human skins, Filled with blood, And smeared with potent poison,
“Now imagine another bodhisattva, with the right inclination, who listens to this Dharma teaching, The Ornament of the Light of Awareness That Enters the Domain of All Buddhas, and then believes in it, engages with it, trusts it,
“Similarly, the applications of mindfulness are themselves omniscience, and omniscience is the applications of mindfulness.
Heard as far as the Brahma worlds,
Moreover, Su­bhūti, when great bodhisattva beings who practice the six transcendent perfections see [enslaved beings with] feudal masters,
He teaches them skillful means, primordial wisdom, vigor, and how to maintain determination.
“He served ten billion buddhas And made vast offerings to them.
That is how the element of consciousness that leans toward non-merit should be considered.
nor does the realm of sentient beings either increase or decrease.
Nanda, Ānanda, Rāhula, Gavāṃpati, Bharadvāja, Kālodāyin, Vakula, and Aniruddha. He dwelt with these and other great śrāvakas and with many bodhisattva mahāsattvas,
This is the final Dharma teaching of the tathāgatas.
Noble children, as soon as I pass into parinirvāṇa, the young prince Ratnākara will become a buddha.
This concludes the nineteenth chapter, on approaching the seat of awakening.
“Smelling the scent, one should clean The woman’s orifice with one’s tongue.
I shall describe this, so listen to me!
It would not be right of me to escape from that wilderness alone.’
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ excellent wisdom of spontaneous accomplishment consist in?
“They live secretly in solitary places. They never have any distractions.
Similarly, they neither associate sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena with omniscience, nor do they disassociate them therefrom.
“Venerable ones, would you say that the mind is blue, or is it yellow?
The sameness of liberation is the same as the sameness of the dharmas.
It is populous, filled with people.
Whoever’s name one includes in the mantra, she will arrive.
and were abiding in emptiness,
Venerable Lord, it is because I consider that those great bodhisattva beings who teach and grant instruction in the transcendent perfection of generosity, and
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ aspiration to persist for the benefit of all sentient beings consist in?
His wish was to be completely on his own and at peace.
“Those who do not know this way Listen to the Buddha’s words
“The last of all of them Was the Lord of the World,
and because the recitation of the Prātimokṣasūtra is equally applicable, from now on you must not neglect what you must train in.”
“Make images that are fashioned of clay, Or stone, or wood, or painted,
Conclusion of the twenty-first chapter, “The Past.”
Thus, the absence of mental intensity is the entrance into nonduality.”
“Divine princes, the emptiness of internal phenomena, the emptiness of external phenomena, the emptiness of both external and internal phenomena, the emptiness of emptiness, the emptiness of great extent, the emptiness of ultimate reality, the emptiness of conditioned phenomena, the emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, the emptiness of the unlimited, the emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, the emptiness of non-dispersal, the emptiness of inherent existence, the emptiness of all intrinsic defining characteristics, the emptiness of all things, the emptiness of non-apprehension, the emptiness of non-entities, the emptiness of essential nature, and the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities are all indeed like a dream, like a magical display.
The Blessed One replied, “Su­bhūti, if all the sentient beings in this world system of the great trichiliocosm, as many as there have been throughout time, had acquired a human body and all of them had then attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, and a single son of enlightened heritage or daughter of enlightened heritage who followed the vehicle of the bodhisattvas had honored, venerated, and respected those tathāgatas, arhats and genuinely perfect buddhas, and performed all kinds of service on their behalf, offering for the duration of their lives robes, food, bedding, mats, medicines for the treatment of ailments, and [other] resources
“Some said, ‘I don’t have to do any physical work.’
They, along with the dharmabhāṇaka Supuṣpacandra, resorted to the forest called Samantabhadra and dwelt there. Supuṣpacandra taught those bhikṣus there the Dharma teaching of retention.
While resting in this visualization one should first make offerings to the best of one’s ability
he practiced all such virtues for seven incalculable eons.
“Then the great rishis have Great compassion for the once-blind man,
“Saying ‘I am not meditating’ is called pride. ‘I am meditating’ is a second kind of pride.
“What is being free from rebirth? It is putting an end to rebirth.
It is without any fundamental consciousness,
it quivered, quivered strongly, and quivered intensely;
one would vomit blood from the mouth and die, or
and saturated with awareness;
and it looked like a collapsed stable with rafters exposed on either side.
some are on the sixth bhūmi;
Monks, at that point the Thus-Gone One had accomplished everything he had to do.
Su­bhūti, there are great bodhisattva beings who can indeed see with their eyes of flesh as far as a hundred yojanas.
“Bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have the restraint of the mind attain the ten strengths of a tathāgata, the four fearlessnesses,
Similarly, they will have become equipoised in the formless absorptions, up to and including the sense field of neither perception nor non-perception.
and poison.
Having offered these, please accept them. I shall venerate, honor, respect, and please you.
We will protect their lands. We will grant them all the wealth and crops they desire.
After searching about, he spied a narrow path and set off upon it.
(1) considering all elements to be present in the earth element,
Śakra, mighty king of the gods, then said to the Blessed One,
“Bhaiṣajyarāja, this is the great secret from the higher knowledge of the Tathāgata
then, Su­bhūti, those great bodhisattva beings who practice accordingly do indeed practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
Son of noble family, you should look upon the body just as you look upon these clothes.
Ultimately, there is no ‘far shore,’ there is no ‘this shore,’
raised his hands, palms pressed together in salute of the Buddha,
Desire rooted in the five seals of enlightened body— The pair of the great seal and the gnosis seal, Along with the samaya seal, the dharma seal and the action seal— Becomes exceedingly profound.
“Furthermore, Mañjuśrī, bodhisattvas who openly delight in the pleasures of the five senses without renouncing or abandoning them,
In the center of a multicolored lotus, One should visualize the lord Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.
They should not dwell on the notion that physical forms are void, nor should they dwell on the notion that they are not void.
“Blessed One, you have spoken of ‘sections of the Dharma.’
Su­bhūti, for these reasons this [Great] Vehicle will not come to rest anywhere, but nor will it not do so. This is owing to its non-resting.
Both the childish and the wise will cease to be.
In previous existences the Lord of the World Had made perfect offerings to the jinas of the past.
Bhagavat, how can I obtain it?
Those ones who will appear Will have power over rebirth.
and make offerings to it with various flowers, garlands, incense, unguents, powders, religious robes, clothing, parasols, victory banners, and ribbons, as well as with musical sounds,
Then the bodhisattva mahāsattva Samantabhadra declared,
Bhagavān, since all afflictions arise from the ground of space, I neither seek, nor abandon, nor meditate on, nor manifest, any phenomenon.
It is because it would be impossible—if he does not perceive even himself, how would he perceive the Tathāgata?”
they are also known as sense fields of total consummation because each element is respectively transformed into all the others.
and the reason for teaching are all ultimately utterly unborn.
for it leads one to engage in wholesome deeds.
What, you may ask, is the sacred doctrine that they then teach?
they know the absorptions and associated spheres that the solitary buddhas engage in,
Bhagavān, today we have unexpectedly heard words from the Tathāgata of a kind that we have never heard before, which is a great gain.
and if in the emptiness of inherent existence no sentient beings or anything at all is apprehensible,
This extremely difficult task That the guides have enthusiasm for.
Nobody ever attains anything; there is no realization and no liberation.’ ”
“It obscures the sunlight And it cools the land.
The thirty-seven, the pristine cause, Give rise to non-dual gnosis, the effect.
The Buddha then said to the young Licchavi Prabhāvyūha
He thinks, ‘This is marvelous!
Who perceives this conception? Who ends this conception? {95}
(2) the support for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of perseverance with the formative force of exertion,
No, Venerable Lord!” he replied.
One can also perform this mentally.
Finally, Ānanda, the buddhas accomplish the buddha-work by means of the four māras and all the eighty-four thousand types of passion that afflict living beings.
“Su­bhūti, ordinary people who are unskilled apprehend dreams and they apprehend the dreamer of dreams.
With great devotion he beholds the Bodhisattva Sitting cross-legged on a cushion of grass, Immutable, like the central mountain.
‘I shall attain complete nirvāṇa,’
“Noble ones,” he continued, “in the same way, although I attained the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood countless, innumerable hundreds of thousands of quintillions of eons ago, I sometimes teach as a skillful method such as this in order to guide beings.
the inconceivably numerous attainments concerning the kleśas, and the inconceivably numerous attainments concerning purification. Those are the four.
similarly, [the other causal attributes], up to and including the noble eightfold path, are revealed therein.
when he was dying, he heard this Dharma teaching The White Lotus of the Good Dharma.
I attained the threefold knowledge, Then remembered immeasurable myriad eons, As if waking from sleep.
Padmaśrīgarbha, you should also not think that at that time, at that point, the two beings called Precious Mind and Perfect Wealth were anybody else.
The displays at the seat of awakening Were created by these four deities. To describe their qualities in words Would be utterly impossible.
“‌Noble sir, how does the bodhisattva follow the way to attain the qualities of the Buddha?”
As a Dharma homage, blessed buddhas residing in numerous buddha realms projected numerous light rays from the hair between their eyebrows.
Unguided by the transcendent perfection of wisdom, all of them will be separated from the transcendent perfection of wisdom
It must be powerful, and renowned as such.
It leads beyond conditioned phenomena; It is not nihilistic and neither is it permanent, But cuts through all views— So is the wheel of Dharma described.
Through the power of the tathāgatas’ majesty and their various Dharma discourses, one will be aware of wholesome and unwholesome actions.
Manifestly perfect buddhahood has not been attained anywhere.
Rare are the noble sons or daughters who worship this Dharma teaching,
In that way the faculty of his eyes will be purified.
“There will never be even one being Who has heard this Dharma teaching that will not become a buddha.
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who aspire to generosity.”
and world protectors arrived, as many as there are atoms of dust in the ineffable quintillion buddhafields.
Delighted, induced, aroused, incited, and established by us in the six transcendent perfections, they in turn will attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed and genuinely perfect enlightenment.”
“I will help the Bodhisattva to rise from his bed.”
“The woman who gave birth to me.”
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, the evil Māra, approaching in the guise of a virtuous ascetic, might say,
they do not tell lies,
and no direct realization of a result.
With no despondency, she spoke these words: ‘Listen, father, to what I have to say. {3}
One should make love to Delusion Vajrī.
He also manifests [as someone who renounces the household life, goes forth to live as a renunciant and practices asceticism, and eventually] as someone who, having tamed Māra and turned the wheel of Dharma, pleases beings by bringing down the rain of the great cloud of Dharma.
‘Even slanderous people find slander unpleasant; they do not want to hear it, do not like it, and do not enjoy it.
filled the folds of his skirt with the dazzling colors of divine blue lotus flowers, lotuses, water lilies, and white lotuses,
He went to his parents and said,
Fire overcomes wood, And water overcomes fire. Wind overcomes clouds, And vajra pierces gems.
If he recites the Prātimokṣasūtra and reads and recites its supplements,
he is free from bliss;
We shall fulfill all the instructions that the Tathāgata has given.
If you ask why, O gods,
“ ‘I will put up with beings’ hostility and anger, And liberate everyone from the ocean of existence.
They will behold trillions of stūpas fashioned of the seven kinds of precious metals and gems, containing [the relics] of those who had passed into final nirvāṇa.
“The king who was named Dṛḍhabala, The powerful cakravartin with many treasures,
and are reborn among humans.
And considered them to be teachers, Venerating them with the respect shown to buddhas. {136}
and then the outer form of the Dharma will remain for another thirty-two intermediate eons.
If he remains in his palace, he will become a universal monarch who commands the four armies.
What is this attainment of miraculous powers?
“Son, for as long as you are in this life.”
he dwelt in the Heaven of Joy in Uccadhvaja, a great celestial palace measuring sixty-four leagues around, where he taught the Dharma to the gods of the Heaven of Joy.
That blessed buddha teaches the Dharma to bodhisattva great beings in terms of a single vehicle.
One should leave the mixture for one day and night in a hollowed fruit of downy datura.
A lay vow holder, and also a yoginī,
and think, ‘I have had enough of such beings who can hardly be trained!’
It teaches the non-disturbance of phenomena and is a gateway to the ascertainment of all phenomena.
“It is as follows. Mañjuśrī, imagine that this wide earth were made entirely of beryl,
You who have no home, obtain a home.
In the past he taught that all who are conditioned by birth and death Have no friends whatsoever.
“The one who makes an offering of a single toe Gains excellent merit that is millions of times greater
the love that is happiness because it introduces living beings to the happiness of the Buddha.
Then Senior Su­bhūti, knowing in his own mind the thoughts of these divine princes, addressed them as follows:
Thousands of millions of beings Took rebirth among the pretas.
Blessed One, there are indeed—inconceivably many. They are limitless, and it would not be easy to describe them in words.
Homage to you, Able One Who Shows the Path— The leader, the eye in the trichiliocosm.
Exert yourself with continuous concentration. When acting, one takes the opportunity; Without acting, one does not accomplish anything.
“The resplendence of my mansion Eclipses the light and colors Of any beautiful mansion Anywhere in the desire realm.
The suffering of those born into the animal realm, such as the fear of being eaten by one another, was also pacified.
Sudarśana, supreme among those who are venerated by gods and men
Thus, whether or not the thus-gone ones appear, this realm of phenomena is indeed always there.
“Being by nature completely pure, all dharmas occur due to an assemblage of causes and conditions.
Smiles broke out upon the merchants’ faces as they stared in amazement and cried out,
Even if I were to cut off all of my flesh, The body of the Dharma would have no wound or cut. {23}
they grasp in their hands and polish the moon and the sun, which are so miraculous, powerful, and majestic;
Similarly, you should abide in individual enlightenment!
He is empty of non-existence;
You should always pay homage at such places, Offer praise, and present great offerings.
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, to be brief, all things are non-conceptual!
The hair of their heads is bluish black, soft, and long.
They will find the Tathāgata and the instructions he teaches, and will quickly be among the company of the buddha bhagavāns.
Once there, do not be apprehensive.
As this light shone forth, all the worlds in the ten directions were illuminated.
or else by assuming the form of Śakra, by assuming the form of Brahmā, or by assuming the form of Vaiśravaṇa.
“No, Venerable Su­bhūti!” he replied.
The egoistic views of aggregates, being unproduced themselves, do not exist ultimately. Hence such views do not really conceptualize ‘these are aggregates’ or ‘these aggregates cease.’
all conceived in their own minds the spirit of unexcelled, totally perfect enlightenment.
Its movement, contraction, and expansion constitute the air element.
The Blessed One was resident at the Jetavana, Anāthapiṇḍada’s grove near Śrāvastī.
He had reached the other shore, since he had crossed the four rivers.
“Venerable Lord! The Blessed One has not spoken of the physical states of those individuals who will be reborn in the inferior realms, having defamed the sacred doctrine.”
t is like a palmyra tree: if you were to lop off its crown, it would no longer be green, nor would it flourish, grow, or expand.
Venerable Lord! How do great bodhisattva beings, after abiding in the transcendent perfection of meditative concentration, acquire the transcendent perfection of wisdom?
They should honor each other By uniting the vajra and the lotus.
“Mañjuśrī, that cumulus of water above in the atmosphere, stirred by the wind and releasing water, is designated a cloud due to the maturation of sentient beings’ previous karma.
and fall into the clutches of evil associates.
his was the sixth omen.
Great King, (51) Prince Sarvārthasiddha has rounded canines.
in front of Tathāgata Amitābha, with palms placed together, I wept because of my emotion for the Dharma.
Through the ­power of their state of concentration, this great earth was tremendously shaken in six ways.
Similarly, it should be applied to visual consciousness, and it should also be applied to [the other modes of sensory consciousness], up to and including mental consciousness.
At that time sixty thousand goddesses with melodious voices,
The domain of contemplation, concentration, and absorption, where one does not reincarnate in the formless realms by force of these concentrations and absorptions, such is the domain of the bodhisattva.
And so, noble ones, listen to what has arisen because of the power of my samādhi.
beyond a voice,
“Having seen you who compassionately benefits the world, I went to sit alone in the day’s time of rest.
In the same way, Mañjuśrī, it is better for bodhisattva great beings to engage in nonconceptual miserliness,
Mañjuśrī answered, “Bhagavān, the benefit is inconceivable; there is boundless light.
the monks, the entire retinue, and the whole world, including gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas, rejoiced and praised the Bhagavān’s teachings.
Then, in order for the young prince to enjoy himself, King Śuddhodana erected three palaces for each of the three seasons—hot, rainy, and cold.
Noble son, without attaining the intrinsic nature of this teaching, one will not attain the vast intrinsic nature.
“At this, the precious king of the Mahāyāna sūtras, The Sūtra of the Basket’s Display, issued forth into the ears of those beings.
“Consummate Guide, whose melodious speech relates what is true and untrue,
With extremely cruel actions makes people suffer; He was someone who would carry out my command,
“The body has no essence; it is like foam. It creates suffering, and is putrid and foul smelling.
Intoxicated with jealousy, and drunk with pride about his Śākya family line as well as his own strength,
The person into whose excrement one throws this leaf will be eaten by a crow.
Of the full eighty supreme, Excellent features of a great muni, And the unique eighteen qualities.’ {6}
At that time, there lived a brahmin boy named Bhadraśuddha, good-looking,
There are 108 gateways to the light of the Dharma, and they must be taught without fail to a gathering of gods by a bodhisattva at the time of his passing.
great king, you must diligently create merit in this life.
“Why is it the quality of the bodhisattvas? Because it is the acquisition of training in the Dharma.
They will in the course of time attain the highest, complete enlightenment of perfect buddhahood.
Oṁ, Vauherī, hūṁ, phaṭ!
Hang garlands of pearls and illuminate this entire palace!
and in a split second were back in the universe Sarva­gandha­sugandhā.
Ajita, these noble ones delight in solitude and find pleasure in solitude.
it becomes an entity with perfect knowledge of the sense-fields of sound, scent, taste, and mental objects.
and they are untainted also by the corresponding defects.
constantly and continuously inspire and motivate sentient beings to engage with the joy of the Dharma.
Packs of hyenas, dogs, and jackals, And also vultures are here seeking food.
having thus developed all the living beings who could thereby be developed,
There will be quintillions of sores on their bodies, And likewise abscesses, itching, and pustules,
Furthermore, Śāriputra, the Sukhāvatī world has ponds adorned with seven kinds of jewels. The ponds are full of water possessing the eight qualities.
both the moon and the sun will no longer exist in the world.
the Mucilinda Mountains, the Greater Mucilinda Mountains, the surrounding mountains, the greater surrounding mountains,
All the kings of the garuḍas, kiṃnaras, And rākṣasas will make offerings to them. {33}
When these teachings had been declared, five thousand bodhisattvas entered the door of the Dharma of nonduality and attained tolerance of the birthlessness of things.
this is when someone adheres to desire and then, based on that, follows a course of action through to completion.
This was translated, edited, and finalized by the Indian preceptors Jinamitra and Surendrabodhi and the translator-editor, the venerable Yeshé Dé.
assembles all the bodhisattvas and all the śrāvakas, and then proclaims to them this meaning:
have gained Great power, the six higher knowledges, and the three insights, And have become the pratyeka­buddhas
Similarly, the eyes are non-arising, and [all other sense organs], up to and including the mental faculty, are non-arising.
Like the foremost king of mountains, he was immutable.
Perform the ritual of equal enjoyment.”
the Blessed One obtained food, beverages, bedding, cushions, and medicine, as well as many other excellent offering articles.
if you do not rely on the saṅgha; and finally, if you never enter ultimate liberation.
“Blessed One, if I were to seek instructions, would the Sugata please teach me the Dharma?
Candrabhūti, in a similar way, the physical frame of a dying person also separates from its elements and consciousness.
their inspiration unimpeded.
“Śāriputra, that Dharma cannot be analyzed. It is beyond the scope of sophists;
Like the central mountain, it remained unmoving.
Venerable Lord! The transcendent perfection of wisdom brings light to all sentient beings so that they might acquire the [five] eyes.
he is the One Who Has Attained Stainless Freedom.
“ ‘Those who teach this samādhi of peace
two-and-a-half māṣaka,
owing to the emptiness of that which is not be to abandoned,
I sought The Sūtra of the White Lotus of the Good Dharma, without weariness, without fatigue, for countless, innumerable eons
There are beautiful flowers,
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is like an optical aberration.”
now said, “We pay homage to the bhagavān tathāgata Śākyamuni!”
bring an innumerable, immeasurable, inconceivable number of sentient beings to enlightenment
They will not be reborn as an untouchable or of mixed caste;
These are the two reasons the beginner bodhisattvas hurt themselves and do not penetrate the profound Dharma.
[How can] they become skilled in mindfulness and vigilance, and, without dwelling in any type of concentration, absorption, or equipoise, attain the untaught concentration?
Su­bhūti, great bodhisattva beings, immediately after attaining the mind set on enlightenment, become absorbed in adamantine meditative stability, and then attain omniscience.
the samādhi of the seal of knowledge,
coiled his body around that of the Thus-Gone One seven times, and shielded him with his hoods.
“Similarly, it has not been revealed so that the emptiness of internal phenomena might be grasped or not grasped,
many inconceivable events took place.
They could not approach any nearer And became frightened and greatly amazed. {59}
Their words are beautiful; those of humans cannot compare!
“Noble son, bodhisattvas who practice excellent discipline possess ten qualities.
“Śāradvatī­putra, the ‘six aspects of perception’ are merely conceptualized.
Since the path is comprehended by means of these, they obtain faculties that are sharp, clear, and aware of the path.
He did so in order to shatter the proud satisfaction of extreme practitioners, to vanquish the opponents’ attacks,
And so when the night had passed, Śakra, Brahmā, the earth gods, the sky gods, and the gods of the Heaven of the Four Great Kings, the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, the Heaven Free from Strife, the Heaven of Joy, the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations, the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations, the Brahma Realm, the Luminous Heaven, the Heaven of Great Fruition, the Heaven of Perfected Virtue, and the pure realms—many hundreds of thousands of divinities of beautiful appearances
“What is not rebuking the poor? It is having kindness toward others.
“In the dreadful time in future When the Buddha has passed away,
They will see within their bodies the images of
One should insert the finger inside the vagina until one makes it throb— This will strengthen the vagina.
Likewise, for the benefit of the destitute in the world Tārā creates clothes, seats, homes, and parasols.
With the exception of the Tathāgata himself, there is no disciple or bodhisattva capable of competing with his eloquence
The grass was green, soft, fresh, and beautiful.
Therefore physical forms are non-existent, while being inconceivable, [unappraisable, innumerable,] and equal to the unequaled.
All the eighteen unique qualities of a buddha had unfolded within him.
The Dharma is itself the nature of the Buddha,
he took his seat on the magnificent royal throne of the thus-gone ones, the essence of the thus-gone ones.
Including Maheśvara, Candana,
“Do not be concerned, Bhagavān! After you have passed into nirvāṇa,
During the period when the Bodhisattva stayed in Queen Māyā’s womb,
So it is, Ānanda, that the sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who follow the vehicle of the bodhisattvas, the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas, or the vehicle of the śrāvakas
The non-appropriation of physical forms is not physical form, on account of the emptiness of its inherent existence.
He came to Vulture Peak, to the Bhagavān, bowed his head to the Bhagavān’s feet,
At all times I know their various modes of conduct
Then at that time the Bhagavān said to Ānanda, “In that way, Ānanda,
Here in the painting of Sole Hero,
They give flowers, garlands, perfume, unguents, powders, parasols, victory banners, ribbons, butter, grain-seed oils, and lamps.
“ ‘How excellent your wonderful wisdom! How excellent your unsurpassable mind!
has a compassionate, benevolent, loving, and affectionate mind;
I am virtue and I am nonvirtue, And I am the karmic result of these two.
And, having sat on the Bodhimaṇḍa, May I teach this kind of Dharma.
Similarly, Su­bhūti, all things have the modality of the emptiness of external phenomena,
The king woke up and, when he saw the light, he promptly asked his chamberlain, “Did the sun rise?
Alas! Due to the causes and conditions of adopting wrong views as correct, after their bodies have decayed and died, they will be reborn within inferior realms, falling into the lower abodes, among the denizens of the hells!
Ānanda, Bhadrapāla offered alms devotedly to a monk who lived a humble life of purity and ethical conduct;
Similarly, you should abide in all the attributes of the buddhas,
Ānanda, that buddha realm known as Utterly Purifying of the Thus-Gone One, the foe-destroyer, the completely perfect Buddha King of Many Arrangements will be filled with prosperity, abundance, happiness, plentiful harvests, and gaiety, and will have many human and other inhabitants.
and is one who long ago perfected the four means of attraction;
Evil one, you have no one with you, Like someone suffering from a contagious disease, abandoned in a forest.
This, Śāradvatī­putra, is called the transcendent perfection of supramundane generosity.
bent toward the land of Gayā and Gayā­śīrṣa Hill as a Dharma homage for the Blessed One.
those bodhisattvas dwelling there in that world will spontaneously become radiant and have immeasurable life spans.
and self-discipline; of the transcendence of morality, which is consummated in the moral development of immoral beings;
and the Bhagavān accepted it out of compassion.
“Why is it kept by those who are mindful? Because they do not allow it to perish.
“The wisdom of the perfect Buddha is limitless like the sky,
Śāradvatī­putra, these are the views that great bodhisattva beings might adopt, with respect to all things.”
I will practice the six transcendent perfections by any means until even the names of the two [lower] vehicles—the vehicle of the śrāvakas and the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas—are no longer heard.
And embracing one’s consort tightly,
Gathering these sentient beings through the four attractive qualities of a bodhisattva,
The other ruled the other half.
One should cultivate the clear understanding that there are no entities.
and that they will master those very roots of virtuous action which venerate, respect, and make offerings to the lord buddhas,
Similarly, they have a view concerning feelings, a view concerning perceptions, a view concerning formative predispositions, and a view concerning consciousness.
Brahmā, lord of the Sahā world, teaches it.
Thus, the absence of presumption is the entrance into nonduality.”
This position is called the kneading of the thighs.
Only the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas can analyze these [attributes] by means of the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
and In particular, are permitted to observe the conduct of the seal.
It does not practice the diligence of a listener or a solitary buddha but does undertake the diligence of the Great Vehicle.
One should make a pill from clearing nut, long pepper, emblic myrobalan, turmeric, and sweet flag, mixed with dew water.
“Noble son, bodhisattvas endowed with ten qualities are free from stinginess and envy.
it is remarkable through signlessness, and because of wishlessness it is free of presumption and repudiation.
encircled and accompanied by their grandfather, who was the cakravartin king Mahākośa, the king’s ministers, and many hundred thousands of quintillions of beings,
So in mathematics, the knowledge of the Peerless One is superior.
“Then when his old friend saw him,
and how do they give up unwholesome company?
The sequence of all these, moreover,
Then, when he recites these names, all glory, all happiness and joys will be obtained.
“The king understood the Dharma That was taught by the Jina.
they will understand my Dharma when I teach it for the very first time.”
They do not give while scolding and not while upset.
Bury it in firm ground wherever they abide, And the bhūtas and evil nāgas will be pacified.
Similarly, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are empty of consciousness [and the other aggregates].
Hence, as a magical manifestation, there appeared a brilliant light from the body of the bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkam­bhin.
Doing it any other way will be fruitless, my beloved.
Su­bhūti, inasmuch as all things are naturally pure, when these great bodhisattva beings train in this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom, it is their absence of fear and intimidation with respect to all things that constitutes the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
The most eminent among the gods all surrounded the structure.
Relatively they have followed, but ultimately there is no one who goes, comes, or remains.
the applications of mindfulness, the nature of the applications of mindfulness, the real nature of the applications of mindfulness, the essential nature of the applications of mindfulness, and the defining characteristics of the essential nature of the applications of mindfulness
he is neither speculation nor the domain of speculation.
“Moreover, Su­bhūti, physical forms are neither fettered by nor liberated from their past limits.
For this reason, the bodies of those bodhisattvas are without those kinds of animalcules.
the seeds of mango tree,
“It is awakening, because in this way one realizes emptiness, no-sign, no-wish; no-effort, no-dwelling, no coming about; no object of apprehension and no-abode.
Those who just touch it with their clothes will attain the level of irreversibility.
behold the blessed buddhas in those buddha realms, and see the two holy beings prostrated at the feet of the blessed ones.
you know everything about all dharmas.
For example, copper is wrought from stone.
Similarly, they should practice the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline,
Because the sage was the very personification of loving kindness, he felt tremendous compassion for the man and asked,
“Moreover, Kauśika, omniscience is empty of omniscience. The bodhisattvas are empty of the bodhisattvas.
The Tathāgata places his hand upon their heads.
that rebirths in the animal realm will be cut off,
Being repulsed by saṃsāra, you should be vigilant and focus your thoughts on its momentariness.
“ ‘Dharmabhāṇaka who is liberated from anger, Lord of beings, bestow this favor on me.
but ran and scampered around here and there, repeatedly looking out at their father.
In perfect union with the yoginī
and declared to the assembly,
First Ānanda placed an iron drum twice shouting-distance away as his target.
After they have transcended the sphere of the infinity of space in all aspects,
They will hear the sounds of elephants and horses, And of carriages, oxen, goats, and sheep, Of bherī drums and mṛdaṅga drums, Vīṇas, flutes, and vallakīs.
the Bhagavān, having gazed at Śrī Mahādevī, addressed Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara as follows in his Great Brahmā voice:
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that one is liberated by by perceiving the sensory element of the nose, the sensory element of odors, and the sensory element of olfactory consciousness as entities?”
In this regard, ‘calves like those of an antelope’ means that his calves are slender and tapered,
However, this transcendent perfection of wisdom has primacy over all [the other] transcendent perfections.
The space within a clay vessel
For example, the four great oceans might dry up, but this food would never be exhausted.
Have seen this entire bhikṣu saṅgha of mine And have seen all of these bodhisattvas.
As such he was able to stay among the consorts without ever being disturbed by the stains of worldly emotions.
requested Mañjuśrī.
Light shines from his body in the ten directions, outshining all other lights.
I must therefore exert myself in offering food;
Noble son, the statement that all phenomena are devoid of self is rational and in accord with the intrinsic nature.
unreal, without syllables,
and even though they are established in emptiness, signlessness and aspirationlessness, they will not be swayed or captivated by them.
It became strewn with coral tree and great coral tree flowers.
“Many hundreds of thousands of yakṣas and rākṣasas live in that continent.
Why is that? Because, Ānanda, beings who have attachment to life and body create bad karma.
their mindfulness is like the ocean,
When he entered, five thousand vases filled with scented water were carried ahead of him.
I must take pleasure in being consciously aware and must truly undertake all virtues.’
Monk, as all phenomena are like space, they are essenceless.
“Blessed One,” said the bodhisattva Sarva­nīvaraṇa­viṣkam­bhin, “you have spoken well. Bliss-Gone One, you have spoken extremely well.
They then achieve and maintain the second meditative concentration, where there is an intense inner clarity, free from both ideation and scrutiny—the absence of ideation and scrutiny being due to one-pointed mental focus, while the joy and bliss that arise from meditative stability are present.
“Here, what is ignorance?
Moreover, Śāradvatī­putra, the evil associates of great bodhisattva beings include malign demonic forces who are able to transform themselves into the guise of a buddha and
Similarly, in the transcendent perfections of ethical discipline, tolerance, perseverance, meditative concentration, and wisdom there are no such concepts.
And immeasurable wisdom of the Lord of Sages,
He says to those people,
Oṁ, Svapnavilokinī! Siddhalocanā! Interpret my dream for me! Svāhā!
whom nobody protects, who have no guardian, who have no savior, who are homeless, and who lack support,
Blessed One, in the future, we will not take any delight in the experiences of suffering in saṃsāra.
They then bowed their heads at the feet of the Thus-Gone One, circumambulated him three times, and returned to their respective homes.
What were these eight?
Even so, Su­bhūti, having understood that all things are like a magical display and dreamlike, great bodhisattva beings embark on unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment for the benefit, well-being, and happiness of the worlds [of sentient beings].
When they possess this understanding of the aspects of the path, they will not lack the thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment, and similarly, they will not lack the meditative stabilities of emptiness, signlessness, and aspirationlessness, or of the five extrasensory powers that arise through the maturation of past actions.
He will become an object of worship for the world!
The wheels sunk into the earth up to their axles.
Then with compassion for them he employs a skillful method.
Because of their ignorance that had no beginning, Those people are devoid of faith;
The Blessed One replied to the venerable Ānanda,
Noble son, this is how bodhisattva great beings abandon ill will.
Then the bodhisattva Padmaśrīgarbha asked the Blessed One,
“What is the attainment of wisdom? It is the knowledge of power and having no objectification.
crystal,
“When I see his ornaments lying there, my heart is pierced with pain.
Like a female yak that protects her calf, you have guarded your discipline. Since you delight in discipline, you have done so much to benefit beings.
miraculously took to the sky
“Embraced by Hatred Vajrī.
May I at some point be the protector, guardian, savior, strength, and support for all these wandering beings!’
“Venerable Su­bhūti, in what way are thoughts of dedication not associated with the mind set on enlightenment?
Monks, at that time the Thus-Gone One spoke these meaningful words:
They coalesce like the sun and moon.
never cultivate thoughts of miserliness, and
she took it with her in order to make memorials for veneration.
“Su­bhūti, do you think that signlessness is one thing and the attributes of the śrāvakas are another?”
In a single lifetime in this universe, they accomplish much benefit for living beings.
Su­bhūti, it is because the emptiness of physical forms will not attain emancipation from the three world systems, and it will not come to rest in omniscience.
everywhere he was known as a śrāvaka.
for the frightened, like Mount Meru;
“What is having possession of the sacred Dharma? It is preserving the Buddha’s enlightenment, and possessing sūtras such as this.
I know the endless pitfalls of desire— They are the root of suffering, rife with conflict, enmity, and despair. Desire is threatening, like a poisonous leaf,
In exactly the way that it is And its exact characteristics. {5}
Su­bhūti, such is the refinement of great bodhisattva beings, abiding in the transcendent perfection of wisdom, who possess the extrasensory power that realizes clairaudience.
are revealed to be irreversible.
or in the vinaya of the bodhisattvas?”
“I see the buddhas, the lion-like lords of humans, Teaching and revealing the Dharma,
although a person in a dream may be aware of all sorts of things,
“Śāradvatī­putra, great bodhisattva beings who engage in union with the transcendent perfection of wisdom are approaching omniscience.
Divine being, the buddhas appear for the sake of the realization of the essential nature of desire, anger, and delusion.
for bodhisattvas, into a chariot.
Anasūyā (She Who Is Not Spiteful)
He lived the holy life for the rest of his days, but he did not attain any store of qualities.
That person who makes offerings In that manner to those texts
“Bhagavān, through your power let us see the body of the tathāgata.”
The bodhisattva Subāhu declared,
Therefore, you should consider! How could you possibly attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment?’
“They never have an avaricious mind; Their minds always delight in generosity.
There are that many light rays From a single hair of a Lord of the World. {6}
I have been born in this world at the time of the five degenerations among beings who are occupied with lowly pursuits.
The actions and deeds that were described by Kāśyapa Were now being demonstrated.
“Son of the Victorious One, just by hearing the names of the tathāgatas and honoring and serving them, beings who perform negative actions will be liberated from rebirths as denizens of the hells and animals, as well as from Yama’s world, and will pass into pleasant forms of existence.
O lord, do not become void,
Furthermore, all the particulars of the ḍākinīs That dwell in the channels and elsewhere Should be understood in the proper order.
Bodhisattvas should have a loving mindset toward all beings.
The accumulation of insight is a gateway to the light of the Dharma,
This bodhisattva, with perfected extrasensory powers,
In the same vein, they practice the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas, without apprehending the distinct qualities of the buddhas.
and having made these offerings, they dedicate them, saying, ‘Through these, my roots of virtue, may I attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment in this buddha field, and, through the good intentions that arise in my mind, may there be present the pleasant, desirable attributes of the five senses which all sentient beings possess!’
The wife with whom he had sported, made love, and indulged all of his desires soon conceived a child.
Now all the intentions that you nurtured for a hundred eons have been fulfilled.
They had laid down their burden and fulfilled their own benefit.
The gods from the pure realms further clarified that matter for the Thus-Gone One, saying,
Being generous to this person will generate great results, great benefits, and great profits, but being generous to that one will not.’
First, give rise to the divine pride.
“Mahauṣadhi,” replied the Blessed One, “as beings roam about in hell, red-hot cauldrons of copper and brass appear in the far distance.
“Those who have not seen the previous sugatas Who have taught this stainless way
In the midst of the assembly they will always teach With profound words that bring delight,
“Blessed One, in what sense is there no difference between their bodies as such, yet the power of their qualities are different?”
One should drink milk and ground long pepper together with clarified butter and honey
Like a lion, he was without fear, fright, anxiety, timidity, disturbance, and perturbation.
And in other world realms as numerous as the sand grains in the Ganges River,
After six trillion eons had passed They all reached supreme enlightenment in the same eon. {164}
On their arms and legs slithered hundreds of thousands of snakes,
with palms placed together he bowed toward the Bhagavān and made this request:
“Ajita, in this way there appeared sequentially
They attain those thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment.
devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras,
the paths of the ten virtuous acts emerge from this.
The lifespan of the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Raśmi­śata­sahasra­paripūrṇa­dhvaja will be immeasurable.”
the merits that the latter will amass will not approach even a hundredth part of the aforementioned merit accrued by those who retain this transcendent perfection of wisdom, and are attentive to it in the correct manner, and so forth
“That Dharma teaching occurs to pacify all the troubles, harms, and afflictions of all sentient beings.
, the emptiness of inherent existence, the emptiness of all things,
Is a sign that the water is still far.
‘You two retired devotees! Go do this!’
bodhisattvas are free of all those.
one billion realms of the Sublime Heaven,
they do not consider anything at all that is to be attracted or not attracted.
Pearl jewelry, mother of pearl, and coral; Male slaves, female slaves, chariots, horses, and sheep. {14}
like a lump of soot thrown before gold from the Jambū River.
of such and such a town, whom I lost fifty years ago.
“Divine son, it is difficult for those who do not exert themselves to understand the ultimate truth.”
Just as the precious wish-fulfilling jewel cannot be split into pieces even by a thousand diamonds,
Ask me when we are among the saṅgha and that will prove the time to answer your question.”
Brother Vāṣpa, Brother Mahānāman,
The great king Vaiśravaṇa now draped his upper robe on one shoulder and, paying homage to the Blessed One with palms joined, said to him,
“Son, you must take the reins of power there.
At that point, in order to weaken the strength of the demons, the Bodhisattva
Eighty-four thousand prominent citizens, they, too, like great sal trees, followed in their rear.
Kauśika, if those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage abide in this transcendent perfection of wisdom, as it has been described,
Similarly, the fruit of being tied to one more rebirth, the fruit of no longer being subject to rebirth, arhatship,
It is beyond the realm of words.
the gods of the Heaven of Delighting in Emanations, such as Su­nirmi­ta;
The sum total of the merit of all those beings with as much merit as a śrāvaka would then match the merit of one solitary buddha.
Ten thousand girls welcomed the Bodhisattva and gazed at his countenance.
Similarly, you should not have conviction in feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness.
This is the union of ambrosia.
Pāpīyān, such is the abode of the thus-gone ones.”
For countless millions of eons, My head, ears, feet, and hands were cut off. {114}
When not stained by outer objects, they are irreproachable.
“The bodhisattva mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha’s meditative concentration is like an ocean.
To sentient beings who are confined to the two extremes they teach a path that is free of those extremes. They do not teach a path confined to the two extremes.
not being weary of the suffering of cyclic existence because of, and for the sake of, sentient beings;
He was disrespectful to the Dharma as well as to Dharma teachers.
he will discover pleasure and not renounce the household.
People who are dedicated to their desires slay those with correct conduct, And therefore people should forsake desires. {64}
one billion realms of Limitless Light,
the followers of Viṣṇu and Garuḍa, and naked ascetics. They take ordination in those orders, but
They will smell the scents of bodies of the Brahmakāyika devas and of the Mahābrahmās.
When likewise the other jewels Are respectfully surrendered
‘Noble son, give up your diligent practice. Why?
Bhikṣus, in this way, through the factor of ignorance there is formation.
Greatly wise one, How do you explain those terms?
He will have an immeasurable saṅgha of hearers.
and the ācārya should teach the nature of the mantras and gestures.”
This is like a person who tries in vain to create a fire in order to make light by rubbing together two wet pieces of wood that have been submerged in water. He will not be able to produce fire and make light.
should retain, hold, recite, and master this very transcendent perfection of wisdom and be attentive to it in the correct manner.
“Therefore, Bhagavān, a wise noble man or noble woman
Monks, in this way the Thus-Gone One traveled through the land. Finally he arrived at the city of Vārāṇasī.
It is so, O gods! It is just as you have said.
Nakṣatra­rāja­saṃkusumitābhi­jña, know that those who possess this king of the sūtras are supreme among all beings.
and when they cultivate in all respects [all the other fruitional attributes], from the ten powers of the tathāgatas up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
Noble son, you will see him if he comes here, to the Sahā universe, to look at me, bow down to me, and honor me.
He always offered the finest flowers, the best fruits, and the most delicious foods first to the thus-gone ones, the memorials of the thus-gone ones, the saṅgha of hearers of the thus-gone ones, and his parents.
the news of their acceptance spread everywhere and Sañjayin was lauded with many accolades and much praise.
Billions of gods had gathered And let a rain of ravishing flowers fall down.
Buddha Śākyamuni is going to answer, so you should listen to him.”
Their minds were entirely liberated by perfect knowledge.
then the kṣatriya king’s kingdom, the fears of those beings there, as well as the epidemics and harmful influences will all be pacified, and
As soon as the bowl hit the water, the nāga king Sāgara, full of devotion and great respect, came to fetch the bowl and bring it to his kingdom, thinking, “This is worthy of veneration!”
the inconceivably numerous fields of conduct concerning the kleśas,
“In future times they will hear This sūtra when it is in the hands
I will have some pleasing items made and let the boy distribute them to all the girls.
Of male and female practitioners,
Because of the primordial purity of all dharmas.
“They will never be disheartened. They will always be wealthy and never poor.
The Blessed One said to the nāga, “My dear sir, with this body of yours you cannot attain any of a host of qualities,
and the Winter Palace was naturally warm.
King Śuddhodana carefully lifted Prince Sarvārthasiddha with both hands and carried him before the sage Asita.
I then related my dream To my superiors, my mothers. {6}
“What are the four dedication prayers? The first dedication prayer is:
It is not associating with householders and mendicants.
Yet by a mere glance from the One Who Is the Source of All Good Qualities,
those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage who would enter the vehicle of the śrāvakas or those who would enter the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas
owing, Venerable Lord, to the fact that such machines are without conceptual imagination,
Like the hunter’s snare catches a monkey.
May all my misfortunes from every quarter be pacified! Svāhā!
This is the perfection of wisdom.
“Friends, whoever puts this Dharma teaching of The Play in Full into writing, and carries, venerates, respects, honors, and pays homage to it while praising this Dharma teaching into the four directions without any feeling of miserliness, saying,
Invoke the truth and perform a dedication; When the oblation is given, there will be pacification.
It will be such an offering to the Tathāgata that it will amaze the worlds of devas, humans, and asuras,
It fondly believes that the lack of self is a self.
He does not emulate feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness.
divided by cords of gold, and filled with beautiful flowers.
The Blessed One replied,
and if in addition they rejoice, thinking, ‘This monk who expounds to me the attachment through which even the fruit of entering the stream will not be actualized, and through which [the other fruits], up to and including individual enlightenment, will not be actualized, is useful to me in many ways!’”
Even the Bhagavān speaks well of him, praising and extolling him. So, venerable one, please come.
“Venerable Lord! This real nature of all things, the unmistaken real nature, the abiding nature of all things, the maturity of all things, is profound!
Bodhisattvas think as follows: ‘It was by adhering to exactly this training that the thus-gone ones of the past gained complete awakening and went entirely beyond suffering.
It is without attachment and without disturbance, eliminating all commotion.
Those who have been foreordained will respond correctly.
Māra perceived that the Bodhisattva was brandishing a sword in his hand, and so he fled toward the south.
They approached the trunk of the fig tree and said to the teacher,
And also the countless devas of rivers Arrived to make offerings to the Guide. {80}
Karketa dust is used for the drawing.
In order to bring beings to maturity, bodhisattvas appear to be carrying out all types of conduct—this is bodhisattva practice.”
“Seated on this jewel lotus,
some of gold,
“Noble one, why are you just sitting there with a razor in your hand?
“It would not be right of me to spend a day here without going to see and pay my respects to the Blessed One.
Taking that which comes at the end of the eight
Noble son, if all sentient beings were to be tamed by a form of the thus-gone ones,
‘We pay homage, we pay homage to the bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara, who brings freedom from fear,’
The buddhas have not been seen by anyone, nor heard, nor worshipped, nor are they being worshipped now.
Thus, while involved in thought and discernment, they experience the joy and bliss that arise from disengagement, perfect the first concentration, and remain within it. “
“What is the elimination of ignorance? It is the elimination of stupidity.
who desires heavenly rebirth should uphold moral conduct;
They know the origin of all illnesses and how to be freed from them.
You cut down the banner of pride.
and the words “praticcha vajra hoḥ” be spoken.
When he said the letter kha, out came the statement: ‘All phenomena are like space (kha­sama­sarva­dharma).’
You should look upon your state of life just as you look upon this snake.
Chanda, surrounded by the other boys, said, “Young Prince, come on! Let’s go and take a look at the forest.
The monks asked him, “Venerable Ānanda, who are these two lads?”
Bodhisattvas who do not apprehend their physical, verbal, and mental virtue, also, have become trained.
God of Gods, please come here!
“Then the executioner Nandika approached King Śūradatta.
On the utpala, there is a moon disk Arisen from the syllable a.
The merchants replied, “Noble Saṅgharakṣita, we too will go forth, so please alight and sit while we secure our wares.”
This is immorality.
It would be hard to express all their virtues.
the more they wish to teach and grant instruction in the transcendent perfection of generosity,
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ excellent outer patience consist in?
a body blooming with the flowers of the excellent signs,
do not apprehend even the nature of a bodhisattva,
flesh, ligaments, bones, marrow, kidneys,
Revered even by the gods,
Then the Bhagavān said to bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya,
It is not objectifying and having no mental engagement with phenomena of the past, future, or present.
the ten strengths of the bodhisattvas,
The same goes for all the sentient beings of the world systems of the ten directions, as many as the sands of the River Ganges.
Great bliss is the vajra ḍākinī.
Therefore, you should consider! How could you possibly attain manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment?’
“Lord of the gods, what can we do? We are unable to see this jeweled structure that delighted the Bodhisattva.”
The appearance of the lion should be white and excellent, Its body and speech gentle and without any fault
May the Blessed One now turn the wheel of Dharma for the benefit and happiness of many beings, for the love of the world, for the well-being and happiness of great numbers of beings, both gods and humans. Bliss-Gone One, please make this offering of Dharma.
When they arrived, they paid homage to him. Hundreds of thousands of gods surrounded him, holding garlands and bouquets of abhimuktaka flowers, campaka flowers, jasmine flowers, nutmeg blossoms, and dhānuṣkāri flowers. Hundreds of thousands of celestial maidens surrounded him, singing divine songs.
“The germination of a sprout from a seed corresponds to an early stage of volition.
“It is possible that someone can make drawings in the empty sky, Or catch the blowing wind with a lasso, Or make the bright sun and moon fall from the sky to the earth,
“A noble son or noble daughter who repeats the six-syllable mahāvidyā will have indestructible mental brilliance.
“The sound of bherī drums, conches, and gongs, Of quintillions of instruments has resounded.
and they do not make assumptions about [their other attainments], up to and including arhatship.
‘Giving away one’s skin represents the bodhisattvas’ perfection of smooth, fine, and golden skin. Therefore,
and (4) the application of mindfulness which, with regard to phenomena, observes phenomena.
“Those gods and humans Who listen to the Dharma from you, And strive to accomplish it, Procure their desired acquisition.
There too you may give generously. There too you may act meritoriously.”
who has a beautified body; who manifests as the supreme rishi;
They should encourage others to relinquish involuntary reincarnation through propensities and all afflicted mental states.
All the lovely and beautiful voices in the three existences Cannot equal a hundredth of the Buddha’s voice. {37}
That will be her last birth as a female.
You were hindered by heavy bindings, tight, secure, and imperishable,
“At that time there arose within me envy And intractable, pitiless malice and anger.
Similarly, when the sun-like bodhisattvas rise they unfold the lotus flowers of the beings who need training.
but will not understand the Dharma if I do not teach it.”
As he had thus fulfilled his intention, he rested evenly in absorption. Then the bodhisattva great beings also saw the Blessed, thus-gone, worthy,
“Venerable Lord, this transcendent perfection is the emptiness of inherent existence.”
have also originated from the transcendent perfection of wisdom.
The nature of that which is called form and that of the tathāgata are nondual.
some with notions, others without notions;
to the one who is a supreme king of healing;
nor do its hands turn yellow.
Only this will produce the result;
“All phenomena that arise from causes, The Tathāgata has taught their cause, And that which is their cessation; Thus has proclaimed the Great Renunciant.
and I do object to your striking him.”
This is the power that prevents any type of being from overpowering those bodhisattvas.
“Holding many musical instruments And excellent, exquisite incense, garlands, and flowers,
“Moreover, Kāśyapa, the Tathāgata guides beings equally, without any inequality.
while hundreds of thousands of Śakras offered prostrations, and hundreds of thousands of Brahmās bowed down before the throne.
They bring that person no happiness.”
And no lower existences, no lower realms.
Bhagavān, it was only through saving their own bodies that they could obtain all those toys,
the sensory element of tactile consciousness, the sensory element of the mental faculty, the sensory element of mental phenomena, and the sensory element of mental consciousness;
Abiding in five forms.
As numerous as are the names for conduct, There are that many names of buddhas. {2}
“Moreover, young man, bodhisattva mahāsattvas who have completely pure physical conduct
“Please tell us what to do, what you wish to be done;
He replied, “This is owing to the non-arriving of all things!”
Where they will be constantly attended by devas, And where many yakṣas will be their servants. {86}
“At that time, during that period, the Bhagavān, with compassion for beings and with compassion for King Śubhavyūha,
“Agreed, O Gautama,” replied Dīrghanakha, “even that view which views all forms of self as unable to endure does not itself endure.”
He was of royal caste since he upheld the single jewel parasol,
Without intention, anger, fear, or bewilderment, it is immutable.
They saw the hundreds of thousands of quintillions of tathāgatas, arhats, perfectly enlightened buddhas seated on their individual lion thrones at the foot of precious trees, the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Śākyamuni and the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Prabhūtaratna seated upon a lion throne in the center of the stūpa, and the fourfold assembly.
who has a beautiful lotus in his hand,
The light of the sun and moon illuminates the entire world.
This Dharma teaching is like the father and mother of all bodhisattvas.”
Eating the bark of arjuna tree together with clarified butter
liberation, or the fruition;
should know that they are the blessing of Samantabhadra.
Chanda had witnessed the exchange of clothes, and later a memorial was erected at the site.
No matter what acts he witnesses, he remains without delusion;
Sitting on seats of light, they illumined each other.
Bhadrapāla was youthful, well-built, with a fine skin color and an open face.
Now the daughters of Māra,
and are perfectly hung with armlets and a variety of other adornments.
But the girl did not respond and continued to fast.
"བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་སེམས་དཔའ་ཆེན་པོ་གང་དག་སྦྱིན་པའི་ཚོགས་འདི་ལྟ་བུ་དང་ལྡན་པ་དེ་དག་ནི་ནམས་ཀྱང་བསོད་ནམས་ཡོངས་སུ་ཉམས་པའམ། ཡེ་ཤེས་ཡོངས་སུ་ཉམས་པའམ། <tBlessed One, those bodhisattva great beings who possess such an accumulation of generosity as this will not diminish in merit, will not diminish in wisdom, nor will they diminish in insight.”
The power of memory and the power of retention. {6}
“Young man, the bodhisattvas have four kinds of fields of conduct. What are the four kinds of fields of conduct?
The hand that for many millions of eons had given away jewels,
such that he arrived before the Thus-Gone One with the intention to quarrel, full of pride, conceit, and arrogance?”
Therefore, Lord, please be kind enough to explain what kind of wheel is the wheel of Dharma, which has been turned by the Thus-Gone One, the Worthy One, the Perfect Buddha.”
His body was adorned with the thirty-two marks of a great being, and with the eighty minor marks,
All things are non-entities and of the essential nature of non-entity.
nor is the flower observable in the fruit that is produced.
“ ‘All the misfortunes That devas and humans have, May they all come to cessation Through the brilliance of irreversibility!’ {26}
To those who possess this sūtra And who are teaching this sūtra.
“Bhagavān, how should one view the four truths of the noble ones?”
“But I see that even a single sentient being Has far more numerous
who wish to express themselves through the emanational display of the buddhas,
Subsequent to fifty recitations of the mantra. Orpiment of bovine origin, tongue of a toothless man, And the roots of nṛparāja—when the moon is in the Śubha asterism,
“If it is true that those who withdraw into repose do not see, how then do they not hear?”
“Young man, those are the ten benefits for the bodhisattva mahāsattvas from becoming very learned.”
It would not be possible to count them Even in ten thousand million eons.
Thus they will think, ‘As I myself cross over, I shall let others cross too. As I become free, I shall liberate others.
the bodhisattva Nakṣatrarāja, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Maitreya,
All the parts of the carriages, such as the harnesses and the rest, tore and split, and the wheels of the carriages sunk into the ground up to their axles.
One of his arhat wards entered into meditation to find out where his preceptor had been reborn
The strength of ten bodhisattvas who have been definitively emerged for ten thousand eons is the same as the strength of one bodhisattva who has been definitively emerged for one hundred thousand eons.
The vase is taught to be the causal tantra;
You should teach this ultimate truth To those who are learned, have heard much Dharma, And who have mindfulness, are wise, have knowledge, And are set upon supreme enlightenment.
the blessed Buddha Kāśyapa appeared in the world,
In order to make offerings to the bhagavān tathāgata Śākyamuni and this Dharma teaching of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma,
“The wise who practice the Buddha’s Dharma Will have an excellent appearance and great beauty.
“It said,
Commensurate with their attainment of complete purity of the body, complete purity of speech, complete purity of mind, and complete purity of defining marks, they do not entertain thoughts of desire,
Such is the bodhisattvas’ consideration of danger.
I established others in the poṣadha vows And I introduced them to enlightenment. {143}
“They will have no concept of food Other than joy in the Dharma and joy in dhyāna.
“Friends, I will now proceed to Jambudvīpa.
“They teach the Pratyeka­buddha­yāna, Describing this way of the Dharma
They seize the legs of dogs And hold them, backs to the ground,
Enlightenment, not being contained in anything, does not stand in reality.
Great King, Prince Sarvārthasiddha’s arm span and height are identical, like the banyan tree.
and then as one who has practiced the transcendent perfection of generosity,
That is to say, this transcendent perfection of wisdom is established for the purpose of granting refuge to and not forsaking all sentient beings.
The celestial maidens traveling through the sky began to sing his praise:
While he is alive says that he has died, The wise know that this would not be proclaimed a lie.
Are you alive or dead?
they do not make assumptions on account of dreams, they do not make assumptions associated with dreams,
[6] they attain the lineage of samādhis; [7] they have few illnesses; [8] they digest their food well;
Saṅgharakṣita went to the Blessed One,
They do not prattle incoherently.
to the one who has illuminated the world;
“The miraculous powers of this excellent being do not decline. His wisdom does not decline.
“To the one from whom we have heard of his Dharma.”
they had stomachs the size of mountains and
“ ‘Praising correct conduct and condemning bad conduct, Being free of dishonesty and relying on those with correct conduct,
“Just as they do not come into being and just as they do not perish, that is how I engendered them.
In that way they are blinded by ignorance.
“What, you may wonder, does the bodhisattvas’ skill in genuinely encouraging, inspiring, and exhilarating beings consist in?
When such persons pass on from here and die, they will be reborn in the world of Brahmā.
Those who see all phenomena as objects of hatred will attain purification from karmic obscurations.
Divine son, whoever focuses on taming disturbing emotions on the ultimate level is not ultimately focusing on anything.
The consciousness of a fly is just that.
Finally abandoning both of these, Those happy people delight in the Dharma. {17}
whose emotions had been cooled as if treated by a balm of sandalwood,
Similarly, they neither associate the truth of the cessation of suffering with omniscience, nor do they disassociate it therefrom.
exhibit himself approaching [the other sense fields], up to and including the sense field of neither perception nor non-perception; or else,
It is like a cakravartin for all minor kings.
The Bodhisattva answered, “Seven of the smallest particles is one small particle.
“Forms created by the mind
teeming with many people and creatures, and adorned with gardens, forests, and mountains.
For the sake of supreme enlightenment. {53}
The dharmakāya should be viewed as that which is the essence of the Tathāgata.
the transcendent perfection of tolerance, and the transcendent perfection of ethical discipline,
“Noble son, this is how it is. As an analogy, when the faculty of the life-force ceases, so will all the other faculties cease as well.
the nāga king Mucilinda, worried that the Blessed One’s body would be harmed by the cold and the wind, came out of his abode,
“Son of a self-immolator, regarding the view that some selves endure and other selves do not endure,
“From remembering one verse from this samādhi The merit will be vastly greater
as the wisest of the wise and the most confident of the confident.”
and consciousness arises with the intercourse of the parents.
All accumulation ends in depletion; All climbs end in falls;
but are not separated from the transcendent perfection of wisdom,
They replied, “Upatiṣya enjoys solitude so he has gone to live in the forest,
It is demonstrable in the shaking and waving of trees,
Senior Śāradvatī­putra, (1) there is the meditative stability of great bodhisattva beings named Heroic Valour.
Having completed their approach to monkhood, they stood with the deportment of monks who had been ordained for one hundred years.
The girls are delighted and joyful;
“In a situation where saffron and so on is close by And easy to obtain,
the fourth door was made of copper,
“It is free from existence and nonexistence, Beyond self and no self, A teaching that is naturally unborn— That is what we call the wheel of Dharma.
Venerable Lord! As I understand the words spoken by the Blessed One,
“The names for conduct, names of buddhas, And names of beings are equal
Nor did I dwell extensively with a mind free from error.
Monks, this teaching I had not heard previously. I understood it by intensely and introspectively focusing my mind on suffering.
At the time, the Blessed One was seated, teaching Dharma to a crowd of many hundreds of monk followers.
“Although pleasures are enjoyed in a dream, When the person awakes they are not be seen.
when any who accept this profound transcendent perfection of wisdom for but a single day, wishing for it, appraising it, or investigating it,
may establish many hundreds of thousands of living beings in enlightenment without his mindfulness being diminished.
There will be no hearers or solitary realizers, only bodhisattvas will gather there.
This is how that petition is made. While seated, he says the following:
“For the retinue, just as for the main deity, Worship them with their own incantations.
but from among all those many Dharma teachings, Bhaiṣajyarāja,
Having made the offering, Brahmā sat, fanning the Blessed One with a chowrie.
“They who possess this supreme samādhi Will have the sweet and melodious voice of a crane,
hatred is an obscuration,
They will enter into their homes And they will corrupt those families. {24}
What qualities?
Venerable Lord, if the notion of physical forms as a self or not a self is invariably non-apprehensible, how could the designation of physical forms as such become a bodhisattva?
And why? Because all other vehicles emerge from this one.
“Desired objects never satisfy;
and therefore places a dry piece of wood on the ground and rubs another dry piece of wood against it.
It would render humans without wisdom insane.
‘Maheśvara, in the kaliyuga, when beings have bad natures, you will be declared to be the primal deity who is the creator, the maker.
And then merely say with words, ‘I have seen the Guide of humans.’ {11}
Moreover, many hundreds of thousands of gods came together from the east, the south, the west, and the north. The foremost among the gods then spoke these verses to the great assembly of gods:
“Filled with water that has the eight qualities, That is clear, cool, and unstained.
Beautiful forms, sweet sounds, fragrant smells, Delicious tastes, and pleasant touch—
Such is the bodhisattvas’ perfect giving of fearlessness.
So the Bodhisattva took the bowl and left Urubilvā. Before noon
he is the One with Shanks like an Antelope.
Covered with garlands of small bells, And ornamented with shining jewels.
“Do not examine him while naked. Examine him without his knowing, while he is dressed only in a lower robe.”
‘Oh! The humans in Jambudvīpa are happy. They can perfectly enjoy cool shade.
in the same way, Śāradvatī­putra, great bodhisattva beings who practice the transcendent perfection of wisdom also examine this same physical body in terms of its material elements,
Thus, without any doubts or reservations about these matters, they trust in the authentic accomplishment of the bodhisattvas.
Restraint, and self-control.
"སེམས་ཅན་དེ་དག་བདེ་འགྲོར་འགྲོ་བར་འགྱུར་གྱི་ངན་འགྲོར་འགྲོ་བར་མི་འགྱུར་བ་དང་། ལེགས་པར་བྱ་བ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་ངན་པར་བྱ་བ་མི་བྱེད་པར་ཡོངས་སུ་བསྔོ་ཞིང་། དེ་ལྟར་སེམས་<t[so when sons or daughters of noble family] dedicate their merit so that such beings will pass to pleasant forms of existence and accomplish wholesome deeds instead of negative ones, in order to liberate the beings born in negative forms of existence, they should supplicate the tathāgatas.
took a place off to one side, and addressed him:
The Blessed One is endowed with forty teeth.
A parasol of precious gems and two yak-tail whisks also appeared from midair.
‘In accordance with the aspirations praised by the buddhas, through this offering of beverages
I pray that you free me from the suffering of the dark impurities in the womb, and from always being owned.”
He possessed the retention of the king of sūtras, But because of my desires I had him slain. {100}
Just as one is called ‘hero’ when one overcomes all enemies, so, too, one is called ‘bodhisattva’ when one conquers the miseries of aging, sickness, and death.
His body, bearing the best of the excellent marks, is adorned with the thirty-two;
the noble eightfold path, the three gateways to liberation, the ten powers of the tathāgatas,
“Śāradvatī­putra, do you think that the designations of feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness as permanent or impermanent constitute a bodhisattva?”
Great brahmin, where do you come from?
Content with what it finds, it does not search.
the inconceivably numerous kinds of knowledge of ignorance concerning the kleśas,
Just like a lotus rising up from the water.”
This is how you should conceive of the transfer it undergoes.
Similarly, they will see him, having attained manifestly perfect buddhahood, turning the wheel of the sacred doctrine,
“With a mind possessed by anger and full of desire for the divine realms,
“ ‘If that food is given to him And if the blood is applied,
Such is the bodhisattvas’ excellent power of unbreakable command.
“Those who seek this peaceful samādhi
Brother Ānanda, the fourfold assembly of bhikṣus, bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas, and upāsikās,
Committing more negative actions,
Thus, misdeeds will not be concealed but confessed before those who maintain pure conduct and,
There are some who will acquire those same attributes even on touching this basket.
How are they perfect in conduct, personal associations, behavior, and deportment?
What are the three points? They are ending the kleśas, mastering merit,
“Blessed One, noble sons and daughters who have faith in this Dharma
“Merit, fully ripened, brings happiness and vanquishes all suffering.
"བྱང་ཆུབ་ཏུ་ཡོངས་སུ་སྔོ་བར་བྱེད་ན་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་ཡོངས་སུ་སྦྱང་བ་བྱས་པ་<tIf he carries all this out and then dedicates it toward awakening, the bodhisattva has become trained, and that food has become suitable for consumption.
Similarly, they will not construe the notion that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are signless, and that signlessness is consciousness [and the rest].
‘Bhikṣus, there is no second yāna or nirvāṇa in this world at all, let alone a third.
Cool and without any flaws.”
They will smell the scents of the thrones of the tathāgatas.
has appeared from the middle of the circle of the assembly, remained suspended in the air, and congratulated me.”
So how can you be sagacious?
Horse meat should come from the king among horses, Whose complexion is neither white nor red, With flesh that neither changes shape nor color.
some have five clairvoyances;
I will choose for the prince whichever girl his eyes linger upon.”
Friend, this is excellent! Beloved teacher, this is excellent!
and being consciously aware at all times not to neglect any good quality.
this Great Vehicle is equal to space.
“Those who have wicked minds, Who are dreadful, and accomplish terrible, very low actions,
One hundred thousand beings were all liberated from suffering and
If there is consciousness, there will be the imputation of name and form, and if things are imputed in terms of name and form, so will they be imputed in terms of the six sense sources.
“Śāradvatī­putra, the ‘twelve links of dependent origination’ are merely conceptualized.
The city is in turmoil and full of terrified cries: “May the Gentle One not depart!
Then he said to his ministers,
The three realms are like that house Dreadful and filled with suffering.
Lord, out of compassion for all beings, I will adopt the eight precepts, Which include disciplined and moral conduct, as well as fasting.
I have heard that they may reveal things directly or in secret, and that they may teach sentient beings with a concealed intention.
In the worlds of this billion-world universe,
And vyāna in the entire body.
“Even witnessing Māra’s army, His mind is unperturbed.
That which distinguishes between individual objects is consciousness.
Through this many bodhisattvas are trained. This is the skillful method of the jinas.
they should reflect, in the same vein as before, [‘Alas! When I have attained manifestly perfect buddhahood in unsurpassed, genuinely perfect enlightenment, in this buddhafield I will practice the six transcendent perfections until] they possess an inestimable life span,’ and so on, in the same vein as before, down to ‘[they will] also approach omniscience.’
The Blessed One responded to these words from Ānanda by proclaiming:
Similarly, they neither know nor see feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness;
When the Sugata spoke to teach With compassion for the people in the streets,
the hopes I had for conquering and for becoming king of the world were dashed too.
where he was honored by offerings,
one will come to know all the treatises clearly within six months as regards both their meaning and composition, even if one has never heard them before.
At that point, Mahauṣadhi saw that the face of the Blessed One had become radiant like a garden of lotus flowers in autumn.
“Through this fully concentrated recitation, All desired spiritual accomplishments will surely be accomplished.
The rays of light then unfurled through the worlds of the great billionfold universe,
“When liberation is experienced, All thoughts become nonthought.
Monks, the cold season had passed and it was the third month of spring.
it is because, in the emptiness of inherent existence, self, sentient beings, living creatures, lives, individuals, humankind, human beings, actors, agents, experiencers, experiencing subjects, knowers, and viewers are all non-apprehensible.
They crush pride as they think, ‘I accept the most despicable and meager alms.’
“For even if as many beings as there are in a kalpa
and went to the great city of Vijaya in order to beg for alms.
However, ignoring the tree with its fine aroma and delicious fruit,
They have no attachment, do not hope for anything, do not focus on anything, and do not truly observe anything.
He left the village of Kāṣṭhavāṭa and set out for the village of Nālada.
they would all become freed from that mass of suffering.
why did I insult him?
“Su­bhūti, the acceptance of great bodhisattva beings includes the cognition and correct exertion of those who enter the stream.
Creating everything and destroying everything.
Through the disengagement of awakening they understand the disengagement of all phenomena.
“Noble ones, if I were to go forth, would you put me to work too?”
It cancels out the entire sphere of operation of the sense-faculties and, piercing to the quick, it alters the color of the blood.
Such is the bodhisattvas’ excellent wisdom that observes the activities of all sentient beings.
At other times, they partake of it themselves.
blaze with light and splendor;
yet the nectar that nourishes each one differs according to the differences of the merits each has accumulated.
Then after he had died, during the time of the teaching of the bhagavān, the tathāgata, the arhat, the perfectly enlightened buddha Candra­sūrya­vimala­prabhāsa­śrī, he was reborn into the family of King Vimaladatta.
One hundred nāgabalas is called a tiṭilambha.
Bodhisattvas should be the foremost physicians, skilled in healing all beings of their maladies, the afflictions.
Venerable Lord! How much merit will those sons of enlightened heritage or daughters of enlightened heritage accrue—those who rejoice in the minds of great bodhisattva beings who are beginners entering the vehicle, and similarly, who rejoice in the minds of great bodhisattva beings who have been practicing over a long period of time, and similarly, who rejoice in the minds of irreversible great bodhisattva beings, and similarly, who rejoice in the minds of those great bodhisattva beings who are tied to only one more rebirth?
It is the same for sensation, identification, mentation, and, young man, for consciousnesses: there are infinite, endless,
‘The path is to be cultivated.’
“Arrange my horses, elephants, and chariots!
They had a captivating scent, were of perfect beauty, and were delightful to the touch.
Because, Ānanda, some beings are pleased and delighted to hear me, but not to see me.
It should be enclosed three times with three ṭhaḥ syllables.
she felt affectionate, joyful, and calm.
And for the sake of buddhahood’s wisdom Enduring abuse from those Beings who believe in objective reality And who are fixed in their arrogance;
“Those in the future time of great terrors Who hear this samādhi and keep it
At that time I went, weeping, to the Tathāgata, the arhat, the samyaksaṃbuddha, the one with wisdom and conduct, the sugata, the knower of the world, the unsurpassable guide who tames beings, the teacher of gods and humans, the buddha, the Bhagavat Ratnottama.
What must be absent for birth not to happen? What must be prevented to eliminate birth?
They sleep mindfully and with alertness, keeping a sense of light and of being awake.
The domain where one turns the wheel of the holy Dharma and manifests the magnificence of ultimate liberation, yet never forsakes the career of the bodhisattva, such is the domain of the bodhisattva!”
Afterward, however, once liberated from those hellish states, they will be excited by desire and forget the suffering they endured in the hell realms,
And her knees have a shapely form.
Mañjuśrī, how does a beginner bodhisattva abide?
should first bathe and then pay homage to the bodhisattva Ākāśagarbha at the break of dawn,
‘Alas! My harem has gone astray, and so has the populace.
Great bodhisattva beings should rather think, ‘When I have attracted these impoverished sentient beings by my generosity,
They should excellently adorn that locale in many ways.
Some priests, who were gluttonous by nature, said,
they further reflect,
He dismounts from his chariot and proceeds on foot.
Within that temple all the most excellent and exquisite pleasures and amusements came together, manifesting due to the maturation of the Bodhisattva’s previous actions.
If one abides by that, the monk who has gone forth and been ordained in the well-proclaimed Dharma and Vinaya will be a genuine monk.
“Bhagavān, I have heard from the Bhagavān this marvelous Dharma that I have never heard before.
‘Since this illusory act is non-apprehensible,
Chaos erupted throughout the ten directions.
“Ānanda, comprehend this Dharma discourse, establish it, assemble it, perfectly master it, and teach it widely to others.
Bodhisattvas, similarly, do not remain with the corpse of affliction and unvirtuous company.
‘A being was born among the Śākyas adorned with perfect marks.
[25] It is that which is difficult to approach. [26] It is great majesty.
The goddess replied:
How are their perfections of discipline?
“ ‘Maintain the conduct that is like a precious jewel, Always depend on favorable friends,
One should draw a four-petal lotus, And then, in its center, a moon.
and, having withdrawn from them, they produce a mind of dislike.
He is not established, shown, afflicted, or purified.
Venerable Lord! Just as to the tathāgatas, arhats, genuinely perfect buddhas there is nothing that is pleasant or unpleasant,
Among all seasons, springtime is the best; At this time men and women frolic, and darkness and dust disappear.
their designation as void or not void, their designation as afflicted or purified,
Sublime in both word and meaning,
and similarly, [no attainments], up to and including omniscience.
The mind set on enlightenment is non-mind
Protector, we go to you for refuge.
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ākaśagarbha,
All the stars, the planets, and the moon may fall from the sky to the earth;
Short necklaces, long necklaces, flower garlands, precious jewels, and huge precious jewels were hung in every direction.
Attachment to family causes envy. Without envy I remained in the pleasant forests. {152}
‘In accordance with the aspirations praised by the buddhas, through this offering of delicacies
Then Brother Śāriputra for a second time made his request to the Bhagavān, saying,
one should pull out the root of white wild indigo when the moon is in the asterism of Puṣya.
Likewise, they may speak of the elements of fire, water, wind, space, and consciousness.
Those smallest particles of dust In those worlds would be uncountable.
What were the previous actions that prepared the Bodhisattva for digesting this drop of vital energy?
You subdued clawed demons
Then, Ānanda, King Candraprabha saw the man again,
then, divine son, one knows disturbing emotions in a manner free from knowing.
How are view and conduct united?
They neither associate physical forms with present events, nor do they disassociate them therefrom.
And as one body they quickly came running out of the burning house.
The vajra, the wheel, and so forth.
The words they speak will be remembered. Those are the benefits that come from dedication to mendicancy. {82}
And knowledge-holder fully ordained monks.
there were many bhikṣus who held the view of objective existence.
Similarly, it has not been revealed so that the sensory element of the mental faculty, the sensory element of mental phenomena, and the sensory element of mental consciousness might be grasped or not grasped.
Then, Bhagavān, the poor man, seeking food and clothes,
When the blessed Bodhisattva was born,
“At that time the constellation of Puṣya had arisen, And the moon and the stars were shining in the sky.
Father, give to us the various kinds of toys for playing with, such as an ox-drawn cart, a goat-drawn cart, and a deer-drawn cart.’
one who wishes to attain emancipation in things without defining characteristics merely wishes to attain emancipation in the other aspects of emptiness, up to and including the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities.
Searching for food in a state of distress.
Similarly, he will not teach the sacred doctrine according to the notions that feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness are utterly pure or that they are not utterly pure.
