“Again, a brahmin says thus: ‘All sensual pleasures are impermanent, suffering, and subject to change.’
Speaking thus, a brahmin speaks truth, not falsehood.
“Again, a brahmin says thus: ‘All states of existence are impermanent, suffering, and subject to change.’
Speaking thus, a brahmin speaks truth, not falsehood.
“Again, a donor, a munificent giver, acquires a good reputation.
“Again, a forest bhikkhu reflects thus: ‘I am now dwelling all alone in the forest.
“Again, a forest bhikkhu reflects thus: ‘I am now dwelling all alone in the forest.
“Again, a forest bhikkhu reflects thus: ‘I am now dwelling all alone in the forest.
“Again, a forest bhikkhu reflects thus: ‘I am now dwelling all alone in the forest.
“Again, a gem has been lost in the king’s inner palace.
“Again, a good person discloses his own faults even when not asked about them, how much more then when asked.
“Again, a good person discloses the virtues of others even when not asked about them, how much more then when asked.
“Again, a good person does not disclose his own virtues even when asked about them, how much less then when not asked.
“Again, a noble disciple has gone for refuge to the Dhamma.
“Again, a noble disciple has gone for refuge to the Saṅgha.
“Again, a noble disciple possesses the virtuous behavior loved by the noble ones, unbroken, flawless, unblemished, unblotched, freeing, praised by the wise, ungrasped, leading to concentration.
“Again, a noble disciple possesses unwavering confidence in the Dhamma thus: ‘The Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One, directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.’
This is the second stream of merit….
“Again, a noble disciple possesses unwavering confidence in the Saṅgha thus: ‘The Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practicing the good way, practicing the straight way, practicing the true way, practicing the proper way; that is, the four pairs of persons, the eight types of individuals—this Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, the unsurpassed field of merit for the world.’
This is the third stream of merit….
“Again, a noble disciple recollects his own generosity thus: ‘It is truly my good fortune and gain that in a population obsessed by the stain of miserliness, I dwell with a mind devoid of the stain of miserliness, freely generous, openhanded, delighting in relinquishment, devoted to charity, delighting in giving and sharing.’
When a noble disciple recollects his generosity, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight.
“Again, a noble disciple recollects his own generosity thus: ‘It is truly my good fortune … that in a population obsessed by the stain of miserliness, I dwell with a mind devoid of the stain of miserliness … delighting in giving and sharing.’
When a noble disciple recollects his generosity, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight.
“Again, a noble disciple recollects his own virtuous behavior as unbroken, flawless, unblemished, unblotched, freeing, praised by the wise, ungrasped, leading to concentration.
“Again, a noble disciple recollects his own virtuous behavior as unbroken, flawless, unblemished, unblotched, freeing, praised by the wise, ungrasped, leading to concentration.
“Again, a noble disciple recollects the deities thus: ‘There are devas the four great kings … … I too have such faith … such virtuous behavior … such learning … such generosity … such wisdom as those deities possessed, because of which, when they passed away here, they were reborn there.’
When a noble disciple recollects the faith, virtuous behavior, learning, generosity, and wisdom in himself and in those deities, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight.
“Again, a noble disciple recollects the deities thus: ‘There are devas the four great kings, Tāvatiṃsa devas, Yāma devas, Tusita devas, devas who delight in creation, devas who control what is created by others, devas of Brahmā’s company, and devas still higher than these.
“Again, a noble disciple recollects the Dhamma thus: ‘The Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One … to be personally experienced by the wise.’
When a noble disciple recollects the Dhamma, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight.
“Again, a noble disciple recollects the Dhamma thus: ‘The Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One, directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.’
When a noble disciple recollects the Dhamma, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight.
“Again, a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha thus: ‘The Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practicing the good way … the unsurpassed field of merit for the world.’
When a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight.
“Again, a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha thus: ‘The Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practicing the good way, practicing the straight way, practicing the true way, practicing the proper way; that is, the four pairs of persons, the eight types of individuals—this Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, the unsurpassed field of merit for the world.’
When a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight.
“Again, a Tathāgata has arisen in the world … and the Dhamma leading to peace, nibbāna, and enlightenment is taught as proclaimed by a Fortunate One.
“Again, a Tathāgata has arisen in the world … and the Dhamma leading to peace, nibbāna, and enlightenment is taught as proclaimed by a Fortunate One.
“Again, a Tathāgata has arisen in the world … and the Dhamma leading to peace, nibbāna, and enlightenment is taught as proclaimed by a Fortunate One.
“Again, a Tathāgata has arisen in the world … and the Dhamma leading to peace, nibbāna, and enlightenment is taught as proclaimed by a Fortunate One.
“Again, a Tathāgata has arisen in the world … and the Dhamma leading to peace, nibbāna, and enlightenment is taught as proclaimed by a Fortunate One.
“Again, a Tathāgata has arisen in the world … and the Dhamma leading to peace, nibbāna, and enlightenment is taught as proclaimed by a Fortunate One.
“Again, a Tathāgata has not arisen in the world … and the Dhamma leading to peace, nibbāna, and enlightenment is not taught as proclaimed by a Fortunate One.
“Again, a virtuous person accomplished in virtuous behavior acquires a good reputation.
“Again, a virtuous person accomplished in virtuous behavior dies unconfused.
“Again, after dispatching his army at a proper time, the king orders it to turn back while en route.
“Again, an enemy wishes for an enemy: ‘May he have no friends!’ For what reason?
“Again, an enemy wishes for an enemy: ‘May he not be famous!’ For what reason?
“Again, an enemy wishes for an enemy: ‘May he not be wealthy!’ For what reason?
“Again, an enemy wishes for an enemy: ‘May he not succeed!’ For what reason?
“Again, an enemy wishes for an enemy: ‘May he sleep badly!’ For what reason?
“Again, an enemy wishes for an enemy: ‘With the breakup of the body, after death, may he be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell!’ For what reason?
“Again, an evil bhikkhu holds wrong view; he resorts to an extremist view.
“Again, an evil bhikkhu is desirous of gain, honor, and admiration.
“Again, an evil bhikkhu is of wrong livelihood; he earns his living by wrong livelihood.
“Again, an immoral person deficient in virtuous behavior dies confused.
“Again, at present people are excited by illicit lust, overcome by unrighteous greed, afflicted by wrong Dhamma.
“Again, at present people are excited by illicit lust, overcome by unrighteous greed, afflicted by wrong Dhamma.
“Again, before his enlightenment … the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One that a kind of grass called tiriyā rose up from his navel and stood touching the sky.
“Again, before his enlightenment … the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One that four birds of different colors came from the four quarters, fell at his feet, and turned all white.
“Again, before his enlightenment … the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One that he climbed up a huge mountain of dung without being soiled by it.
“Again, before his enlightenment … the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One that white worms with black heads crawled from his feet up to his knees and covered them.
“Again, Bhante, a bhikkhu attends to the perception of light; he focuses on the perception of day thus: ‘As by day, so at night; as at night, so by day.’
Thus, with a mind that is open and uncovered, he develops a mind imbued with luminosity.
“Again, Bhante, a bhikkhu reviews this very body upward from the soles of the feet, downward from the tips of the hairs, enclosed in skin, as full of many kinds of impurities: ‘There are in this body head hairs, body hairs, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, pleura, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, stomach, excrement, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, snot, fluid of the joints, urine.’
This subject of recollection, developed and cultivated in this way, leads to abandoning sensual lust.
“Again, Bhante, for a long time the Blessed One has been a forest-dweller who resorts to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
“Again, Bhante, suppose a bhikkhu were to see a corpse thrown aside in a charnel ground, one, two, or three days dead, bloated, livid, and festering.
“Again, Bhante, the Blessed One gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
“Again, Bhante, the Blessed One gets to hear at will, without trouble or difficulty, talk concerned with the austere life that leads to the elimination, that is conducive to opening up the heart, that is, talk on fewness of desires, on contentment, on solitude, on not getting bound up, on arousing energy, on virtuous behavior, on concentration, on wisdom, on liberation, on the knowledge and vision of liberation.
“Again, Bhante, the Blessed One is content with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
“Again, Bhante, the Blessed One is virtuous, of mature behavior, of noble behavior, of wholesome behavior, possessing wholesome behavior.
“Again, Bhante, the Blessed One is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Again, Bhante, the Blessed One recollects his manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many eons of world-dissolution, many eons of world-evolution, many eons of world-dissolution and world-evolution thus: ‘There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn elsewhere, and there too I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn here.’
Thus he recollects his manifold past abodes with their aspects and details.
“Again, Bhante, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous passing away of joy and dejection, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna, neither painful nor pleasant, which has purification of mindfulness by equanimity.
“Again, Bhante, with the destruction of the taints, the Blessed One has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
“Again, Bhante, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, the Blessed One sees beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma thus: ‘These beings who engaged in misconduct by body, speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong view, and undertook kamma based on wrong view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell; but these beings who engaged in good conduct by body, speech, and mind, who did not revile the noble ones, who held right view, and undertook kamma based on right view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in a good destination, in the heavenly world.’
Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma.
“Again, bhikkhus, by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness ‘there is nothing,’ some person here enters and dwells in the base of nothingness.
“Again, bhikkhus, some person dwells contemplating impermanence in all conditioned phenomena, perceiving impermanence, experiencing impermanence, constantly, continuously, and uninterruptedly focusing on it with the mind, fathoming it with wisdom.
“Again, bhikkhus, some person dwells contemplating impermanence in all conditioned phenomena, perceiving impermanence, experiencing impermanence, constantly, continuously, and uninterruptedly focusing on it with the mind, fathoming it with wisdom.
“Again, brahmin, one kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial post, even before the sacrifice, first undertakes the preparations to slay the bulls in sacrifice.
“Again, brahmin, one kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial post, even before the sacrifice, utters such speech as this: ‘Let so many bulls be slain in sacrifice!
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling, and having seen with wisdom, his taints are utterly destroyed.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling, and having seen with wisdom, his taints are utterly destroyed.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling, and having seen with wisdom, his taints are utterly destroyed.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of nothingness, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness, ‘there is nothing,’ a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of nothingness.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of space, ‘consciousness is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of consciousness.
“Again, by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of space, ‘consciousness is infinite,’ someone here enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of consciousness.
“Again, food is plentiful; there has been a good harvest and almsfood is abundant, so that one can easily sustain oneself by means of gleaning.
“Again, for the instructed noble disciple, what is subject to illness falls ill … … what is subject to death dies … … what is subject to destruction is destroyed … … what is subject to loss is lost.
“Again, for the uninstructed worldling, what is subject to illness falls ill … … what is subject to death dies … … what is subject to destruction is destroyed … … what is subject to loss is lost.
“Again, friend, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling, and having seen with wisdom, his taints are utterly destroyed.
“Again, friend, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling, and having seen with wisdom, his taints are utterly destroyed.
“Again, friend, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling, and having seen with wisdom, his taints are utterly destroyed.
“Again, friend, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling, and having seen with wisdom, his taints are utterly destroyed.
“Again, friend, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling, and having seen with wisdom, his taints are utterly destroyed.
“Again, friend, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling, and having seen with wisdom, his taints are utterly destroyed.
“Again, friend, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling, and having seen with wisdom, his taints are utterly destroyed; and he understands it with wisdom.
“Again, friend, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, he enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling, and having seen with wisdom, his taints are utterly destroyed.
“Again, friend, by completely surmounting the base of nothingness, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
“Again, friend, by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness, ‘there is nothing,’ a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of nothingness.
“Again, friend, by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness, ‘there is nothing,’ a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of nothingness.
“Again, friend, by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of space, ‘consciousness is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of consciousness.
“Again, friend, by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of space, ‘consciousness is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of consciousness.
“Again, friend, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain … a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna ….
“Again, friend, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, ‘space is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space.
“Again, friend, with the fading away of rapture, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the third jhāna ….
“Again, friend, with the subsiding of thought and examination, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the second jhāna ….
“Again, friends, a bhikkhu is virtuous….
“Again, good persons resort to a donor, a munificent giver.
“Again, having eaten as much as he wants until his belly is full, a bhikkhu yields to the pleasure of rest, the pleasure of sloth, the pleasure of sleep.
“Again, householder, a bhikkhu dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with compassion … … with a mind imbued with altruistic joy … … with a mind imbued with equanimity, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter.
“Again, householder, a bhikkhu dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter.
“Again, householder, by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of space, ‘consciousness is infinite,’ he enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of consciousness … … by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness, ‘there is nothing,’ he enters and dwells in the base of nothingness.
“Again, householder, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, ‘space is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space.
“Again, householder, with the subsiding of thought and examination a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the second jhāna … … the third jhāna … … the fourth jhāna….
“Again, human beings become unrighteous.
“Again, in the future there will be bhikkhus who are undeveloped in body, virtuous behavior, mind, and wisdom.
“Again, in the future there will be bhikkhus who are undeveloped in body, virtuous behavior, mind, and wisdom.
“Again, in the future there will be bhikkhus who are undeveloped in body, virtuous behavior, mind, and wisdom.
“Again, in the future there will be bhikkhus who are undeveloped in body, virtuous behavior, mind, and wisdom.
“Again, in the future there will be bhikkhus who bond closely with bhikkhunīs, female probationers, and novices.
“Again, in the future there will be bhikkhus who bond closely with monastery workers and novices.
“Again, in the future there will be bhikkhus who desire fine almsfood.
“Again, in the future there will be bhikkhus who desire fine lodgings.
“Again, in the king’s frontier fortress many foodstuffs—sesame, green gram, and beans—are stored up for the delight, relief, and ease of its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders.
“Again, in the king’s frontier fortress many kinds of troops reside, that is, elephant troops, cavalry, charioteers, archers, standard bearers, camp marshals, food servers, ugga-caste warriors, front-line commandoes, great-bull warriors, attack soldiers, shield-bearing soldiers, domestic-slave soldiers.
“Again, in the king’s frontier fortress many medicaments—ghee, butter, oil, honey, molasses, and salt—are stored up for the delight, relief, and ease of its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders.
“Again, in the king’s frontier fortress many weapons are stored, both missiles and hand weapons.
“Again, in the king’s frontier fortress much rice and barley are stored up for the delight, relief, and ease of its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders.
“Again, in the king’s frontier fortress the gatekeeper is wise, competent, and intelligent, one who keeps out strangers and admits acquaintances.
“Again, in the king’s frontier fortress the moat is dug deep and wide.
“Again, in the king’s frontier fortress the patrol path is high and wide.
“Again, in the king’s frontier fortress the rampart is high and wide, covered over by a coat of plaster.
“Again, in the king’s inner palace a father longs for his son, or a son longs for his father.
“Again, in the king’s inner palace there is the trampling of elephants, horses, and chariots, as well as tantalizing forms, sounds, odors, tastes, and tactile objects that are not suitable for a monk.
“Again, Mahānāma you should recollect the Dhamma … … the Saṅgha … … your own virtuous behavior … … your own generosity … … the deities thus….
“Again, Mahānāma, a noble disciple recollects his own generosity thus: ‘It is truly my good fortune and gain that in a population obsessed by the stain of miserliness, I dwell at home with a mind devoid of the stain of miserliness, freely generous, openhanded, delighting in relinquishment, devoted to charity, delighting in giving and sharing.’
When a noble disciple recollects his generosity, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight, based on generosity.
“Again, Mahānāma, a noble disciple recollects his own virtuous behavior as unbroken, flawless, unblemished, unblotched, freeing, praised by the wise, ungrasped, leading to concentration.
“Again, Mahānāma, a noble disciple recollects the deities thus: ‘There are devas the four great kings, Tāvatiṃsa devas, Yāma devas, Tusita devas, devas who delight in creation, devas who control what is created by others, devas of Brahmā’s company, and devas still higher than these.
“Again, Mahānāma, a noble disciple recollects the Dhamma thus: ‘The Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One, directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.’
When a noble disciple recollects the Dhamma, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight, based on the Dhamma.
“Again, Mahānāma, a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha thus: ‘The Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practicing the good way, practicing the straight way, practicing the true way, practicing the proper way; that is, the four pairs of persons, the eight types of individuals—this Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, the unsurpassed field of merit for the world.’
When a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight, based on the Saṅgha.
“Again, Mahānāma, with wealth acquired by energetic striving, amassed by the strength of his arms, earned by the sweat of his brow, righteous wealth righteously gained, a clansman honors, respects, esteems, and venerates his wife and children, his slaves, workers, and servants.
“Again, Mahānāma, with wealth acquired by energetic striving, amassed by the strength of his arms, earned by the sweat of his brow, righteous wealth righteously gained, a clansman honors, respects, esteems, and venerates the oblational deities.
“Again, Mahānāma, with wealth acquired by energetic striving, amassed by the strength of his arms, earned by the sweat of his brow, righteous wealth righteously gained, a clansman honors, respects, esteems, and venerates the owners of the neighboring fields and those with whom he does business.
“Again, Mahānāma, with wealth acquired by energetic striving, amassed by the strength of his arms, earned by the sweat of his brow, righteously gained, a clansman honors, respects, esteems, and venerates ascetics and brahmins.
“Again, Mahānāma, you should recollect the deities thus: ‘There are devas the four great kings, Tāvatiṃsa devas, Yāma devas, Tusita devas, devas who delight in creation, devas who control what is created by others, devas of Brahmā’s company, and devas still higher than these.
“Again, Mahānāma, you should recollect the Dhamma thus: ‘The Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One, directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.’
When a noble disciple recollects the Dhamma, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight, based on the Dhamma.
“Again, Mahānāma, you should recollect the Saṅgha thus: ‘The Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practicing the good way, practicing the straight way, practicing the true way, practicing the proper way; that is, the four pairs of persons, the eight types of individuals—this Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, the unsurpassed field of merit for the world.’
When a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight, based on the Saṅgha.
“Again, Mahānāma, you should recollect your own generosity thus: ‘It is truly my good fortune and gain that in a population obsessed by the stain of miserliness, I dwell at home with a mind devoid of the stain of miserliness, freely generous, openhanded, delighting in relinquishment, devoted to charity, delighting in giving and sharing.’
When a noble disciple recollects his generosity, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight, based on generosity.
“Again, Mahānāma, you should recollect your own virtuous behavior as unbroken, flawless, unblemished, unblotched, freeing, praised by the wise, ungrasped, leading to concentration.
“Again, Master Gotama, when someone performs this wonder by which he declares another’s state of mind on the basis of a clue … by hearing the sound of people, spirits, or deities … by hearing the sound of the diffusion of thought while he is thinking and examining … by encompassing with his own mind the mind of one who has attained concentration that is without thought and examination such that he understands: ‘This person’s mental activities are so disposed that immediately afterward he will think this thought,’ and, even if he makes many declarations, they are exactly so and not otherwise—again, only the one who performs this wonder experiences it and it occurs only to him.
“Again, Nandiya, you should recollect good friends thus: ‘It is truly my good fortune and gain that I have good friends who take compassion on me, who desire my good, who exhort and instruct me.’
Thus you should establish mindfulness internally based on good friends.
“Again, Nandiya, you should recollect the deities thus: ‘Those deities that have been reborn in a mind-made body in companionship with the devas who transcend those subsisting on edible food do not see in themselves anything still to be done or to increase what has been done.
“Again, Nandiya, you should recollect the Dhamma thus: ‘The Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One, directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.’
Thus you should establish mindfulness internally based on the Dhamma.
“Again, Nandiya, you should recollect your own generosity thus: ‘It is truly my good fortune and gain that in a population obsessed by the stain of miserliness, I dwell at home with a mind devoid of the stain of miserliness, freely generous, openhanded, delighting in relinquishment, devoted to charity, delighting in giving and sharing.’
Thus you should establish mindfulness internally based on generosity.
“Again, neither the Teacher nor a fellow monk in the position of a teacher teaches the Dhamma to a bhikkhu, but he himself teaches the Dhamma to others in detail as he has heard it and learned it.
“Again, neither the Teacher nor a fellow monk in the position of a teacher teaches the Dhamma to a bhikkhu, nor does he himself teach the Dhamma to others in detail as he has heard it and learned it, but he recites the Dhamma in detail as he has heard it and learned it.
“Again, neither the Teacher nor a fellow monk in the position of a teacher teaches the Dhamma to a bhikkhu, nor does he teach the Dhamma to others in detail as he has heard it and learned it, nor does he recite the Dhamma in detail as he has heard it and learned it, but he ponders, examines, and mentally inspects the Dhamma as he has heard it and learned it.
“Again, neither the Teacher nor a fellow monk in the position of a teacher teaches the Dhamma to a bhikkhu, nor does he teach the Dhamma to others in detail as he has heard it and learned it, nor does he recite the Dhamma in detail as he has heard it and learned it, nor does he ponder, examine, and mentally inspect the Dhamma as he has heard it and learned it, but he has grasped well a certain object of concentration, attended to it well, sustained it well, and penetrated it well with wisdom.
“Again, one kind of excellent thoroughbred horse is not stirred nor does it acquire a sense of urgency as soon as it sees the shadow of the goad, but it is stirred and acquires a sense of urgency when its hairs are struck by the goad, thinking: ‘What task will my trainer set for me today?
“Again, one kind of excellent thoroughbred horse is not stirred nor does it acquire a sense of urgency as soon as it sees the shadow of the goad, nor when its hairs are struck by the goad, but it is stirred and acquires a sense of urgency when its hide is struck by the goad, thinking: ‘What task now will my trainer set for me today?
“Again, one kind of excellent thoroughbred horse is not stirred nor does it acquire a sense of urgency as soon as it sees the shadow of the goad, nor when its hairs are struck by the goad, nor when its hide is struck by the goad, but it is stirred and acquires a sense of urgency when its bone is struck by the goad, thinking: ‘What task now will my trainer set for me today?
“Again, one kind of excellent thoroughbred person does not hear: ‘In such and such a village or town some woman or man has fallen ill or died,’ nor does he himself see a woman or a man who has fallen ill or died, nor has a relative or family member of his fallen ill or died.
“Again, one kind of excellent thoroughbred person does not hear: ‘In such and such a village or town some woman or man has fallen ill or died,’ nor does he himself see a woman or a man who has fallen ill or died.
“Again, one kind of excellent thoroughbred person does not hear: ‘In such and such a village or town some woman or man has fallen ill or died.’
Rather, he himself sees a woman or a man who has fallen ill or died.
“Again, people are dwelling in concord, harmoniously, without disputes, blending like milk and water, viewing each other with eyes of affection.
“Again, Rāhu the asura king receives the water with his hand and discards it into the ocean.
“Again, some ascetic or brahmin, claiming to be perfectly celibate, does not actually engage in intercourse with women; nor does he consent to being rubbed, massaged, bathed, and kneaded by them.
“Again, some bhikkhu can endure the cloud of dust and the crests of the standards, but when he hears the uproar, he sinks, founders, does not brace himself, and cannot maintain the spiritual life.
“Again, some bhikkhu can endure the cloud of dust, but when he sees the crests of the standards, he sinks, founders, does not brace himself, and cannot maintain the spiritual life.
“Again, some bhikkhu can endure the cloud of dust, the crests of the standards, and the uproar, but he is struck down and wounded by a blow.
“Again, some bhikkhu can endure the clouds of dust, the crests of the standards, the uproar, and a blow.
“Again, some bhikkhu dwells in dependence upon a certain village or town.
“Again, some bhikkhu dwells in dependence upon a certain village or town.
“Again, some bhikkhu dwells in dependence upon a certain village or town.
“Again, some bhikkhu dwells in dependence upon a certain village or town.
“Again, some person dwells contemplating impermanence in all conditioned phenomena, perceiving impermanence, experiencing impermanence, constantly, continuously, and uninterruptedly focusing on it with the mind, fathoming it with wisdom.
“Again, some person dwells contemplating impermanence in the eye, perceiving impermanence, experiencing impermanence, constantly, continuously, and uninterruptedly focusing on it with the mind, fathoming it with wisdom.
“Again, some person dwells contemplating impermanence in the eye, perceiving impermanence, experiencing impermanence, constantly, continuously, and uninterruptedly focusing on it with the mind, fathoming it with wisdom.
“Again, some person dwells contemplating impermanence in the eye, perceiving impermanence, experiencing impermanence, constantly, continuously, and uninterruptedly focusing on it with the mind, fathoming it with wisdom.
“Again, some person dwells contemplating impermanence in the eye, perceiving impermanence, experiencing impermanence, constantly, continuously, and uninterruptedly focusing on it with the mind, fathoming it with wisdom.
“Again, some person dwells contemplating impermanence in the eye, perceiving impermanence, experiencing impermanence, constantly, continuously, and uninterruptedly focusing on it with the mind, fathoming it with wisdom.
“Again, some person dwells contemplating impermanence in the eye, perceiving impermanence, experiencing impermanence, constantly, continuously, and uninterruptedly focusing on it with the mind, fathoming it with wisdom.
“Again, some person dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with altruistic joy, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter.
“Again, some person dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with compassion … … altruistic joy … … equanimity, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter.
“Again, some person dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with compassion, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter.
“Again, some person fulfills virtuous behavior but cultivates concentration and wisdom only to a moderate extent.
“Again, some person fulfills virtuous behavior but cultivates concentration and wisdom only to a moderate extent.
“Again, some person fulfills virtuous behavior but cultivates concentration and wisdom only to a moderate extent.
“Again, some person fulfills virtuous behavior but cultivates concentration and wisdom only to a moderate extent.
“Again, some person here dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with equanimity, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter.
“Again, some person, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous passing away of joy and dejection, enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna, neither painful nor pleasant, which has purification of mindfulness by equanimity.
“Again, some person, with the fading away as well of rapture, dwells equanimous and, mindful and clearly comprehending, he experiences pleasure with the body; he enters and dwells in the third jhāna of which the noble ones declare: ‘He is equanimous, mindful, one who dwells happily.’
He relishes it, desires it, and finds satisfaction in it.
“Again, some person, with the subsiding of thought and examination, enters and dwells in the second jhāna, which has internal placidity and unification of mind and consists of rapture and pleasure born of concentration, without thought and examination.
“Again, some person, with the subsiding of thought and examination, enters and dwells in the second jhāna….
“Again, some teacher whose Dhamma teaching is unpurified claims: ‘I am one whose Dhamma teaching is purified.
“Again, some teacher whose explanations are unpurified claims: ‘I am one whose explanations are purified.
“Again, some teacher whose knowledge and vision are unpurified claims: ‘I am one whose knowledge and vision are purified.
“Again, some teacher whose livelihood is unpurified claims: ‘I am one whose livelihood is purified.
“Again, some warrior can endure the cloud of dust and the crests of the standards, but when he hears the uproar, he sinks, founders, does not brace himself, and cannot enter the battle.
“Again, some warrior can endure the cloud of dust, but when he sees the crests of the standards, he sinks, founders, does not brace himself, and cannot enter the battle.
“Again, some warrior can endure the cloud of dust, the crests of the standards, and the uproar, but he is struck down and wounded by blows.
“Again, some warrior can endure the cloud of dust, the crests of the standards, the uproar, and the blows.
“Again, some warrior takes up a sword and shield, arms himself with a bow and quiver, and enters the fray of battle.
“Again, some warrior takes up a sword and shield, arms himself with a bow and quiver, and enters the fray of battle.
“Again, some warrior takes up a sword and shield, arms himself with a bow and quiver, and enters the fray of battle.
“Again, some warrior takes up a sword and shield, arms himself with a bow and quiver, and enters the fray of battle.
“Again, someone does not declare on the basis of a clue, but he hears the sound of people, spirits, or deities and then declares: ‘Your thought is thus, such is what you are thinking, your mind is in such and such a state.’
And even if he makes many declarations, they are exactly so and not otherwise.
“Again, someone does not declare on the basis of a mark, or by hearing the sound of people, spirits, or deities, but he hears the sound of the diffusion of thought as one is thinking and examining and then declares: ‘Your thought is thus, such is what you are thinking, your mind is in such and such a state.’
And even if he makes many declarations, they are exactly so and not otherwise.
“Again, someone does not declare on the basis of a mark, or by hearing the sound of people, spirits, or deities, or by hearing the sound of the diffusion of thought as one is thinking and examining, but with his own mind he encompasses the mind of one who has attained concentration without thought and examination and he understands: ‘This person’s mental activities are so disposed that immediately afterward he will think this thought.’
And even if he makes many declarations, they are exactly so and not otherwise.
“Again, someone has not done what is evil, cruel, and defiled, but has done what is good and wholesome and made a shelter for himself.
“Again, someone has not done what is good and wholesome or made a shelter for himself, but he has done what is evil, cruel, and defiled.
“Again, someone here is perplexed, doubtful, and undecided about the good Dhamma.
“Again, someone is devoid of lust, desire, affection, thirst, passion, and craving for the body.
“Again, someone is not devoid of lust, desire, affection, thirst, passion, and craving for the body.
“Again, someone is unperplexed, doubt-free, and decided about the good Dhamma.
“Again, the air element in the upper regions of the sky becomes disturbed.
“Again, the bhikkhus are difficult to correct and possess qualities that make them difficult to correct.
“Again, the bhikkhus are difficult to correct and possess qualities that make them difficult to correct.
“Again, the bhikkhus are easy to correct and possess qualities that make them easy to correct.
“Again, the bhikkhus are easy to correct and possess qualities that make them easy to correct.
“Again, the bhikkhus do not make others repeat the Dhamma in detail as they have heard it and learned it.
“Again, the bhikkhus do not ponder, examine, and mentally inspect the Dhamma as they have heard it and learned it.
“Again, the bhikkhus do not recite the Dhamma in detail as they have heard it and learned it.
“Again, the bhikkhus do not teach the Dhamma to others in detail as they have heard it and learned it.
“Again, the bhikkhus make others repeat the Dhamma in detail as they have heard it and learned it.
“Again, the bhikkhus ponder, examine, and mentally inspect the Dhamma as they have heard it and learned it.
“Again, the bhikkhus recite the Dhamma in detail as they have heard it and learned it.
“Again, the bhikkhus teach the Dhamma to others in detail as they have heard it and learned it.
“Again, the elder bhikkhus are luxurious and lax, leaders in backsliding, discarding the duty of solitude; they do not arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
“Again, the elder bhikkhus are luxurious and lax, leaders in backsliding, discarding the duty of solitude; they do not arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
“Again, the elder bhikkhus are not luxurious and lax, but discard backsliding and take the lead in solitude; they arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
“Again, the elder bhikkhus are not luxurious and lax, but they discard backsliding and take the lead in solitude; they arouse energy for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
“Again, the great ocean contains many precious substances, numerous precious substances such as pearls, gems, lapis lazuli, conch, quartz, coral, silver, gold, rubies, and cats-eye.
“Again, the great ocean does not associate with a corpse, but quickly carries it to the coast and washes it ashore.
“Again, the great ocean has but one taste, the taste of salt.
“Again, the great ocean is stable and does not overflow its boundaries.
“Again, the great ocean is the abode of great beings such as timis, timiṅgalas, timirapiṅgalas, asuras, nāgas, and gandhabbas.
“Again, the great ocean is the abode of great beings … … five hundred yojanas long.
“Again, the king demotes someone.
“Again, the king dispatches his army at an improper time.
“Again, the king promotes someone.
“Again, the mind of a bhikkhu with taints destroyed slants, slopes, and inclines to seclusion; it is withdrawn, delighting in renunciation, and is entirely finished with all things that are a basis for the taints.
“Again, the mind of a bhikkhu with taints destroyed slants, slopes, and inclines to seclusion; it is withdrawn, delights in renunciation, and is entirely finished with all things that are a basis for the taints.
“Again, the noble disciple possesses the virtuous behavior loved by the noble ones, unbroken, flawless, unblemished, unblotched, freeing, praised by the wise, ungrasped, leading to concentration.
“Again, the noble disciple possesses unwavering confidence in the Dhamma thus: ‘The Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One, directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.’
This is the second pleasant visible dwelling that pertains to the higher mind, which he has achieved for the purification of the impure mind, for the cleansing of the unclean mind.
“Again, the noble disciple possesses unwavering confidence in the Saṅgha thus: ‘The Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practicing the good way, practicing the straight way, practicing the true way, practicing the proper way; that is, the four pairs of persons, the eight types of individual—this Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, the unsurpassed field of merit for the world.’
This is the third pleasant visible dwelling that pertains to the higher mind, which he has achieved for the purification of the impure mind, for the cleansing of the unclean mind.
“Again, the person in whom another has complete confidence may commit an offense because of which the Saṅgha makes him sit at the end.
“Again, the person in whom another has complete confidence may depart for some other quarter … … may disrobe … … may pass away.
“Again, the person through whom another comes to understand as it really is: ‘This is suffering,’ and ‘This is the origin of suffering,’ and ‘This is the cessation of suffering,’ and ‘This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering.’
This person is helpful to the other person.
“Again, the person through whom, with the destruction of the taints, another realizes for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it.
“Again, the rain-cloud devas become heedless.
“Again, the Saṅgha is dwelling at ease—in concord, harmoniously, without disputes, with a single recitation.
“Again, the Saṅgha is dwelling at ease—in concord, harmoniously, without disputes, with a single recitation.
“Again, the secret deliberations of the king’s inner palace have spread to others.
“Again, the Tathāgata recollects his manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births … … Thus he recollects his manifold past abodes with their aspects and details.
“Again, the Tathāgata recollects his manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many eons of world-dissolution, many eons of world-evolution, many eons of world-dissolution and world-evolution thus: ‘There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn elsewhere, and there too I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn here.’
Thus he recollects his manifold past abodes with their aspects and details.
“Again, the Tathāgata understands as it really is the defilement, the cleansing, and the emergence in regard to the jhānas, emancipations, concentrations, and meditative attainments.
“Again, the Tathāgata understands as it really is the defilement, the cleansing, and the emergence in regard to the jhānas, emancipations, concentrations, and meditative attainments.
“Again, the Tathāgata understands as it really is the diversity in the dispositions of beings.
“Again, the Tathāgata understands as it really is the result of the undertaking of kamma past, future, and present in terms of possibilities and causes.
“Again, the Tathāgata understands as it really is the result of the undertaking of kamma past, future, and present in terms of possibilities and causes.
“Again, the Tathāgata understands as it really is the superior or inferior condition of the faculties of other beings and persons.
“Again, the Tathāgata understands as it really is the ways leading everywhere.
“Again, the Tathāgata understands as it really is the world with its numerous and diverse elements.
“Again, the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One, the righteous king of the Dhamma, relying just on the Dhamma, honoring, respecting, and venerating the Dhamma, taking the Dhamma as his standard, banner, and authority, provides righteous protection, shelter, and guard for the bhikkhunīs … for the male lay followers … for the female lay followers, saying: ‘Such bodily action should be cultivated….
“Again, the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One, the righteous king of the Dhamma, relying just on the Dhamma, honoring, respecting, and venerating the Dhamma, taking the Dhamma as his standard, banner, and authority, provides righteous protection, shelter, and guard in regard to mental action, saying: ‘Such mental action should be cultivated; such mental action should not be cultivated.’
“Again, the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One, the righteous king of the Dhamma, relying just on the Dhamma, honoring, respecting, and venerating the Dhamma, taking the Dhamma as his standard, banner, and authority, provides righteous protection, shelter, and guard in regard to verbal action, saying: ‘Such verbal action should be cultivated; such verbal action should not be cultivated.’
“Again, the training fundamental to the spiritual life has been prescribed by me to my disciples for the utterly complete destruction of suffering.
“Again, there comes a time of perilous turbulence in the wilderness, when the people of the countryside, mounted on their vehicles, flee on all sides.
“Again, there comes a time of perilous turbulence in the wilderness, when the people of the countryside, mounted on their vehicles, flee on all sides.
“Again, there comes a time when a great rain cloud arises.
“Again, there comes a time when a great rain cloud arises.
“Again, there is a famine, a poor harvest, a time when almsfood is difficult to obtain and it is not easy to subsist by means of gleaning.
“Again, there is a schism in the Saṅgha, and when there is a schism in the Saṅgha there are mutual insults, mutual reviling, mutual disparagement, and mutual rejection.
“Again, there is a schism in the Saṅgha, and when there is a schism in the Saṅgha there are mutual insults, mutual reviling, mutual disparagement, and mutual rejection.
“Again, there is an ascetic or brahmin who possesses psychic potency and has attained mastery of mind, or a deity who is very powerful and mighty.
“Again, there is peril, turbulence in the wilderness, and the people of the countryside, mounted on their vehicles, flee on all sides.
“Again, those bhikkhus who are learned, experts on the Dhamma, experts on the discipline, experts on the outlines, respectfully teach the discourses to others.
“Again, those bhikkhus who are learned, heirs to the heritage, experts on the Dhamma, experts on the discipline, experts on the outlines, do not respectfully teach the discourses to others.
“Again, those bhikkhus who are learned, heirs to the heritage, experts on the Dhamma, experts on the discipline, experts on the outlines, do not respectfully teach the discourses to others.
“Again, those bhikkhus who are learned, heirs to the heritage, experts on the Dhamma, experts on the discipline, experts on the outlines, respectfully teach the discourses to others.
“Again, Upāli, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, he enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling.
“Again, Upāli, by completely surmounting the base of nothingness, ‘this is peaceful, this is sublime,’ he enters and dwells in the base of neither-perception-nor-nonperception.
“Again, Upāli, by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness, ‘there is nothing,’ he enters and dwells in the base of nothingness.
“Again, Upāli, by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of space, ‘consciousness is infinite,’ he enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of consciousness.
“Again, Upāli, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain … he enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna….
“Again, Upāli, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, ‘space is infinite,’ the bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space.
“Again, Upāli, with the fading away as well of rapture … he enters and dwells in the third jhāna….
“Again, Upāli, with the subsiding of thought and examination, the bhikkhu enters and dwells in the second jhāna….
“Again, wanderers, a brahmin says thus: ‘I am not anywhere the belonging of anyone, nor is there anywhere anything in any place that is mine.’
Speaking thus, a brahmin speaks truth, not falsehood.
“Again, whatever assembly a donor, a munificent giver, approaches—whether of khattiyas, brahmins, householders, or ascetics—he approaches it confidently and composed.
“Again, whatever assembly a virtuous person accomplished in virtuous behavior approaches—whether of khattiyas, brahmins, householders, or ascetics—he approaches it confidently and composed.
“Again, whatever assembly an immoral person deficient in virtuous behavior approaches—whether of khattiyas, brahmins, householders, or ascetics—he approaches it timid and disconcerted.
“Again, whatever streams in the world flow into the great ocean and however much rain falls into it from the sky, neither a decrease nor a filling up can be seen in the great ocean.
“Again, when a bhikkhu does not know and see what object to rely on and attend to in order to attain the immediate destruction of the taints, on that occasion he should approach an esteemed bhikkhu and say to him: ‘Friend, I do not know and see what object to rely on and attend to in order to attain the immediate destruction of the taints.
“Again, when a bhikkhu is attending to form, his mind does not launch out upon it and become placid, settled, and focused on it.
“Again, when a bhikkhu is attending to harming, his mind does not launch out upon it and become placid, settled, and focused on it.
“Again, when a bhikkhu is attending to ill will, his mind does not launch out upon it, and become placid, settled, and focused on it.
“Again, when a bhikkhu is attending to personal existence, his mind does not launch out upon it and become placid, settled, and focused on it.
“Again, when a bhikkhu’s mind is obsessed and oppressed by doubt, and he does not understand as it really is the escape from arisen doubt, on that occasion he should approach an esteemed bhikkhu and say to him: ‘Friend, my mind is obsessed and oppressed by doubt, and I do not understand as it really is the escape from arisen doubt.
“Again, when a bhikkhu’s mind is obsessed and oppressed by dullness and drowsiness, and he does not understand as it really is the escape from arisen dullness and drowsiness, on that occasion he should approach an esteemed bhikkhu and say to him: ‘Friend, my mind is obsessed and oppressed by dullness and drowsiness….’
The esteemed bhikkhu then teaches him the Dhamma for abandoning dullness and drowsiness.
“Again, when a bhikkhu’s mind is obsessed and oppressed by ill will, and he does not understand as it really is the escape from arisen ill will, on that occasion he should approach an esteemed bhikkhu and say to him: ‘Friend, my mind is obsessed and oppressed by ill will….’
The esteemed bhikkhu then teaches him the Dhamma for abandoning ill will.
“Again, when a bhikkhu’s mind is obsessed and oppressed by restlessness and remorse, and he does not understand as it really is the escape from arisen restlessness and remorse, on that occasion he should approach an esteemed bhikkhu and say to him: ‘Friend, my mind is obsessed and oppressed by restlessness and remorse….’ … The esteemed bhikkhu then teaches him the Dhamma for abandoning restlessness and remorse.
“Again, when a bodhisatta mindfully and with clear comprehension emerges from his mother’s womb, then in this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, in this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, a measureless glorious radiance becomes manifest, surpassing the divine majesty of the devas.
“Again, when a Tathāgata awakens to the unsurpassed perfect enlightenment, then in this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, in this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, a measureless glorious radiance becomes manifest, surpassing the divine majesty of the devas.
“Again, when a Tathāgata sets in motion the unsurpassed wheel of the Dhamma, then in this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, in this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, a measureless glorious radiance becomes manifest, surpassing the divine majesty of the devas.
“Again, when a wild colt is told: ‘Go forward!’ and is being spurred and incited by its trainer, it does not go forward or turn back but stands right there as still as a post.
“Again, when a wild colt is told: ‘Go forward!’ and is being spurred and incited by its trainer, it does not heed its trainer or the goad but destroys the mouthbit with its teeth and sets out wherever it wishes.
“Again, when a wild colt is told: ‘Go forward!’ and is being spurred and incited by its trainer, it leaps back and damages the rail and breaks the triple rod.
“Again, when a wild colt is told: ‘Go forward!’ and is being spurred and incited by its trainer, it leaps up with the front of its body and churns the air with its front feet.
“Again, when a wild colt is told: ‘Go forward!’ and is being spurred and incited by its trainer, it loosens its thigh from the chariot pole and crushes the chariot pole.
“Again, when a wild colt is told: ‘Go forward!’ and is being spurred and incited by its trainer, it takes a wrong path and leads the chariot off the track.
“Again, when a wild colt is told: ‘Go forward!’ and is being spurred and incited by its trainer, it tucks in its front legs and its back legs and sits down right there on all four legs.
“Again, when one dwells with a mind obsessed and oppressed by doubt, and one does not understand as it really is the escape from arisen doubt, on that occasion one does not know and see as it really is one’s own good, the good of others, and the good of both.
“Again, when one dwells with a mind obsessed and oppressed by dullness and drowsiness, and one does not understand as it really is the escape from arisen dullness and drowsiness, on that occasion one does not know and see as it really is one’s own good, the good of others, and the good of both.
“Again, when one dwells with a mind obsessed and oppressed by ill will, and one does not understand as it really is the escape from arisen ill will, on that occasion one does not know and see as it really is one’s own good, the good of others, and the good of both.
“Again, when one dwells with a mind obsessed and oppressed by restlessness and remorse, and one does not understand as it really is the escape from arisen restlessness and remorse, on that occasion one does not know and see as it really is one’s own good, the good of others, and the good of both.
“Again, when one dwells with a mind that is not obsessed and oppressed by doubt, and one understands as it really is the escape from arisen doubt, on that occasion one knows and sees as it really is one’s own good, the good of others, and the good of both.
“Again, when one dwells with a mind that is not obsessed and oppressed by dullness and drowsiness, and one understands as it really is the escape from arisen dullness and drowsiness, on that occasion one knows and sees as it really is one’s own good, the good of others, and the good of both.
“Again, when one dwells with a mind that is not obsessed and oppressed by ill will, and one understands as it really is the escape from arisen ill will, on that occasion one knows and sees as it really is one’s own good, the good of others, and the good of both.
“Again, when one dwells with a mind that is not obsessed and oppressed by restlessness and remorse, and one understands as it really is the escape from arisen restlessness and remorse, on that occasion one knows and sees as it really is one’s own good, the good of others, and the good of both.
“Again, when the bhikkhus are reproving a bhikkhu for an offense, he answers evasively, diverts the discussion to an irrelevant subject, and displays anger, hatred, and bitterness.
“Again, when the bhikkhus are reproving a bhikkhu for an offense, he attributes an offense to the reprover himself, saying: ‘You have committed such and such an offense.
“Again, when the bhikkhus are reproving a bhikkhu for an offense, he castigates the reprover himself: ‘What right does an incompetent fool like you have to speak?
“Again, when the bhikkhus are reproving a bhikkhu for an offense, he does not heed the Saṅgha or his reprover but sets out wherever he wishes while still bearing his offense.
“Again, when the bhikkhus are reproving a bhikkhu for an offense, he does not say, ‘I committed an offense,’ nor does he say, ‘I did not commit an offense,’ but he vexes the Saṅgha by keeping silent.
“Again, when the bhikkhus are reproving a bhikkhu for an offense, he says: ‘Why are you making such a fuss about me?
“Again, when the bhikkhus are reproving a bhikkhu for an offense, he speaks while waving his arms about in the midst of the Saṅgha.
“Again, when the bodhisatta passes away from the Tusita order and, mindful and clearly comprehending, enters his mother’s womb, this earth shakes, shudders, and trembles.
“Again, when the bodhisatta, mindful and clearly comprehending, emerges from his mother’s womb, this earth shakes, shudders, and trembles.
“Again, when the great rivers—the Ganges, the Yamunā, the Aciravatī, the Sarabhū, and the Mahī—reach the great ocean, they give up their former names and designations and are simply called the great ocean.
“Again, when the king has been busy, engaged with much work, he has had intercourse with one of the women but does not remember this, and because of their relations she has become pregnant.
“Again, when the Tathāgata attains final nibbāna by the nibbāna element without residue remaining, this earth shakes, shudders, and trembles.
“Again, when the Tathāgata awakens to the unsurpassed perfect enlightenment, this earth shakes, shudders, and trembles.
“Again, when the Tathāgata sets in motion the unsurpassed wheel of the Dhamma, this earth shakes, shudders, and trembles.
“Again, when the Tathāgata, mindful and clearly comprehending, lets go his vital force, this earth shakes, shudders, and trembles.
“Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain … a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna ….
“Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous passing away of joy and dejection, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna, neither painful nor pleasant, which has purification of mindfulness by equanimity.
“Again, with the breakup of the body, after death, a donor, a munificent giver, is reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
“Again, with the breakup of the body, after death, a virtuous person accomplished in virtuous behavior is reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
“Again, with the breakup of the body, after death, an immoral person deficient in virtuous behavior is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
“Again, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, ‘space is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space.
“Again, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, ‘space is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space.
“Again, with the destruction of the taints, a bhikkhu has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
“Again, with the destruction of the taints, the Tathāgata has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
“Again, with the destruction of the taints, the Tathāgata has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
“Again, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, a bhikkhu sees beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate … … and he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma.
“Again, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, the Tathāgata sees beings passing away and being reborn … … and he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma.
“Again, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, the Tathāgata sees beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma thus: ‘These beings who engaged in misconduct by body, speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong view, and undertook kamma based on wrong view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell; but these beings who engaged in good conduct by body, speech, and mind, who did not revile the noble ones, who held right view, and undertook kamma based on right view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.’
Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma.
“Again, with the fading away as well of rapture … he enters and dwells in the third jhāna ….
“Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu dwells equanimous and, mindful and clearly comprehending, he experiences pleasure with the body; he enters and dwells in the third jhāna of which the noble ones declare: ‘He is equanimous, mindful, one who dwells happily.’
He makes the happiness divested of rapture drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body that is not pervaded by the happiness divested of rapture.
“Again, with the subsiding of thought and examination, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the second jhāna ….
“Again, with the subsiding of thought and examination, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the second jhāna, which has internal placidity and unification of mind and consists of rapture and pleasure born of concentration, without thought and examination.
“Again, with wealth acquired by energetic striving … righteously gained, the noble disciple establishes an uplifting offering of alms—an offering that is heavenly, resulting in happiness, conducive to heaven—to those ascetics and brahmins who refrain from intoxication and heedlessness, who are settled in patience and mildness, who tame themselves, calm themselves, and train themselves for nibbāna.
“Again, with wealth acquired by energetic striving … righteously gained, the noble disciple makes his friends and companions happy and pleased and properly maintains them in happiness.
“Again, with wealth acquired by energetic striving … righteously gained, the noble disciple makes provisions against the losses that might arise from fire, floods, kings, thieves, or displeasing heirs; he makes himself secure against them.
“Again, with wealth acquired by energetic striving … righteously gained, the noble disciple makes provisions with his wealth against the losses that might arise because of fire or floods, kings or bandits or unloved heirs; he makes himself secure against them.
“Again, with wealth acquired by energetic striving … righteously gained, the noble disciple makes the five oblations: to relatives, guests, ancestors, the king, and the deities.
“Again, with wealth acquired by energetic striving … righteously gained, the noble disciple makes the five oblations: to relatives, guests, ancestors, the king, and the deities.
“Again, with wealth acquired by energetic striving … … righteously gained, the noble disciple establishes an uplifting offering of alms—an offering that is heavenly, resulting in happiness, conducive to heaven—to those ascetics and brahmins who refrain from intoxication and heedlessness, who are settled in patience and mildness, who tame themselves, calm themselves, and train themselves for nibbāna.
“Against these four things, bhikkhus, there can be no guarantor, neither an ascetic, a brahmin, a deva, Māra, Brahmā, nor anyone in the world.”
“All those, bhikkhus, who have reached certainty about me are accomplished in view.
“All those, bhikkhus, who have unwavering confidence in me are stream-enterers.
“Alms are given in my family, Bhante, but they consist of broken rice accompanied by rice gruel.”
“Although such a bhikkhu might not wish: ‘Oh, if only my fellow monks would honor, respect, esteem, and venerate me!’ yet his fellow monks honor, respect, esteem, and venerate him.
“Although such a bhikkhu might wish: ‘Oh, if only my fellow monks would honor, respect, esteem, and venerate me!’ yet his fellow monks do not honor, respect, esteem, and venerate him.
“Amid such splendor and a delicate life, it occurred to me: ‘An uninstructed worldling, though himself subject to old age, not exempt from old age, feels repelled, humiliated, and disgusted when he sees another who is old, overlooking his own situation.
“Among external factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great good as good friendship….”
“Among external factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great harm as bad friendship….”
“Among internal factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great good as heedfulness.
“Among internal factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great harm as heedlessness.
“Among internal factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great harm as laziness … … that leads to such great good as arousal of energy …”
“Among internal factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great harm as the pursuit of unwholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of wholesome qualities … … that leads to such great good as the pursuit of wholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of unwholesome qualities.
“Among these, Master Gotama, when someone performs this wonder by which he wields the various kinds of psychic potency … exercises mastery with the body as far as the brahmā world, only the one who performs this wonder experiences it and it occurs only to him.
“And for the sake of what benefit should a bhikkhu dwell equanimous, mindful and clearly comprehending, having turned away from both the repulsive and the unrepulsive?
“And for the sake of what benefit should a bhikkhu dwell perceiving the repulsive in both the unrepulsive and the repulsive?
“And for the sake of what benefit should a bhikkhu dwell perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive?
“And for the sake of what benefit should a bhikkhu dwell perceiving the unrepulsive in both the repulsive and the unrepulsive?
“And for the sake of what benefit should a bhikkhu dwell perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive?
“And for the sake of what benefit should a woman or a man, a householder or one gone forth, often reflect thus: ‘I am subject to death; I am not exempt from death’?
“And for the sake of what benefit should a woman or a man, a householder or one gone forth, often reflect thus: ‘I am subject to illness; I am not exempt from illness’?
“And for the sake of what benefit should a woman or a man, a householder or one gone forth, often reflect thus: ‘I am the owner of my kamma, the heir of my kamma; I have kamma as my origin, kamma as my relative, kamma as my resort; I will be the heir of whatever kamma, good or bad, that I do’?
“And for the sake of what benefit should a woman or a man, a householder or one gone forth, often reflect thus: ‘I must be parted and separated from everyone and everything dear and agreeable to me’?
“And for what reason should a bhikkhu overcome gain whenever it arises?
“And how does a bhikkhu blaze?
“And how does a bhikkhu dress wounds?
“And how does a bhikkhu fail to dress wounds?
“And how does a bhikkhu fail to pick out flies’ eggs?
“And how does a bhikkhu fail to smoke out the sheds?
“And how does a bhikkhu fume?
“And how does a bhikkhu guard the doors of the sense faculties?
“And how does a bhikkhu have a single guard?
“And how does a bhikkhu have benefactors?
“And how does a bhikkhu have four supports?
“And how does a bhikkhu have knowledge of form?
“And how does a bhikkhu know the road?
“And how does a bhikkhu know the watering place?
“And how does a bhikkhu know what it is to have drunk?
“And how does a bhikkhu milk dry?
“And how does a bhikkhu not blaze?
“And how does a bhikkhu not fume?
“And how does a bhikkhu not know the road?
“And how does a bhikkhu not know the watering place?
“And how does a bhikkhu not know what it is to have drunk?
“And how does a bhikkhu not milk dry?
“And how does a bhikkhu not pick up?
“And how does a bhikkhu not push away?
“And how does a bhikkhu not ruminate?
“And how does a bhikkhu observe moderation in eating?
“And how does a bhikkhu observe moderation in eating?
“And how does a bhikkhu pick out flies’ eggs?
“And how does a bhikkhu pick up?
“And how does a bhikkhu possess beauty?
“And how does a bhikkhu possess beauty?
“And how does a bhikkhu possess five factors?
“And how does a bhikkhu possess six factors?
“And how does a bhikkhu possess speed?
“And how does a bhikkhu possess speed?
“And how does a bhikkhu possess speed?
“And how does a bhikkhu possess speed?
“And how does a bhikkhu possess speed?
“And how does a bhikkhu possess strength?
“And how does a bhikkhu possess strength?
“And how does a bhikkhu possess the right proportions?
“And how does a bhikkhu push away?
“And how does a bhikkhu ruminate?
“And how does a bhikkhu show extra veneration to those elder bhikkhus of long-standing who have long gone forth, the fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha?
“And how does a bhikkhu show no extra veneration to those elder bhikkhus of long-standing who have long gone forth, the fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha?
“And how does a bhikkhu smoke out the sheds?
“And how does a deva live together with a female deva?
“And how does a deva live together with a wretch?
“And how does a lodging possess five factors?
“And how does a master thief depend on powerful people?
“And how does a master thief depend on powerful people?
“And how does a master thief depend on the uneven?
“And how does a master thief depend on the uneven?
“And how does a master thief depend on thickets?
“And how does a master thief depend on thickets?
“And how does a master thief move alone?
“And how does a master thief offer bribes?
“And how does a person attain nibbāna through exertion with the breakup of the body?
“And how does a person attain nibbāna without exertion in this very life?
“And how does a person attain nibbāna without exertion with the breakup of the body?
“And how does a person despise as a result of living together?
“And how does a person who is like a good horse possess speed and beauty but not the right proportions?
“And how does a person who is like a good horse possess speed but not beauty or the right proportions?
“And how does a person who is like a good horse possess speed, beauty, and the right proportions?
“And how does a person who is like a wild colt possess speed and beauty but not the right proportions?
“And how does a person who is like a wild colt possess speed and beauty but not the right proportions?
“And how does a person who is like a wild colt possess speed but not beauty or the right proportions?
“And how does a person who is like a wild colt possess speed, beauty, and the right proportions?
“And how does a person who is like a wild colt possess speed, beauty, and the right proportions?
“And how does a shopkeeper have benefactors?
“And how does a woman behave agreeably to her husband?
“And how does a woman manage the domestic help?
“And how does a woman safeguard his earnings?
“And how does a wretch live together with a female deva?
“And how does an evil bhikkhu depend on powerful people?
“And how does an evil bhikkhu depend on powerful people?
“And how does an evil bhikkhu depend on the uneven?
“And how does an evil bhikkhu depend on the uneven?
“And how does an evil bhikkhu depend on thickets?
“And how does an evil bhikkhu depend on thickets?
“And how does an evil bhikkhu move alone?
“And how does an evil bhikkhu offer bribes?
“And how does an excellent thoroughbred person … possess speed, beauty, and the right proportions?
“And how does desire arise with reference to things in the future that are the basis for desire and lust?
“And how does desire arise with reference to things presently existing that are the basis for desire and lust?
“And how does the bhikkhu who has committed an offense thoroughly reflect upon himself?
“And how does the reproving bhikkhu thoroughly reflect upon himself?
“And how has a bhikkhu abandoned five factors?
“And how has a bhikkhu abandoned five factors?
“And how has a bhikkhu attained the imperturbable?
“And how has a bhikkhu attained the state of a brahmā?
“And how has a bhikkhu attained the state of a deva?
“And how has a bhikkhu attained the state of a noble one?
“And how has a bhikkhu dispelled personal truths?
“And how has a bhikkhu drawn back?
“And how has a bhikkhu filled in the moat?
“And how has a bhikkhu no knowledge of form?
“And how has a bhikkhu pulled out the pillar?
“And how has a bhikkhu purified his intentions?
“And how has a bhikkhu removed the crossbar?
“And how has a bhikkhu totally renounced seeking?
“And how has a bhikkhu totally renounced seeking?
“And how has a bhikkhu tranquilized bodily activity?
“And how has a bhikkhu tranquilized bodily activity?
“And how has a person gone on retreat both by body and by mind?
“And how has a person gone on retreat neither by body nor by mind?
“And how has a person not gone on retreat by body but gone on retreat by mind?
“And how is a bhikkhu a boltless one?
“And how is a bhikkhu a long-distance shooter?
“And how is a bhikkhu a long-distance shooter?
“And how is a bhikkhu a noble one with banner lowered, with burden dropped, detached?
“And how is a bhikkhu a sharp-shooter?
“And how is a bhikkhu a sharp-shooter?
“And how is a bhikkhu accomplished in virtuous behavior?
“And how is a bhikkhu intent on wakefulness?
“And how is a bhikkhu intent on wakefulness?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who destroys?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who destroys?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who goes?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who goes?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who guards?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who has removed the crossbar?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who knows himself?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who knows moderation?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who knows the assembly?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who knows the Dhamma?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who knows the meaning?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who knows the proper time?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who knows the superior and inferior kinds of persons?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who listens?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who patiently endures?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who patiently endures?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who splits a great body?
“And how is a bhikkhu one who splits a great body?
“And how is a bhikkhu responsible?
“And how is a bhikkhu skilled in characteristics?
“And how is a bhikkhu skilled in pastures?
“And how is a bhikkhu skilled in the ways of his own mind?
“And how is a bhikkhu skilled in the ways of his own mind?
“And how is a bhikkhu unskilled in characteristics?
“And how is a bhikkhu unskilled in pastures?
“And how is a bhikkhu well liberated by wisdom?
“And how is a bhikkhu well liberated in mind?
“And how is a king’s bull elephant one who destroys?
“And how is a king’s bull elephant one who destroys?
“And how is a king’s bull elephant one who goes?
“And how is a king’s bull elephant one who goes?
“And how is a king’s bull elephant one who guards?
“And how is a king’s bull elephant one who listens?
“And how is a king’s bull elephant one who patiently endures?
“And how is a king’s bull elephant one who patiently endures?
“And how is a person a delicate ascetic among ascetics?
“And how is a person a delicate ascetic among ascetics?
“And how is a person a delicate ascetic among ascetics?
“And how is a person a delicate ascetic among ascetics?
“And how is a person a deva with a retinue of asuras?
“And how is a person a deva with a retinue of devas?
“And how is a person a red-lotus ascetic?
“And how is a person a red-lotus ascetic?
“And how is a person a red-lotus ascetic?
“And how is a person a red-lotus ascetic?
“And how is a person a white-lotus ascetic?
“And how is a person a white-lotus ascetic?
“And how is a person a white-lotus ascetic?
“And how is a person a white-lotus ascetic?
“And how is a person an asura with a retinue of devas?
“And how is a person blameless?
“And how is a person capricious?
“And how is a person dull and stupid?
“And how is a person empty and open?
“And how is a person full and covered?
“And how is a person full and open?
“And how is a person gullible for gossip?
“And how is a person heading from darkness to light?
“And how is a person heading from light to darkness?
“And how is a person heading from light to light?
“And how is a person made of hardwood and surrounded by hardwood?
“And how is a person made of hardwood but surrounded by softwood?
“And how is a person made of softwood but surrounded by hardwood?
“And how is a person mostly blameworthy?
“And how is a person one of little learning who is intent on what he has learned?
“And how is a person one of little learning who is not intent on what he has learned?
“And how is a person one of much learning who is intent on what he has learned?
“And how is a person one of much learning who is not intent on what he has learned?
“And how is a person one who both makes a hole and lives in it?
“And how is a person one who both thunders and rains?
“And how is a person one who both thunders and rains?
“And how is a person one who does not torment himself or pursue the practice of torturing himself and does not torment others or pursue the practice of torturing others—the one who, since he torments neither himself nor others, in this very life dwells hungerless, quenched and cooled, experiencing bliss, having himself become divine?
“And how is a person one who gives and then despises?
“And how is a person one who has risen up and attained a firm foothold?
“And how is a person one who has risen up and is crossing over?
“And how is a person one who has risen up and stays put?
“And how is a person one who has risen up and then goes under?
“And how is a person one who has risen up, crossed over, and gone beyond, a brahmin who stands on high ground?
“And how is a person one who has risen up, sees clearly, and looks around?
“And how is a person one who is deep and appears to be deep?
“And how is a person one who is deep but appears to be shallow?
“And how is a person one who is ripe and appears to be ripe?
“And how is a person one who is ripe but appears to be unripe?
“And how is a person one who is shallow and appears to be shallow?
“And how is a person one who is unripe and appears to be unripe?
“And how is a person one who lives in a hole but does not make one?
“And how is a person one who neither makes a hole nor lives in one?
“And how is a person one who neither thunders nor rains?
“And how is a person one who neither thunders nor rains?
“And how is a person one who rains but does not thunder?
“And how is a person one who rains but does not thunder?
“And how is a person one who torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself and also torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others?
“And how is a person one who torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others?
“And how is a person one whose venom is both quick to come up and virulent?
“And how is a person one whose venom is neither quick to come up nor virulent?
“And how is a person one whose venom is virulent but not quick to come up?
“And how is a person practicing both for his own welfare and for the welfare of others?
“And how is a person practicing both for his own welfare and for the welfare of others?
“And how is a person practicing both for his own welfare and for the welfare of others?
“And how is a person practicing for the welfare of others but not for his own welfare?
“And how is a person practicing for the welfare of others but not for his own welfare?
“And how is a person practicing for the welfare of others but not for his own welfare?
“And how is a person practicing neither for his own welfare nor for the welfare of others?
“And how is a person practicing neither for his own welfare nor for the welfare of others?
“And how is a person practicing neither for his own welfare nor for the welfare of others?
“And how is a person slightly blameworthy?
“And how is a person wrathful both toward his own cattle and toward the cattle of others?
“And how is a person wrathful neither toward his own cattle nor toward the cattle of others?
“And how is a person wrathful toward the cattle of others, not toward his own cattle?
“And how is a shopkeeper responsible?
“And how is a woman accomplished in generosity?
“And how is a woman accomplished in virtuous behavior?
“And how is a woman accomplished in wisdom?
“And how is affection born from hatred?
“And how is an offering not purified through either the donor or the recipients?
“And how is an offering purified through both the donor and the recipients?
“And how is an offering purified through the recipients but not through the donor?
“And how is hatred born from affection?
“And how is hatred born from hatred?
“And how is it that a bhikkhu cannot patiently endure forms?
“And how is it that a bhikkhu cannot patiently endure odors?
“And how is it that a bhikkhu cannot patiently endure sounds?
“And how is it that a bhikkhu cannot patiently endure tactile objects?
“And how is it that a bhikkhu cannot patiently endure tastes?
“And how is it that a bhikkhu patiently endures forms?
“And how is it that a bhikkhu patiently endures odors?
“And how is it that a bhikkhu patiently endures sounds?
“And how is it that a bhikkhu patiently endures tactile objects?
“And how is it that a bhikkhu patiently endures tastes?
“And how is it that a king’s bull elephant cannot patiently endure forms?
“And how is it that a king’s bull elephant cannot patiently endure odors?
“And how is it that a king’s bull elephant cannot patiently endure sounds?
“And how is it that a king’s bull elephant cannot patiently endure tactile objects?
“And how is it that a king’s bull elephant cannot patiently endure tastes?
“And how is it that a king’s bull elephant patiently endures forms?
“And how is it that a king’s bull elephant patiently endures odors?
“And how is it that a king’s bull elephant patiently endures sounds?
“And how is it that a king’s bull elephant patiently endures tactile objects?
“And how is it that a king’s bull elephant patiently endures tastes?
“And how is it, Ānanda, that someone of the black class produces a black state?
“And how is it, Ānanda, that someone of the black class produces a white state?
“And how is it, Ānanda, that someone of the black class produces nibbāna, which is neither black nor white?
“And how is it, Ānanda, that someone of the white class produces a black state?
“And how is it, Ānanda, that someone of the white class produces a white state?
“And how is it, Ānanda, that someone of the white class produces nibbāna, which is neither black nor white?
“And how is liberation its core?
“And how is mindfulness its authority?
“And how is the mind of a bhikkhu well consolidated by wisdom?
“And how is there a standstill—not deterioration or growth—in wholesome qualities?
“And how is there co-residency among the bad, and how do the bad live together?
“And how is there deterioration—not a standstill or growth—in wholesome qualities?
“And how is there growth—not a stand still or deterioration—in wholesome qualities?
“And how is there the unsurpassed gain?
“And how is there the unsurpassed hearing?
“And how is there the unsurpassed recollection?
“And how is there the unsurpassed service?
“And how is there the unsurpassed training?
“And how is wisdom its supervisor?
“And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu guard the doors of the sense faculties?
“And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu have keen eyes?
“And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu possess five factors?
“And how, bhikkhus, does a person attain nibbāna through exertion in this very life?
“And how, bhikkhus, does a person who is like a wild colt possess speed but not beauty or the right proportions?
“And how, bhikkhus, does a shopkeeper have keen eyes?
“And how, bhikkhus, does desire arise with reference to things in the past that are the basis for desire and lust?
“And how, bhikkhus, does desire not arise with reference to things in the future that are the basis for desire and lust?
“And how, bhikkhus, does desire not arise with reference to things in the past that are the basis for desire and lust?
“And how, bhikkhus, does desire not arise with reference to things presently existing that are the basis for desire and lust?
“And how, bhikkhus, has a bhikkhu dispelled personal truths?
“And how, bhikkhus, has a person gone on retreat by body but not gone on retreat by mind?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a bhikkhu one who listens?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a bhikkhu skilled in places?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a king’s bull elephant one who listens?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person an ascetic unshaken?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person an ascetic unshaken?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person an ascetic unshaken?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person an ascetic unshaken?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person an asura with a retinue of asuras?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person blameworthy?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person empty and covered?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person heading from darkness to darkness?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person made of softwood and surrounded by softwood?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person one who has gone under once and remains under?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person one who is shallow but appears to be deep?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person one who is unripe but appears to be ripe?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person one who makes a hole but does not live in it?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person one who thunders but does not rain?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person one who thunders but does not rain?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person one who torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person one whose venom is quick to come up but not virulent?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person practicing for his own welfare but not for the welfare of others?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person practicing for his own welfare but not for the welfare of others?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person practicing for his own welfare but not for the welfare of others?
“And how, bhikkhus, is a person wrathful toward his own cattle, not toward the cattle of others?
“And how, bhikkhus, is affection born from affection?
“And how, bhikkhus, is an offering purified through the donor but not through the recipients?
“And how, bhikkhus, is there a fourfold corruption and failure of verbal kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result?
“And how, bhikkhus, is there a fourfold success of verbal kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result?
“And how, bhikkhus, is there a threefold corruption and failure of bodily kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result?
“And how, bhikkhus, is there a threefold corruption and failure of mental kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result?
“And how, bhikkhus, is there a threefold success of bodily kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result?
“And how, bhikkhus, is there a threefold success of mental kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result?
“And how, bhikkhus, is there co-residency among the good, and how do the good live together?
“And how, bhikkhus, is training its benefit?
“And how, brahmin, is righteous conduct, conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, threefold by way of the body?
“And how, brahmin, is unrighteous conduct, conduct contrary to the Dhamma, threefold by way of the body?
“And how, Cunda, do the brahmins of the west prescribe their rites of purity?”
“And how, Cunda, is impurity by body threefold?
“And how, Cunda, is impurity by mind threefold?
“And how, Cunda, is impurity by speech fourfold?
“And how, Cunda, is purity by body threefold?
“And how, Cunda, is purity by mind threefold?
“And how, Cunda, is purity by speech fourfold?
“And how, Doṇa, is a brahmin a caṇḍāla of a brahmin?
“And how, Doṇa, is a brahmin one who has crossed the boundary?
“And how, Doṇa, is a brahmin one who remains within the boundary?
“And how, Doṇa, is a brahmin similar to a deva?
“And how, Doṇa, is a brahmin similar to Brahmā?
“And how, friend, is the mind of a bhikkhu well consolidated by mind?
“And how, friends, is a bhikkhu skilled in the ways of his own mind?
“And how, householders, does a wretch live together with a wretch?
“And how, Sandha, does a thoroughbred meditate?
“And how, Visākhā, does one cleanse a dirty body by exertion?
“And how, Visākhā, does one cleanse a dirty cloth by exertion?
“And how, Visākhā, does one cleanse a dirty head by exertion?
“And how, Visākhā, is a dirty mirror cleansed by exertion?
“And how, Visākhā, is a woman accomplished in faith?
“And how, Visākhā, is a woman capable at her work?
“And how, Visākhā, is impure gold cleansed by exertion?
“And how, Visākhā, is the cowherds’ uposatha observed?
“And how, Visākhā, is the Nigaṇṭhas’ uposatha observed?
“And how, Visākhā, is the noble ones’ uposatha observed?
“And in what way could one rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a consoler, one who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of consolation and thereby guides his disciples’?
“And in what way could one rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a proponent of deeds who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of deeds and thereby guides his disciples’?
“And in what way could one rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a repeller who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of repulsion and thereby guides his disciples’?
“And in what way could one rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a tormentor who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of tormenting and thereby guides his disciples’?
“And in what way could one rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is an abolitionist who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of abolition and thereby guides his disciples’?
“And in what way could one rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is an annihilationist who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of annihilation and thereby guides his disciples’?
“And in what way could one rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is retiring, one who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of retiring and thereby guides his disciples’?
“And in what way, friends, has the Blessed One said that a person is not subject to decline?
“And in what way, Sīha, could one rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a proponent of non-doing who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of non-doing and thereby guides his disciples’?
“And now, Bhante, we must be going.
“And still another Dhamma speaker speaks much and meaningful, and his assembly is skilled in distinguishing what is meaningful from what is pointless.
“And still another person values virtuous behavior and takes virtuous behavior as an authority, values concentration and takes concentration as an authority, and values wisdom and takes wisdom as an authority.
“And still another woman is not prone to anger or often exasperated….
“And still someone else who enjoys sensual pleasures seeks wealth both righteously and unrighteously, both by violence and without violence.
“And still someone else who enjoys sensual pleasures seeks wealth righteously, without violence.
“And still someone else who enjoys sensual pleasures seeks wealth righteously, without violence.
“And still someone else who enjoys sensual pleasures seeks wealth unrighteously, by violence.
“And these words were uttered, Bhante, by the Blessed One: ‘I will not attain final nibbāna, Evil One, until there are bhikkhunī disciples of mine who are competent … until there are male lay disciples of mine who are competent … until there are female lay disciples of mine who are competent … and teach the antidotal Dhamma.’
Now at present the Blessed One has bhikkhunī disciples … male lay disciples … female lay disciples who are competent, disciplined, self-confident, attained to security from bondage, learned, upholders of the Dhamma, practicing in accordance with the Dhamma, practicing in the proper way, conducting themselves accordingly; who have learned their own teacher’s doctrine and can explain it, teach it, proclaim it, establish it, disclose it, analyze it, and elucidate it; who can thoroughly refute in reasoned ways the current tenets of others and teach the antidotal Dhamma.
“And these words were uttered, Bhante, by the Blessed One: ‘I will not attain final nibbāna, Evil One, until this spiritual life of mine has become successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, well proclaimed among devas and humans.’
That spiritual life of the Blessed One has become successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, well proclaimed among devas and humans.
“And what are the eighteen currents of craving related to the external?
“And what are the eighteen currents of craving related to the internal?
“And what are the five kinds of mental barrenness that he has abandoned?
“And what are the five things that he should establish in himself?
“And what are the four factors of stream-entry that he possesses?
“And what are the four factors of stream-entry that he possesses?
“And what are the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life, which he gains at will, without trouble or difficulty?
“And what are the nine things rooted in craving?
“And what are the taints to be abandoned by avoiding that have been abandoned by avoiding?
“And what are the taints to be abandoned by developing that have been abandoned by developing?
“And what are the taints to be abandoned by dispelling that have been abandoned by dispelling?
“And what are the taints to be abandoned by patiently enduring that have been abandoned by patiently enduring?
“And what are the taints to be abandoned by using that have been abandoned by using?
“And what are the things to be abandoned by direct knowledge?
“And what are the things to be abandoned by speech, not by body?
“And what are the things to be abandoned neither by body nor by speech but by having repeatedly seen with wisdom?
“And what are the things to be developed by direct knowledge?
“And what are the things to be realized by direct knowledge?
“And what five factors does he possess?
“And what is accomplishment in activity?
“And what is accomplishment in faith?
“And what is accomplishment in faith?
“And what is accomplishment in generosity?
“And what is accomplishment in generosity?
“And what is accomplishment in generosity?
“And what is accomplishment in initiative?
“And what is accomplishment in initiative?
“And what is accomplishment in livelihood?
“And what is accomplishment in mind?
“And what is accomplishment in protection?
“And what is accomplishment in protection?
“And what is accomplishment in view?
“And what is accomplishment in view?
“And what is accomplishment in virtuous behavior?
“And what is accomplishment in virtuous behavior?
“And what is accomplishment in virtuous behavior?
“And what is accomplishment in virtuous behavior?
“And what is accomplishment in wisdom?
“And what is accomplishment in wisdom?
“And what is accomplishment in wisdom?
“And what is balanced living?
“And what is balanced living?
“And what is better than that good?
“And what is better than that good?
“And what is bodily purity?
“And what is bodily purity?
“And what is bodily sagacity?
“And what is bright kamma with bright result?
“And what is bright kamma with bright result?
“And what is bright kamma with bright result?
“And what is dark-and-bright kamma with dark-and-bright result?
“And what is dark-and-bright kamma with dark-andbright result?
“And what is dark-and-bright kamma with dark-andbright result?
“And what is failure in activity?
“And what is failure in livelihood?
“And what is failure in mind?
“And what is failure in view?
“And what is failure in view?
“And what is failure in virtuous behavior?
“And what is failure in virtuous behavior?
“And what is good friendship?
“And what is good friendship?
“And what is good?
“And what is good?
“And what is it?”
“And what is it?”
“And what is kamma that is neither dark nor bright with neither-dark-nor-bright result, kamma that leads to the destruction of kamma?
“And what is kamma that is neither dark nor bright with neither-dark-nor-bright result, kamma that leads to the destruction of kamma?
“And what is kamma that is neither dark nor bright with neither-dark-nor-bright result, kamma that leads to the destruction of kamma?
“And what is kamma that is neither dark nor bright with neither-dark-nor-bright result, kamma that leads to the destruction of kamma?
“And what is kamma that is neither dark nor bright with neither-dark-nor-bright result, kamma that leads to the destruction of kamma?
“And what is mental purity?
“And what is mental purity?
“And what is mental sagacity?
“And what is one of good character?
“And what is one of good character?
“And what is one of still better character?
“And what is one of still better character?
“And what is one of still worse character?
“And what is practice that is painful with quick direct knowledge?
“And what is practice that is painful with quick direct knowledge?
“And what is practice that is pleasant with quick direct knowledge?
“And what is practice that is pleasant with quick direct knowledge?
“And what is practice that is pleasant with sluggish direct knowledge?
“And what is practice that is pleasant with sluggish direct knowledge?
“And what is striving by abandonment?
“And what is striving by abandonment?
“And what is striving by development?
“And what is striving by development?
“And what is striving by protection?
“And what is striving by protection?
“And what is that Dhamma exposition on union and disengagement?
“And what is the assembly of the foremost?
“And what is the assembly of the ignoble?
“And what is the assembly of the inferior?
“And what is the assembly of the noble?
“And what is the assembly that speaks Dhamma?
“And what is the assembly that speaks non-Dhamma?
“And what is the assembly that values the good Dhamma, not worldly things?
“And what is the assembly that values worldly things, not the good Dhamma?
“And what is the assembly trained in interrogation, not in vain talk?
“And what is the assembly trained in vain talk, not in interrogation?
“And what is the blistering way of practice?
“And what is the blistering way of practice?
“And what is the calming practice?
“And what is the cessation of feelings?
“And what is the cessation of perceptions?
“And what is the cessation of sensual pleasures?
“And what is the cessation of suffering?
“And what is the cessation of the taints?
“And what is the concentration of a trainee?
“And what is the corpse’s posture?
“And what is the cream of an assembly?
“And what is the deep assembly?
“And what is the development of concentration that leads to mindfulness and clear comprehension?
“And what is the development of concentration that leads to obtaining knowledge and vision?
“And what is the development of concentration that leads to the destruction of the taints?
“And what is the diversity of feelings?
“And what is the diversity of kamma?
“And what is the diversity of perceptions?
“And what is the diversity of sensual pleasures?
“And what is the diversity of suffering?
“And what is the diversity of the taints?
“And what is the divided assembly?
“And what is the divided assembly?
“And what is the dregs of an assembly?
“And what is the fault pertaining to the future life?
“And what is the fault pertaining to the present life?
“And what is the fire of those worthy of gifts?
“And what is the fire of those worthy of offerings?
“And what is the Fortunate One’s discipline?
“And what is the fourth ascetic?
“And what is the happiness of blamelessness?
“And what is the happiness of enjoyment?
“And what is the happiness of freedom from debt?
“And what is the harmonious assembly?
“And what is the harmonious assembly?
“And what is the householder’s fire?
“And what is the lion’s posture?
“And what is the middle way of practice?
“And what is the middle way of practice?
“And what is the noble method that he has clearly seen and thoroughly penetrated with wisdom?
“And what is the one who has crossed over and gone beyond, the brahmin who stands on high ground?
“And what is the one-eyed person?
“And what is the patient practice?
“And what is the patient practice?
“And what is the peril of a bad destination?
“And what is the peril of crocodiles?
“And what is the peril of fierce fish?
“And what is the peril of punishment?
“And what is the peril of reproach by others?
“And what is the peril of whirlpools?
“And what is the person full of expectation?
“And what is the person full of expectation?
“And what is the person who goes against the stream?
“And what is the person who goes along with the stream?
“And what is the person who has overcome expectation?
“And what is the person who has overcome expectation?
“And what is the person who is hard to measure?
“And what is the person who is immeasurable?
“And what is the person who is inwardly firm?
“And what is the person whose mind is like a diamond?
“And what is the person whose mind is like lightning?
“And what is the person whose speech is like flowers?
“And what is the person whose speech is like honey?
“And what is the person with lap-like wisdom?
“And what is the person with wide wisdom?
“And what is the plane of the bad person?
“And what is the plane of the good person?
“And what is the power of blamelessness?
“And what is the power of concentration?
“And what is the power of concentration?
“And what is the power of development?
“And what is the power of development?
“And what is the power of development?
“And what is the power of energy?
“And what is the power of energy?
“And what is the power of energy?
“And what is the power of energy?
“And what is the power of mindfulness?
“And what is the power of mindfulness?
“And what is the power of moral dread?
“And what is the power of moral dread?
“And what is the power of moral shame?
“And what is the power of moral shame?
“And what is the power of reflection?
“And what is the power of reflection?
“And what is the power of reflection?
“And what is the power of sustaining a favorable relationship?
“And what is the power of wisdom?
“And what is the power of wisdom?
“And what is the power of wisdom?
“And what is the result of feelings?
“And what is the result of kamma?
“And what is the result of perceptions?
“And what is the result of sensual pleasures?
“And what is the result of suffering?
“And what is the result of the taints?
“And what is the righteous assembly?
“And what is the second ascetic?
“And what is the sensualist’s posture?
“And what is the shallow assembly?
“And what is the source and origin of feelings?
“And what is the source and origin of kamma?
“And what is the source and origin of perceptions?
“And what is the source and origin of suffering?
“And what is the source and origin of the taints?
“And what is the taming practice?
“And what is the Tathāgata’s posture?
“And what is the third ascetic?
“And what is the two-eyed person?
“And what is the unrighteous assembly?
“And what is the wealth of generosity?
“And what is the wealth of generosity?
“And what is the wealth of learning?
“And what is the wealth of learning?
“And what is the wealth of moral dread?
“And what is the wealth of moral shame?
“And what is the wealth of virtuous behavior?
“And what is the wealth of virtuous behavior?
“And what is the wealth of wisdom?
“And what is the wealth of wisdom?
“And what is the wisdom of a trainee?
“And what is verbal purity?
“And what is verbal purity?
“And what is verbal sagacity?
“And what is worse than that bad?
“And what is worse than that bad?
“And what kind of person is like a line etched in stone?
“And what kind of person is like a line etched in the ground?
“And what kind of person is like a line etched in water?
“And what kind of person is to be associated with, followed, and served with honor and respect?
“And what kind of person is to be associated with, followed, and served?
“And what kind of person is to be associated with, followed, and served?
“And what kind of person is to be looked upon with equanimity, not to be associated with, followed, and served?
“And what kind of person, bhikkhus, is not to be associated with, followed, and served?
“And what kind of person, bhikkhus, is to be looked upon with disgust, not to be associated with, followed, and served?
“And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of concentration?”
“And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of concentration?”
“And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of disenchantment and dispassion?”
“And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of dispassion?”
“And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of joy?”
“And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of joy?”
“And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of non-regret?”
“And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of non-regret?”
“And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of pleasure?”
“And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of pleasure?”
“And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of rapture?”
“And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of rapture?”
“And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of the knowledge and vision of things as they really are?”
“And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of the knowledge and vision of things as they really are?”
“And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of tranquility?”
“And what, Bhante, is the purpose and benefit of tranquility?”
“And what, bhikkhus, are the eight kinds of persons who are like wild colts and the eight faults of a person?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the eight kinds of wild colts and the eight faults of a horse?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the eight thoughts of a great person?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the seven destinations of persons?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the seven principles of non-decline?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the seven principles of non-decline?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the seven principles of non-decline?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the seven principles of non-decline?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the seven principles of non-decline?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the six qualities that lead to non-decline?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the taints to be abandoned by restraint that have been abandoned by restraint?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the things to be abandoned by body, not by speech?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the things to be fully understood by direct knowledge?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the things to be realized by the body?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of excellent thoroughbred horses?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of excellent thoroughbred horses?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of excellent thoroughbred persons?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of excellent thoroughbred persons?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of good horses?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of good horses?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of persons who are like good horses?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of persons who are like good horses?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of persons who are like wild colts?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of persons who are like wild colts?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of wild colts?
“And what, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of wild colts?
“And what, bhikkhus, is accomplishment in virtuous behavior?
“And what, bhikkhus, is attainment of nibbāna through non-clinging?
“And what, bhikkhus, is bad?
“And what, bhikkhus, is bad?
“And what, bhikkhus, is bad?
“And what, bhikkhus, is bad?
“And what, bhikkhus, is craving—the ensnarer, streaming, widespread, and sticky—by which this world has been smothered and enveloped, and by which it has become a tangled skein, a knotted ball of thread, a mass of reeds and rushes, so that it does not pass beyond the plane of misery, the bad destination, the lower world, saṃsāra?
“And what, bhikkhus, is dark kamma with dark result?
“And what, bhikkhus, is dark kamma with dark result?
“And what, bhikkhus, is dark kamma with dark result?
“And what, bhikkhus, is good?
“And what, bhikkhus, is good?
“And what, bhikkhus, is non-Dhamma and harmful?
“And what, bhikkhus, is non-Dhamma and harmful?
“And what, bhikkhus, is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma?
“And what, bhikkhus, is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma?
“And what, bhikkhus, is one of bad character?
“And what, bhikkhus, is oneself as one’s authority?
“And what, bhikkhus, is practice that is painful with sluggish direct knowledge?
“And what, bhikkhus, is striving by restraint?
“And what, bhikkhus, is striving by restraint?
“And what, bhikkhus, is that exposition of the Dhamma on creeping?
“And what, bhikkhus, is that noble emetic that always succeeds and never fails?
“And what, bhikkhus, is that noble purgative that always succeeds and never fails?
“And what, bhikkhus, is that noble washing?
“And what, bhikkhus, is that penetrative exposition of the Dhamma?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the assembly of the foremost?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the blind person?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the bond of sensuality?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the calming practice?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the cessation of kamma?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the coarse way of practice?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the coarse way of practice?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the development of concentration that leads to dwelling happily in this very life?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the development of noble five-factored right concentration?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma and beneficial?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma and beneficial?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma as one’s authority?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma not to be realized?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma not to be realized?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma that results in happiness?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma that results in happiness?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma that results in suffering?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma that results in suffering?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma to be realized?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma to be realized?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the first ascetic?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the impatient practice?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the impatient practice?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the noble paccorohaṇī festival?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the noble paccorohaṇī festival?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the noble path?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the noble path?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the noble truth of suffering?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the noble truth of the origin of suffering?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the peril of self-reproach?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the peril of waves?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the person who is easily measured?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the person whose mind is like an open sore?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the person whose speech is like dung?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the person with inverted wisdom?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the person without expectation?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the person without expectation?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the power of faith?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the power of faith?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the power of faith?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the power of wisdom?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the practice that is painful with sluggish direct knowledge?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the severance of the bond of sensuality?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the source and origin of sensual pleasures?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the taming practice?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the training in the higher mind?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the training in the higher mind?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the training in the higher virtuous behavior?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the training in the higher virtuous behavior?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the training in the higher wisdom?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the training in the higher wisdom?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the unsurpassed sight?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the wealth of faith?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the wealth of faith?
“And what, bhikkhus, is the world as one’s authority?
“And what, brahmin, is the wonder of instruction?
“And what, brahmin, is the wonder of mind-reading?
“And what, brahmin, is the wonder of psychic potency?
“And what, Byagghapajjas, is the factor of striving for purity of liberation?
“And what, Byagghapajjas, is the factor of striving for purity of mind?
“And what, Byagghapajjas, is the factor of striving for purity of view?
“And what, Byagghapajjas, is the factor of striving for purity of virtuous behavior?
“And what, householder, is accomplishment in faith?
“And what, householder, is the happiness of ownership?
“And what, Licchavis, are the seven principles of non-decline?
“And what, Mahānāma, is the virtuous behavior of a trainee?
“And what, Ānanda, are the six classes?
“And what, Ānanda, is mindfulness of breathing?
“And what, Ānanda, is the perception of abandoning?
“And what, Ānanda, is the perception of cessation?
“And what, Ānanda, is the perception of danger?
“And what, Ānanda, is the perception of dispassion?
“And what, Ānanda, is the perception of impermanence in all conditioned phenomena?
“And what, Ānanda, is the perception of impermanence?
“And what, Ānanda, is the perception of non-delight in the entire world?
“And what, Ānanda, is the perception of non-self?
“And what, Ānanda, is the perception of unattractiveness?
“And when living for twenty-four hundred fortnights, one lives just for, nights:, nights of winter,, nights of summer, and, nights of the rains.
“And when you think: ‘Energy is aroused in me without slackening; my mindfulness is established without confusion; my body is tranquil without disturbance; my mind is concentrated and one-pointed,’ this is your restlessness.
“And when you think: ‘Yet my mind is still not liberated from the taints through non-clinging,’ this is your remorse.
“And where, bhikkhus, is the power of faith to be seen?
“And who is one of still worse character?
“And who is that?”
“And who is the good person?
“And who is the good person?
“And who is the good person?
“And who is the good person?
“And who is the good person?
“And who is the good person?
“And who is the person inferior to the bad person?
“And who is the person inferior to the bad person?
“And who is the person inferior to the bad person?
“And who is the person inferior to the bad person?
“And who is the person inferior to the bad person?
“And who is the person inferior to the bad person?
“And who is the person superior to the good person?
“And who is the person superior to the good person?
“And who is the person superior to the good person?
“And who is the person superior to the good person?
“And who is the person superior to the good person?
“And who is the person superior to the good person?
“And who, bhikkhus, is of bad character?
“And who, bhikkhus, is the bad person?
“And who, bhikkhus, is the bad person?
“And who, bhikkhus, is the bad person?
“And who, bhikkhus, is the bad person?
“And who, bhikkhus, is the bad person?
“And who, bhikkhus, is the bad person?
“And who, bhikkhus, is the Fortunate One?
“And who, friends, is the person fettered externally?
“And who, friends, is the person fettered internally?
“And why is a talk on generosity properly addressed to a generous person?
“And why is a talk on generosity wrongly addressed to a miser?
“And why is a talk on learning properly addressed to a learned person?
“And why is a talk on learning wrongly addressed to a person of little learning?
“And why is a talk on virtuous behavior properly addressed to a virtuous person?
“And why is a talk on virtuous behavior wrongly addressed to an immoral person?
“And why is a talk on wisdom properly addressed to a wise person?
“And why is a talk on wisdom wrongly addressed to an unwise person?
“And why is ‘suffering’ … ‘disease’ … ‘a boil’ … ‘a dart’ … ‘a tie’ … ‘a swamp’ … ‘a womb’ a designation for sensual pleasures?
“And why is ‘suffering’ … ‘disease’ … ‘boil’ … ‘tie’ … ‘swamp’ a designation for sensual pleasures?
“And why should the fire of lust be abandoned and avoided and not be cultivated?
“And why, bhikkhus, is a talk on faith properly addressed to one endowed with faith?
“And why, bhikkhus, is a talk on faith wrongly addressed to one devoid of faith?
“And why, bhikkhus, is ‘peril’ a designation for sensual pleasures?
“And why, bhikkhus, is ‘peril’ a designation for sensual pleasures?
“And why, Doṇa, doesn’t the brahmin couple with a pregnant woman?
“And you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will be skillful and diligent in attending to our husband’s domestic chores, whether knitting or weaving; we will possess sound judgment about them in order to carry out and arrange them properly.’
Thus should you train yourselves.
“And you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will find out what our husband’s domestic helpers—whether slaves, messengers, or workers—have done and left undone; we will find out the condition of those who are ill; and we will distribute to each an appropriate portion of food.’
Thus should you train yourselves.
“And you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will guard and protect whatever income our husband brings home—whether money or grain, silver or gold—and we will not be spendthrifts, thieves, wastrels, or squanderers of his earnings.’
Thus should you train yourselves.
“And you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will honor, respect, esteem, and venerate those whom our husband respects—his mother and father, ascetics and brahmins—and when they arrive we will offer them a seat and water.’
Thus should you train yourselves.
“And, brahmin, who are those subject to death that are frightened and terrified of death?
“And, brahmin, who are those subject to death that are not frightened and terrified of death?
“Another bhikkhu fulfills virtuous behavior and concentration, but cultivates wisdom only to a moderate extent.
“Another bhikkhu fulfills virtuous behavior and concentration, but cultivates wisdom only to a moderate extent.
“Another bhikkhu fulfills virtuous behavior, but cultivates concentration and wisdom only to a moderate extent.
“Another bhikkhu fulfills virtuous behavior, concentration, and wisdom.
“Another bhikkhu fulfills virtuous behavior, concentration, and wisdom.
“Another Dhamma speaker speaks little but meaningful, and his assembly is skilled in distinguishing what is meaningful from what is pointless.
“Another person values virtuous behavior and takes virtuous behavior as an authority, but does not value concentration or take concentration as an authority, and does not value wisdom or take wisdom as an authority.
“Another woman is prone to anger and easily exasperated….
“Any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī who has abandoned crookedness, faults, and defects of the body, speech, and mind is established in this Dhamma and discipline, just as the wheel that was finished in six months less six days.
“Any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī who has not abandoned crookedness, faults, and defects of the body, speech, and mind has fallen down from this Dhamma and discipline, just as the wheel that was finished in six days.
“Any kamma fashioned by greed, born of greed, caused by greed, originating from greed, is unwholesome and blameworthy and results in suffering.
“Any kamma fashioned by hatred … Any kamma fashioned by delusion, born of delusion, caused by delusion, originating from delusion, is unwholesome and blameworthy and results in suffering.
“Any kamma fashioned by non-greed, born of non-greed, caused by non-greed, originating from non-greed, is wholesome and blameless and results in happiness.
“Any kamma fashioned by non-hatred … Any kamma fashioned by non-delusion, born of non-delusion, caused by non-delusion, originating from non-delusion, is wholesome and blameless and results in happiness.
“Any kamma fashioned through delusion, born of delusion, caused by delusion, originated by delusion, ripens wherever the individual is reborn.
“Any kamma fashioned through hatred, born of hatred, caused by hatred, originated by hatred, ripens wherever the individual is reborn.
“Any kamma fashioned through non-delusion, born of non-delusion, caused by non-delusion, originated by non-delusion, is abandoned when delusion has vanished; it is cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated so that it is no more subject to future arising.
“Any kamma fashioned through non-hatred, born of non-hatred, caused by non-hatred, originated by non-hatred, is abandoned when hatred has vanished; it is cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated so that it is no more subject to future arising.
“Any kamma, bhikkhus, fashioned through greed, born of greed, caused by greed, originated by greed, ripens wherever the individual is reborn.
“Any kamma, bhikkhus, fashioned through non-greed, born of non-greed, caused by non-greed, originated by non-greed, is abandoned when greed has vanished; it is cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated so that it is no more subject to future arising.
“Are alms given in your family, householder?”
“Are you dozing, Moggallāna?
“As a lovely white lotusis not soiled by the water,I am not soiled by the world:therefore, O brahmin, I am a Buddha.”
“As he is living in dependence on the Teacher or on a certain fellow monk in the position of a teacher, toward whom he has set up a keen sense of moral shame and moral dread, affection and reverence, he approaches them from time to time and inquires: ‘How is this, Bhante?
“As long as the bhikkhus are endowed with faith, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“As long as the bhikkhus are intent on forest lodgings, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“As long as the bhikkhus assemble in harmony, adjourn in harmony, and conduct the affairs of the Saṅgha in harmony, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“As long as the bhikkhus assemble often and hold frequent assemblies, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“As long as the bhikkhus do not come under the control of arisen craving that leads to renewed existence, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“As long as the bhikkhus do not decree anything that has not been decreed or abolish anything that has already been decreed, but undertake and follow the training rules as they have been decreed, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“As long as the bhikkhus do not delight in work, do not take delight in work, are not devoted to delight in work, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“As long as the bhikkhus each individually establish mindfulness: ‘How can well-behaved fellow monks who have not yet come here come, and how can well-behaved fellow monks who are already here dwell at ease?’ only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“As long as the bhikkhus honor, respect, esteem, and venerate those bhikkhus who are elders, of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and guides of the Saṅgha, and think they should be heeded, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“As long as the Vajjis assemble in harmony, adjourn in harmony, and conduct the affairs of the Vajjis in harmony, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“As long as the Vajjis do not abduct women and girls from their families and force them to live with them, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“As long as the Vajjis do not decree anything that has not been decreed or abolish anything that has already been decreed but undertake and follow the ancient Vajji principles as they have been decreed, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“As long as the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and venerate the Vajji elders and think they should be heeded, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“As long as the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and venerate their traditional shrines, both those within and those outside, and do not neglect the righteous oblations as given and done to them in the past, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“As long as the Vajjis provide righteous protection, shelter, and guard for arahants,: ‘How can those arahants who have not yet come here come to our realm, and how can those arahants who have already come dwell at ease here?’ only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“As the fragrant red kokanada lotusblooms in the morning, its fragrance unspent,behold Aṅgīrasa radiantlike the sun beaming in the sky.”
“As the hundred-peaked rain cloud,thundering, wreathed in lightning,pours down rain upon the earth,inundating the plains and lowlands,so the Perfectly Enlightened One’s disciple,the wise one accomplished in vision,surpasses the miserly personin five specific respects:life span and glory,beauty and happiness.Possessed of wealth, after deathhe rejoices in heaven.” 
“As the stainless moonmoving through the sphere of spaceoutshines with its radianceall the stars in the world,so one accomplished in virtuous behavior,a person endowed with faith,outshines by generosityall the misers in the world.
“As to this, bhikkhus, there is a threefold corruption and failure of bodily kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result; a fourfold corruption and failure of verbal kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result; and a threefold corruption and failure of mental kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result.
“As to this, bhikkhus, there is a threefold corruption and failure of bodily kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result; a fourfold corruption and failure of verbal kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result; and a threefold corruption and failure of mental kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result.
“As to this, bhikkhus, there is a threefold success of bodily kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result.
“As to this, bhikkhus, there is a threefold success of bodily kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result; a fourfold success of verbal kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result; and a threefold success of mental kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result.
“As we are alone, Meghiya, wait until another bhikkhu comes along.”
“As we are alone, Meghiya, wait until another bhikkhu comes along.” 
“At a still later time, as that boy continues to grow up and his faculties mature still more, he enjoys himself furnished and endowed with the five objects of sensual pleasure: with forms cognizable by the eye that are wished for, desired, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual pleasure, tantalizing; with sounds cognizable by the ear … with odors cognizable by the nose … with tastes cognizable by the tongue … with tactile objects cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual pleasure, tantalizing.
“At present I am the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One, and I teach a doctrine of kamma, a doctrine of deeds, a doctrine of energy.
“At present, brahmin, people are excited by illicit lust, overcome by unrighteous greed, afflicted by wrong Dhamma.
“Austerity and celibacyare the nāga’s other two feet.Faith is the great nāga’s trunk,and equanimity his ivory tusks.
“Basing himself on these five things, that bhikkhu should rely on four things.
“Be at ease, Evil One.
“Because I had developed and cultivated these things with enthusiasm as the fifth, there being a suitable basis, I was capable of realizing any state realizable by direct knowledge toward which I inclined my mind.
“Because of accomplishment in virtuous behavior, with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
“Because of accomplishment in virtuous behavior, with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
“Because of failure in virtuous behavior, with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
“Because of failure in virtuous behavior, with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
“Before his enlightenment, while he was just a bodhisatta, not fully enlightened, the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One that this mighty earth was his bedstead; the Himālaya, king of mountains, was his pillow; his left hand rested on the eastern sea, his right hand on the western sea, and his two feet on the southern sea.
“Before long, bhikkhus, Citta will think of renouncing.”
“Before my enlightenment, while I was just a bodhisatta, not yet fully enlightened, it occurred to me too: ‘Good is renunciation, good is solitude.’
Yet my mind did not launch out upon renunciation and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, though I saw it as peaceful.
“Beginning today, Bhante, let the Blessed One consider me a wife who is like a slave.”
“Between them, Ānanda, the person in whom anger and conceit are found, and who from time to time engages in exchanges of words, but who has listened, become learned, and penetrated by view, and who attains temporary liberation, surpasses and excels the other person.
“Between them, Ānanda, the person who is immoral, and who understands as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where that immorality of his ceases without remainder; who has listened, become learned, penetrated by view, and who attains temporary liberation, surpasses and excels the other person.
“Between them, Ānanda, the person who is mild, a pleasant companion, one with whom his fellow monks gladly dwell, who has listened, become learned, and penetrated by view, and who attains temporary liberation, surpasses and excels the other person.
“Between them, Ānanda, the person who is restless, and who understands as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where that restlessness of his ceases without remainder; who has listened, become learned, penetrated by view, and who attains temporary liberation, surpasses and excels the other person.
“Bhaddiya, a greedy person, overcome by greed, with mind obsessed by it, destroys life, takes what is not given, transgresses with another’s wife, and speaks falsehood; and he encourages others to do likewise.
“Bhaddiya, a non-vehement person, not overcome by vehemence, his mind not obsessed by it, does not destroy life … nor does he encourage others to do likewise.
“Bhaddiya, a person without greed, not overcome by greed, his mind not obsessed by it, does not destroy life, take what is not given, transgress with another’s wife, or speak falsehood; nor does he encourage others to do likewise.
“Bhaddiya, a vehement person, overcome and with mind obsessed by vehemence, destroys life … and he encourages others to do likewise.
“Bhaddiya, the good persons in the world encourage their disciples thus: ‘Come, good man, you should constantly remove greed.
“Bhante Anuruddha, we agreeable-bodied deities exert mastery and exercise control over three things.
“Bhante Sāriputta, it has been a long time since we heard a Dhamma talk from the Blessed One.
“Bhante Uttara, this exposition of the Dhamma has not been promulgated anywhere among the four human assemblies: that is, among bhikkhus, bhikkhunīs, male lay followers, and female lay followers.
“Bhante Ānanda, if a woman or a man—young, youthful, and fond of ornaments, with head bathed—obtains a garland of blue lotuses, jasmine flowers, or lilies, she or he would accept it with both hands and place it on top of her or his head.
“Bhante Ānanda, is there any one thing properly expounded by the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One who knows and sees, such that if a bhikkhu dwells diligent, ardent, and resolute in it, his unliberated mind is liberated, his undestroyed taints are destroyed, and he attains the as-yet-unattained unsurpassed security from bondage?”
“Bhante Ānanda, just how should this teaching of the Blessed One be understood, where one who is celibate and one who is not celibate both have exactly the same destination in their future life?
“Bhante Ānanda, just how should this teaching of the Blessed One be understood, where one who is celibate and one who is not celibate both have exactly the same destination in their future life?
“Bhante Ānanda, we laymen enjoy sensual pleasures, delight in sensual pleasures, take delight in sensual pleasures, and rejoice in sensual pleasures.
“Bhante Ānanda, whose Dhamma is well expounded?
“Bhante Ānanda, you teach the Dhamma for the abandoning of lust, hatred, and delusion, so your Dhamma is well expounded.
“Bhante, by what is the world led?
“Bhante, could a bhikkhu obtain such a state of concentration that he would have no I-making, mine-making, and underlying tendency to conceit in regard to this conscious body; he would have no I-making, mine-making, and underlying tendency to conceit in regard to all external objects; and he would enter and dwell in that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, through which there is no more I-making, mine-making, and underlying tendency to conceit for one who enters and dwells in it?”
“Bhante, could a bhikkhu obtain such a state of concentration that he would not attend to the eye and forms, the ear and sounds, the nose and odors, the tongue and tastes, the body and tactile objects; that he would not attend to earth, water, fire, or air; he would not attend to the base of the infinity of space, the base of the infinity of consciousness, the base of nothingness, or the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception; he would not attend to this world; he would not attend to the other world; he would not attend to anything seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, and examined by the mind, but he would still be attentive?”
“Bhante, could a bhikkhu obtain such a state of concentration that he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth; of water in relation to water; of fire in relation to fire; of air in relation to air; of the base of the infinity of space in relation to the base of the infinity of space; of the base of the infinity of consciousness in relation to the base of the infinity of consciousness; of the base of nothingness in relation to the base of nothingness; of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception in relation to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception; of this world in relation to this world; of the other world in relation to the other world, but he would still be percipient?”
“Bhante, could a bhikkhu obtain such a state of concentration that he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth; of water in relation to water; of fire in relation to fire; of air in relation to air; of the base of the infinity of space in relation to the base of the infinity of space; of the base of the infinity of consciousness in relation to the base of the infinity of consciousness; of the base of nothingness in relation to the base of nothingness; of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception in relation to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception; of this world in relation to this world; of the other world in relation to the other world; of anything seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, and examined by the mind, but he would still be percipient?”
“Bhante, could a bhikkhu obtain such a state of concentration that he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth; of water in relation to water; of fire in relation to fire; of air in relation to air; of the base of the infinity of space in relation to the base of the infinity of space; of the base of the infinity of consciousness in relation to the base of the infinity of consciousness; of the base of nothingness in relation to the base of nothingness; of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception in relation to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception; of this world in relation to this world; of the other world in relation to the other world; of anything seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, and examined by the mind, but he would still be percipient?”
“Bhante, did the Blessed One sleep well?”
“Bhante, every half-month more than a hundred and fifty training rules come up for recitation.
“Bhante, from how many things is the Tathāgata released, detached, and emancipated, that he dwells with a mind free from boundaries?” 
“Bhante, from today onward I will give gifts to the Saṅgha.”
“Bhante, how does a noble disciple who has arrived at the fruit and understood the teaching often dwell?”
“Bhante, how many qualities should a bhikkhu possess to be agreed upon as an exhorter of bhikkhunīs?”
“Bhante, how many qualities should a bhikkhu possess to be agreed upon to adjudicate?”
“Bhante, how many qualities should a bhikkhu possess to be attended upon by a novice?”
“Bhante, how many qualities should a bhikkhu possess to give dependence?”
“Bhante, how many qualities should a bhikkhu possess to give full ordination?”
“Bhante, how many qualities should a woman possess so that, with the breakup of the body, after death, she is reborn in companionship with the agreeable-bodied deities?”
“Bhante, how many reasons are there for suspending the Pātimokkha?”
“Bhante, how many roots of disputes are there?”
“Bhante, how many roots of disputes are there?”
“Bhante, I also don’t know the bhikkhus’ view in its entirety.”
“Bhante, I am even more satisfied and pleased with the Blessed One for telling me: ‘Make an investigation, Sīha!
“Bhante, I am even more satisfied and pleased with the Blessed One for telling me: ‘Sīha, your family has long been a fountain of support for the Nigaṇṭhas; hence you should consider continuing to give alms to them when they approach you.’
For I have heard: ‘The ascetic Gotama says thus: “Alms should be given only to me, not to others; alms should be given only to my disciples, not to the disciples of others.
“Bhante, I am not bearing up, I am not getting better.
“Bhante, I discipline one kind of horse gently, another kind sternly, and still another kind both gently and sternly.”
“Bhante, I do not go by faith in the Blessed One concerning those six directly visible fruits of giving declared by him.
“Bhante, I do not understand in detail the meaning of this statement that the Blessed One has spoken in brief.
“Bhante, I don’t know the Blessed One’s view in its entirety.”
“Bhante, I have committed a transgression in that, when the Blessed One was instructing, encouraging, inspiring, and gladdening the bhikkhus with a Dhamma talk connected with the training rules, I so foolishly, stupidly, and unskillfully became impatient and bitter, thinking: ‘This ascetic is too stringent.’
Bhante, may the Blessed One accept my transgression seen as a transgression for the sake of future restraint.”
“Bhante, I have completed the rains residence at Sāvatthī.
“Bhante, I have heard this: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a magician who knows a converting magic by which he converts the disciples of teachers of other sects.’
Do those who speak thus state what has been said by the Blessed One and not misrepresent him with what is contrary to fact?
“Bhante, I have heard: ‘A number of bhikkhus are making a robe for the Blessed One, thinking that with his robe completed, at the end of the three months, the Blessed One will set out wandering.’
Bhante, with all our various engagements, how should we dwell?”
“Bhante, I have heard: ‘A number of bhikkhus are making a robe for the Blessed One, thinking that with his robe completed, at the end of the three months, the Blessed One will set out wandering.’
Bhante, with all our various engagements, how should we dwell?” 
“Bhante, I hold such a thesis and view as this: If anyone carps against others and does not at all substantiate it, he is blameworthy and at fault.”
“Bhante, I prefer the rites of purity prescribed by the brahmins of the west who carry around waterpots, wear garlands of water plants, tend the sacred fire, and immerse themselves in water.”
“Bhante, I understand in detail the meaning of this statement that the Blessed One has spoken in brief to be as follows.
“Bhante, I understand in detail the meaning of this statement that the Blessed One has spoken in brief to be as follows.
“Bhante, I was carousing in the Nāga Grove when I first saw the Blessed One in the distance.
“Bhante, I wasn’t following the duty of an ascetic when the lay followers banished me from all seven monasteries.”
“Bhante, I will admit to the Blessed One what should be admitted and reject what should be rejected; and when I do not understand the meaning of his words, I will question him about them further, saying: ‘How is this, Bhante?
“Bhante, if a horse to be tamed by me won’t submit to discipline by any of these methods, then I kill him.
“Bhante, in the presence of the Blessed One I heard and learned this: ‘The giver of what is agreeable gains what is agreeable.’
Bhante, my boiled hill rice cleared of dark grains, accompanied by various sauces and condiments, is agreeable.
“Bhante, in the presence of the Blessed One I heard and learned this: ‘The giver of what is agreeable gains what is agreeable.’
Bhante, my cloths from Kāsi are agreeable.
“Bhante, in the presence of the Blessed One I heard and learned this: ‘The giver of what is agreeable gains what is agreeable.’
Bhante, my couch spread with rugs, blankets, and covers, with an excellent covering of antelope hide, with a canopy above and red bolsters at both ends, is agreeable.
“Bhante, in the presence of the Blessed One I heard and learned this: ‘The giver of what is agreeable gains what is agreeable.’
Bhante, my fried vegetable stalks are agreeable.
“Bhante, in the presence of the Blessed One I heard and learned this: ‘The giver of what is agreeable gains what is agreeable.’
Bhante, my pork embellished with jujubes is agreeable.
“Bhante, in the presence of the Blessed One I heard and learned this: ‘The giver of what is agreeable gains what is agreeable.’
Bhante, my sal flower porridge is agreeable.
“Bhante, in the presence of the Blessed One I heard this; in his presence I learned this: ‘Abhibhū, a disciple of the Blessed One Sikhī, while staying in the brahmā world, conveyed his voice throughout a thousandfold world system.’
How far, Bhante, can the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One convey his voice?”
“Bhante, it is out of my gratitude and thankfulness that I show such supreme honor toward the Blessed One and display such an offering of loving-kindness to him.
“Bhante, it is said: ‘Concord in the Saṅgha, concord in the Saṅgha.’
How is there concord in the Saṅgha?”
“Bhante, it is said: ‘Concord in the Saṅgha, concord in the Saṅgha.’
How is there concord in the Saṅgha?”
“Bhante, it is said: ‘existence, existence.’
In what way, Bhante, is there existence?”
“Bhante, it is said: ‘existence, existence.’
In what way, Bhante, is there existence?”
“Bhante, it is said: ‘Schism in the Saṅgha, schism in the Saṅgha.’
How is there schism in the Saṅgha?”
“Bhante, it is said: ‘Schism in the Saṅgha, schism in the Saṅgha.’
How, Bhante, is there schism in the Saṅgha?”
“Bhante, it is said: ‘The directly visible Dhamma, the directly visible Dhamma.’
In what way, Bhante, is the Dhamma directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise’?” 
“Bhante, it is those devas that are formless, perceptionmade.”
“Bhante, it occurred to those venerable ones: ‘A number of very well-known Licchavis … are making an uproar and a racket….
“Bhante, it would be good if the Blessed One would teach me the Dhamma in brief, so that, having heard the Dhamma from the Blessed One, I might dwell alone, withdrawn, heedful, ardent, and resolute.”
“Bhante, it would be good if the Blessed One would teach me the Dhamma in brief, so that, having heard the Dhamma from the Blessed One, I might dwell alone, withdrawn, heedful, ardent, and resolute.”
“Bhante, it would be good if women could obtain the going forth from the household life into homelessness in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata.”
“Bhante, just as one might catch emerging with a large snare, just so, when I emerged, the Blessed One caught me with a large snare in debate.”
“Bhante, let the Blessed One teach me the Dhamma in brief!
“Bhante, let the Blessed One teach me the Dhamma in brief.
“Bhante, let the Blessed One together with three other monks consent to accept tomorrow’s meal from me.”
“Bhante, my brother is Prince Cunda.
“Bhante, not long after the Blessed One left, those venerable ones, too, got up from their seats and went to their own dwellings.”
“Bhante, on how many grounds has the Tathāgata prescribed the training rules for his disciples and recited the Pātimokkha?”
“Bhante, on one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at the Kosalan town of Paṅkadhā.
“Bhante, on one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling right here in Rājagaha, the Mountain Fort.
“Bhante, on one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling right here in Rājagaha….
“Bhante, one who has not established mindfulness directed to the body in regard to his own body might strike a fellow monk and then set out on tour without apologizing.
“Bhante, one who has not established mindfulness directed to the body in regard to his own body might strike a fellow monk and then set out on tour without apologizing.
“Bhante, one who has not established mindfulness directed to the body in regard to his own body might strike a fellow monk and then set out on tour without apologizing.
“Bhante, one who has not established mindfulness directed to the body in regard to his own body might strike a fellow monk and then set out on tour without apologizing.
“Bhante, one who has not established mindfulness directed to the body in regard to his own body might strike a fellow monk and then set out on tour without apologizing.
“Bhante, one who has not established mindfulness directed to the body in regard to his own body might strike a fellow monk and then set out on tour without apologizing.
“Bhante, one who has not established mindfulness directed to the body in regard to his own body might strike a fellow monk and then set out on tour without apologizing.
“Bhante, one who has not established mindfulness directed to the body in regard to his own body might strike a fellow monk and then set out on tour without apologizing.
“Bhante, one who has not established mindfulness directed to the body in regard to his own body might strike a fellow monk and then set out on tour without apologizing.
“Bhante, one who has not established mindfulness directed to the body in regard to his own body might strike a fellow monk here and then set out on tour without apologizing.”
“Bhante, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One, guided by the Blessed One, take recourse in the Blessed One.
“Bhante, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One, guided by the Blessed One, take recourse in the Blessed One.
“Bhante, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One, guided by the Blessed One, take recourse in the Blessed One.
“Bhante, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One, guided by the Blessed One, take recourse in the Blessed One.
“Bhante, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One, guided by the Blessed One, take recourse in the Blessed One.
“Bhante, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One, guided by the Blessed One, take recourse in the Blessed One.
“Bhante, please let the Blessed One together with the Saṅgha of bhikkhus accept tomorrow’s meal from me.”
“Bhante, Pūraṇa Kassapa has described six classes: a black class, a blue class, a red class, a yellow class, a white class, and a supreme white class.
“Bhante, since I was young, when the young girl Nakulamātā was given to me in marriage, I do not recall ever transgressing against her even in thought, much less by deed.
“Bhante, suppose one cultivates behavior and observances, an lifestyle, and a spiritual life, setting them up as if they were the essence.
“Bhante, that is not the only astounding and amazing quality of mine.
“Bhante, that is not the only astounding and amazing quality of mine.
“Bhante, that is not the only astounding and amazing quality of mine.
“Bhante, that is not the only astounding and amazing quality of mine.
“Bhante, that is not the only astounding and amazing quality of mine.
“Bhante, that is not the only astounding and amazing quality of mine.
“Bhante, the asuras do take delight in the great ocean.”
“Bhante, the lay followers of my native district have banished me from all seven monasteries there.”
“Bhante, the Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta claims to be all-knowing and all-seeing and to have all-embracing knowledge and vision,: ‘When I am walking, standing, sleeping, and awake, knowledge and vision are constantly and continuously present to me.’
He prescribes the termination of old kammas by means of austerity and the demolition of the bridge by not creating any new kamma.
“Bhante, the Venerable Girimānanda is sick, afflicted, and gravely ill.
“Bhante, the wanderer Sarabha, who recently left this Dhamma and discipline, has been telling an assembly in Rājagaha: ‘I have learned the Dhamma of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan son.
“Bhante, there are some ascetics and brahmins who come to Kesaputta.
“Bhante, there are some ascetics and brahmins who proclaim the crossing of the flood through two things: by means of purification of virtuous behavior and by means of austerity and disgust.
“Bhante, there are these seven qualities that lead to the non-decline of a bhikkhu.
“Bhante, there are these six qualities that lead to the non-decline of a bhikkhu.
“Bhante, there are these three fragrances that spread with the wind but not against the wind.
“Bhante, there are these three qualities that lead to the decline of a bhikkhu.
“Bhante, these are the brahmin householders of Icchānaṅgala who have brought abundant food of various kinds.
“Bhante, these are the brahmin householders of Icchānaṅgala who have brought abundant food of various kinds.
“Bhante, these are the brahmin householders of Icchānaṅgala who have brought abundant food of various kinds.
“Bhante, these manifestations of faith in one endowed with faith that the Blessed One has spoken of are seen in this bhikkhu, and he does exhibit them.”
“Bhante, these six qualities lead to the non-decline of a bhikkhu.
“Bhante, this venerable one said thus: ‘“The world is finite” … “The world is infinite” … “The soul and the body are the same” … “The soul is one thing, the body another” … “The Tathāgata exists after death” … “The Tathāgata does not exist after death” … “The Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death” … “The Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death”; this alone is true, anything else is wrong: such is my view, householder.’
This view of his has also arisen because of his own careless attention or conditioned by someone else’s utterance.
“Bhante, this venerable one said thus: ‘“The world is non-eternal; this alone is true, anything else is wrong”: such is my view, householder.’
This view of his has also arisen because of his own careless attention or conditioned by someone else’s utterance.
“Bhante, this was said by the Blessed One in ‘The Maidens’ Questions’:
“Bhante, those people should say: ‘We got it from that great heap of grain.’”
“Bhante, those teachings that I could recall in the past, when I was a human being, come back to me now; and those teachings that I could not recall in the past, when I was a human being, come back to me now.
“Bhante, we are laymen enjoying sensual pleasures, living at home in a house full of children.
“Bhante, what is the cause and condition for the doing of bad kamma, for the occurrence of bad kamma?”
“Bhante, what is the cause and condition for the doing of good kamma, for the occurrence of good kamma?”
“Bhante, what is the purpose and benefit of wholesome virtuous behavior?”
“Bhante, what is the purpose and benefit of wholesome virtuous behavior?”
“Bhante, whatever has come into being and is conditioned, a product of volition, dependently originated, is impermanent.
“Bhante, whatever has come into being and is conditioned, a product of volition, dependently originated, is impermanent.
“Bhante, when a bhikkhu is an arahant, one whose taints are destroyed, who has lived the spiritual life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached his own goal, utterly destroyed the fetters of existence, and become completely liberated through final knowledge, he is intent upon six things: on renunciation, on solitude, on non-affliction, on the destruction of craving, on the destruction of clinging, and on nonconfusion.
“Bhante, when a bhikkhu is an arahant, one whose taints are destroyed, who has lived the spiritual life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached his own goal, utterly destroyed the fetters of existence, one completely liberated through final knowledge, it does not occur to him: ‘There is someone better than me,’ or ‘There is someone equal to me,’ or ‘There is someone inferior to me.’”
“Bhante, when a bhikkhu is thus perfectly liberated in mind, even if powerful forms cognizable by the eye come into range of the eye, they do not obsess his mind; his mind is not at all affected.
“Bhante, when a bhikkhu’s taints have been destroyed, he possesses eight powers by reason of which he can claim: ‘My taints have been destroyed.’
What eight?
“Bhante, when a bhikkhu’s taints have been destroyed, he possesses ten powers by reason of which he can claim the destruction of the taints: ‘My taints have been destroyed.’
What ten?
“Bhante, when a bhikkhu’s taints have been destroyed, he possesses these eight powers on the basis of which he can claim: ‘My taints have been destroyed.’”
“Bhante, when a bhikkhu’s taints have been destroyed, he possesses these ten powers by reason of which he can claim the destruction of the taints: ‘My taints have been destroyed.’”
“Bhante, where is the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One now dwelling?
“Bhante, why is it that arguments, quarrels, contention, and disputes arise in the Saṅgha and bhikkhus do not dwell at ease?”
“Bhante, why is it that at times the Tathāgata is disposed to teach the Dhamma and at times is not disposed to teach?”
“Bhante, why is it that at times the Tathāgata is disposed to teach the Dhamma and at times is not disposed?”
“Bhante, why is it that one gift is not of great fruit and benefit while the other is?”
“Bhante, why is it that some women here are ugly, ill formed, and unsightly; poor, destitute, and indigent; and lacking in influence?
“Bhante, why is it that women do not sit in council, or engage in business, or go to Kamboja?”
“Bhikkhu, bhikkhu!
“Bhikkhu, the uninstructed worldling does not understand remorse, its origin, its cessation, and the way leading to its cessation.
“Bhikkhu, the uninstructed worldling does not understand views, their origin, their cessation, and the way leading to their cessation.
“Bhikkhu, this is why doubt does not arise in the instructed noble disciple about the undeclared points.”
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu charged with aggravated misconduct should behave rightly with respect to eight principles.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu could obtain such a state of concentration that he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth … he would not be percipient of anything seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, and examined by the mind, but he would still be percipient.”
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu endowed with faith, rightly aspiring, should aspire thus: ‘May I become like Sāriputta and Moggallāna!’ This is the standard and criterion for my bhikkhu disciples, that is, Sāriputta and Moggallāna.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu endowed with faith, rightly aspiring, should aspire thus: ‘May I become like Sāriputta and Moggallāna!’ This is the standard and criterion for my bhikkhu disciples, that is, Sāriputta and Moggallāna.”
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu may be endowed with faith but he is not virtuous … … endowed with faith and virtuous, but he is not learned … … learned, but not a speaker on the Dhamma … … a speaker on the Dhamma, but not one who frequents assemblies … … one who frequents assemblies, but not one who confidently teaches the Dhamma to an assembly … … one who confidently teaches the Dhamma to an assembly, but not an expert on the discipline … … an expert on the discipline, but not a forest-dweller who resorts to remote lodgings … … a forest-dweller who resorts to remote lodgings, but not one who contacts with the body and dwells in those peaceful emancipations, transcending forms, that are formless … … one who contacts with the body and dwells in those peaceful emancipations, transcending forms, that are formless, but not one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu may be endowed with faith but he is not virtuous … … … endowed with faith and virtuous, but he is not learned … … learned, but not a speaker on the Dhamma … … a speaker on the Dhamma, but not one who frequents assemblies … … one who frequents assemblies, but not one who confidently teaches the Dhamma to an assembly … … one who confidently teaches the Dhamma to an assembly, but not an expert on the discipline … … an expert on the discipline, but not one who recollects his manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births … … thus he does not recollect his manifold past abodes with their aspects and details … … one who recollects his manifold past abodes … but not one who, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human … … understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma … … one who, with the divine eye … understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma, but not one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu may be endowed with faith but he is not virtuous; thus he is incomplete with respect to that factor.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu may be endowed with faith but he is not virtuous; thus he is incomplete with respect to that factor.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu may be endowed with faith but he is not virtuous; thus he is incomplete with respect to that factor.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who has abandoned five factors and possesses five factors is called, in this Dhamma and discipline, a supreme person who is consummate and has completely lived the spiritual life.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who has dispelled personal truths, totally renounced seeking, and tranquilized bodily activity is said to have drawn back.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who has dispelled personal truths, totally renounced seeking, and tranquilized bodily activity is said to have drawn back.” 
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is not skilled in the ways of others’ minds: ‘I will be skilled in the ways of my own mind.’
It is in this way that you should train yourselves.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is not skilled in the ways of others’ minds: ‘I will be skilled in the ways of my own mind.’
It is in this way that you should train yourselves.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is not skilled in the ways of others’ minds: ‘I will be skilled in the ways of my own mind.’ … … … But if, by such self-examination, a bhikkhu knows: ‘I am often without longing … and concentrated,’ then he should base himself on those same wholesome qualities and make a further effort to reach the destruction of the taints.”
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who possesses four qualities is incapable of decline and is in the vicinity of nibbāna.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who possesses four qualities is practicing the unmistakable way and has laid the groundwork for the destruction of the taints.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who possesses four qualities is practicing the unmistakable way and has laid the groundwork for the destruction of the taints.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who wishes to reprove another person should examine himself with respect to five things and establish five things in himself before he reproves the other person.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who wishes to reprove another person should examine himself with respect to these five things and establish these five things in himself before he reproves the other person.”
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who wishes to reprove another should examine himself thus: ‘Is my bodily behavior pure?
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhunī endowed with faith, rightly aspiring, should aspire thus: ‘May I become like the bhikkhunīs Khemā and Uppalavaṇṇā!’ This is the standard and criterion for my bhikkhunī disciples, that is, the bhikkhunīs Khemā and Uppalavaṇṇā.
“Bhikkhus, a bhikkhunī endowed with faith, rightly aspiring, should aspire thus: ‘May I become like the bhikkhunīs Khemā and Uppalavaṇṇā!’ This is the standard and criterion for my bhikkhunī disciples, that is, the bhikkhunīs Khemā and Uppalavaṇṇā.”
“Bhikkhus, a crow has ten bad qualities.
“Bhikkhus, a donor who gives food gives the recipients five things.
“Bhikkhus, a female lay follower endowed with faith, rightly aspiring, should aspire thus: ‘May I become like the female lay follower Khujjuttarā and Veḷukaṇṭakī Nandamātā!’ This is the standard and criterion for my female lay disciples, that is, the female lay follower Khujjuttarā and Veḷukaṇṭakī Nandamātā.”
“Bhikkhus, a female lay follower endowed with faith, rightly aspiring, should aspire thus: ‘May I become like the female lay followers Khujjuttarā and Veḷukaṇṭakī Nandamātā!’ This is the standard and criterion for my female lay disciples, that is, the female lay followers Khujjuttarā and Veḷukaṇṭakī Nandamātā.”
“Bhikkhus, a hair blanket is declared to be the worst kind of woven garment.
“Bhikkhus, a lay follower should not engage in these five trades.
“Bhikkhus, a male lay follower endowed with faith, rightly aspiring, should aspire thus: ‘May I become like Citta the householder and Hatthaka of Āḷavī!’ This is the standard and criterion for my male lay disciples, that is, Citta the householder and Hatthaka of Āḷavī.
“Bhikkhus, a male lay follower endowed with faith, rightly aspiring, should aspire thus: ‘May I become like Citta the householder and Hatthaka of Āḷavī!’ This is the standard and criterion for my male lay disciples, that is, Citta the householder and Hatthaka of Āḷavī.”
“Bhikkhus, a man binds a woman in eight ways.
“Bhikkhus, a seed sown in a field that possesses eight factors brings forth abundant fruits, its are delectable, and it yields a profit.
“Bhikkhus, a seed sown in a field that possesses eight factors does not bring forth abundant fruits, its are not delectable, and it does not yield a profit.
“Bhikkhus, a supervisor of novices who possesses five qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, a supervisor of novices who possesses five qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, a supervisor of novices who possesses five qualities maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition.
“Bhikkhus, a supervisor of novices who possesses five qualities preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured.
“Bhikkhus, a supervisor of novices who possesses five qualities should be understood as foolish.
“Bhikkhus, a supervisor of novices who possesses five qualities should be understood as wise.
“Bhikkhus, a talk is properly addressed when, having weighed one type of person against another, it is addressed to these five types of persons.
“Bhikkhus, a talk is properly addressed when, having weighed one type of person against another, it is addressed to these five types of persons.”
“Bhikkhus, a talk is wrongly addressed when, having weighed one type of person against another, it is addressed to these five types of persons.
“Bhikkhus, a woman binds a man in eight ways.
“Bhikkhus, abandon the unwholesome!
“Bhikkhus, against four things there can be no guarantor, neither an ascetic, a brahmin, a deva, Māra, Brahmā, nor anyone in the world.
“Bhikkhus, all those in the past who declined in wholesome qualities declined because of these six qualities.
“Bhikkhus, all those in the past who did not decline in wholesome qualities did not decline because of these six qualities.
“Bhikkhus, all those who have reached certainty about me are accomplished in view.
“Bhikkhus, all those who have unwavering confidence in me are stream-enterers.
“Bhikkhus, an assigner of meals who possesses five qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, an assigner of meals who possesses five qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, an assigner of meals who possesses five qualities maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition.
“Bhikkhus, an assigner of meals who possesses five qualities preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured.
“Bhikkhus, an assigner of meals who possesses five qualities should be understood as foolish.
“Bhikkhus, an assigner of meals who possesses five qualities should be understood as wise.
“Bhikkhus, an uninstructed worldling meets gain and loss, disrepute and fame, blame and praise, and pleasure and pain.
“Bhikkhus, any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī who gives up the training and reverts to the lower life incurs five reasonable criticisms and grounds for censure in this very life.
“Bhikkhus, any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī who lives the complete and pure spiritual life, even with pain and dejection, weeping with a tearful face, gains five reasonable grounds for praise in this very life.
“Bhikkhus, as far as Kāsi and Kosala extend, as far as the realm of King Pasenadi of Kosala extends, there King Pasenadi of Kosala ranks as the foremost.
“Bhikkhus, as far as sun and moon revolve and light up the quarters with their brightness, so far the thousandfold world system extends.
“Bhikkhus, as long as these seven principles of non-decline continue among the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus are seen in them, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.”
“Bhikkhus, as long as these seven principles of non-decline continue among the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus are seen in them, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.”
“Bhikkhus, as long as these seven principles of non-decline continue among the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus are seen in them, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.”
“Bhikkhus, as long as these seven principles of non-decline continue among the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus are seen in them, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.”
“Bhikkhus, as long as these seven principles of non-decline continue among the bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus are seen in them, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.” 
“Bhikkhus, as the Tathāgata speaks, so he does; as he does, so he speaks.
“Bhikkhus, bad unwholesome qualities arise along with consciousness, not without consciousness.
“Bhikkhus, bad unwholesome qualities arise along with feeling, not without feeling.
“Bhikkhus, bad unwholesome qualities arise along with form, not without form.
“Bhikkhus, bad unwholesome qualities arise along with perception, not without perception.
“Bhikkhus, bad unwholesome qualities arise based on the conditioned, not without a basis in the conditioned.
“Bhikkhus, bad unwholesome qualities arise through a cause, not without a cause.
“Bhikkhus, bad unwholesome qualities arise through a source, not without a source.
“Bhikkhus, bad unwholesome qualities arise through causal activities, not without causal activities.
“Bhikkhus, bad unwholesome qualities arise with a basis, not without a basis.
“Bhikkhus, bad unwholesome qualities arise with a condition, not without a condition.
“Bhikkhus, based on the Himalayas, the king of mountains, great sal trees grow in five ways.
“Bhikkhus, based on the Himalayas, the king of mountains, great sal trees grow in three ways.
“Bhikkhus, be observant of virtuous behavior and observant of the Pātimokkha.
“Bhikkhus, before his enlightenment, while he was just a bodhisatta, not fully enlightened, five great dreams appeared to the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
“Bhikkhus, before my enlightenment, while I was just a bodhisatta, not yet fully enlightened, I developed and cultivated five things.
“Bhikkhus, before my enlightenment, while I was just a bodhisatta, not yet fully enlightened, it occurred to me: ‘What is the gratification in the world?
“Bhikkhus, before my enlightenment, while I was still a bodhisatta, not yet fully enlightened, I perceived only a light, but I did not see forms.
“Bhikkhus, behaving rightly toward four persons, the wise, competent, good person preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured; he is blameless and beyond reproach by the wise; and he generates much merit.
“Bhikkhus, behaving rightly toward two persons, the wise, competent, good person preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured; he is blameless and beyond reproach among the wise; and he generates much merit.
“Bhikkhus, behaving rightly toward two persons, the wise, competent, good person preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured; he is blameless and beyond reproach among the wise; and he generates much merit.
“Bhikkhus, behaving wrongly toward four persons, the foolish, incompetent, bad person maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition; he is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise; and he generates much demerit.
“Bhikkhus, behaving wrongly toward two persons, the foolish, incompetent, bad person maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition; he is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise; and he generates much demerit.
“Bhikkhus, behaving wrongly toward two persons, the foolish, incompetent, bad person maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition; he is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise; and he generates much demerit.
“Bhikkhus, being alert and mindful, develop concentration that is measureless.
“Bhikkhus, beings are the owners of their kamma, the heirs of their kamma; they have kamma as their origin, kamma as their relative, kamma as their resort; whatever kamma they do, good or bad, they are its heirs.
“Bhikkhus, beings are the owners of their kamma, the heirs of their kamma; they have kamma as their origin, kamma as their relative, kamma as their resort; whatever kamma they do, good or bad, they are its heirs.
“Bhikkhus, beings for the most part are captivated by sensual pleasures.
“Bhikkhus, by having abandoned six things, one is capable of contemplating phenomena in phenomena both internally and externally.
“Bhikkhus, by relying on a good person, four benefits are to be expected.
“Bhikkhus, conditioned phenomena are impermanent; conditioned phenomena are unstable; conditioned phenomena are unreliable.
“Bhikkhus, considering five prospects, mother and father wish for a son to be born in their family.
“Bhikkhus, could a bhikkhu obtain such a state of concentration that he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth … of anything seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, and examined by the mind, but he would still be percipient?”
“Bhikkhus, develop the wholesome!
“Bhikkhus, did that foolish man think: ‘A mother does not fall in love with her son, or a son with his mother’?
“Bhikkhus, do not be afraid of merit.
“Bhikkhus, dwell observant of virtuous behavior, observant of the Pātimokkha.
“Bhikkhus, even a wheel-turning monarch, a righteous king who rules by the Dhamma, does not turn the wheel without a king above him.”
“Bhikkhus, even a wheel-turning monarch, a righteous king who rules by the Dhamma, does not turn the wheel without a king above him.”
“Bhikkhus, even as one who encompasses with his mind the great ocean includes thereby all the streams that run into the ocean, just so, whoever develops and cultivates mindfulness directed to the body includes all wholesome qualities that pertain to true knowledge.”
“Bhikkhus, every half-month more than a hundred and fifty training rules come up for recitation; clansmen who desire their own good train in these.
“Bhikkhus, every half-month more than a hundred and fifty training rules come up for recitation; clansmen who desire their own good train in these.
“Bhikkhus, every half-month more than a hundred and fifty training rules come up for recitation; clansmen who desire their own good train in these.
“Bhikkhus, for a person of right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration, right knowledge, and right liberation, whatever bodily kamma, verbal kamma, and mental kamma he instigates and undertakes in accordance with that view, and whatever his volition, yearning, inclination, and volitional activities, all lead to what is wished for, desired, and agreeable, to well-being and happiness.
“Bhikkhus, for a person of right view, whatever bodily kamma, verbal kamma, and mental kamma he instigates and undertakes in accordance with that view, and whatever his volition, yearning, inclination, and volitional activities, all lead to what is wished for, desired, and agreeable, to well-being and happiness.
“Bhikkhus, for a person of wrong view, whatever bodily kamma, verbal kamma, and mental kamma he instigates and undertakes in accordance with that view, and whatever his volition, yearning, inclination, and volitional activities, all lead to what is unwished for, undesired, and disagreeable, to harm and suffering.
“Bhikkhus, for a person of wrong view, wrong intention, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong concentration, wrong knowledge, and wrong liberation, whatever bodily kamma, verbal kamma, and mental kamma he instigates and undertakes in accordance with that view, and whatever his volition, yearning, inclination, and volitional activities, all lead to what is unwished for, undesired, and disagreeable, to harm and suffering.
“Bhikkhus, for a virtuous person, for one whose behavior is virtuous, non-regret possesses its proximate cause.
“Bhikkhus, for a virtuous person, for one whose behavior is virtuous, non-regret possesses its proximate cause.
“Bhikkhus, for a virtuous person, for one whose behavior is virtuous, right concentration possesses its proximate cause.
“Bhikkhus, for an immoral person there are two receptacles: hell or the animal realm.
“Bhikkhus, for an immoral person, for one deficient in virtuous behavior, non-regret lacks its proximate cause.
“Bhikkhus, for an immoral person, for one deficient in virtuous behavior, non-regret lacks its proximate cause.
“Bhikkhus, for an immoral person, for one deficient in virtuous behavior, right concentration lacks its proximate cause.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, eight things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, eight things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, eight things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, eleven things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, five things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, five things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, five things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, five things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, five things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, four things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, four things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, four things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, nine things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, nine things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, seven things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, seven things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, seven things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, six things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, six things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, six things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, ten things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, ten things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, ten things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, three things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge of lust, two things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge … for full understanding … for the utter destruction … for the abandoning … for the destruction … for the vanishing … for the fading away … for the cessation … for the giving up … for the relinquishment of hatred … delusion … anger … hostility … denigration … insolence … envy … miserliness … deceitfulness … craftiness … obstinacy … vehemence … conceit … arrogance … intoxication … heedlessness, three things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge … for full understanding … for the utter destruction … for the abandoning … for the destruction … for the vanishing … for the fading away … for the cessation … for the giving up … for the relinquishment of hatred … of delusion … of anger … of hostility … of denigration … of insolence … of envy … of miserliness … of deceitfulness … of craftiness … of obstinacy … of vehemence … of conceit … of arrogance … of intoxication … of heedlessness … these eight things are to be developed.”
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge … for full understanding … for the utter destruction … for the abandoning … for the destruction … for the vanishing … for the fading away … for the cessation … for the giving up … for the relinquishment of hatred … of delusion … of anger … of hostility … of denigration … of insolence … of envy … of miserliness … of deceitfulness … of craftiness … of obstinacy … of vehemence … of conceit … of arrogance … of intoxication … of heedlessness … these eleven things are to be developed.”
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge … for full understanding … for the utter destruction … for the abandoning … for the destruction … for the vanishing … for the fading away … for the cessation … for the giving up … for the relinquishment of hatred … of delusion … of anger … of hostility … of denigration … of insolence … of envy … of miserliness … of deceitfulness … of craftiness … of obstinacy … of vehemence … of conceit … of arrogance … of intoxication … of heedlessness … these nine things are to be developed.”
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge … for full understanding … for the utter destruction … for the abandoning … for the destruction … for the vanishing … for the fading away … for the cessation … for the giving up … for the relinquishment of hatred … of delusion … of anger … of hostility … of denigration … of insolence … of envy … of miserliness … of deceitfulness … of craftiness … of obstinacy … of vehemence … of conceit … of arrogance … of intoxication … of heedlessness … these seven things are to be developed.” 
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge … for full understanding … for the utter destruction … for the abandoning … for the destruction … for the vanishing … for the fading away … for the cessation … for the giving up … for the relinquishment of hatred … of delusion … of anger … of hostility … of denigration … of insolence … of envy … of miserliness … of deceitfulness … of craftiness … of obstinacy … of vehemence … of conceit … of arrogance … of intoxication … of heedlessness … these six things are to be developed.”
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge … for full understanding … for the utter destruction … for the abandoning … for the destruction … for the vanishing … for the fading away … for the cessation … for the giving up … for the relinquishment of hatred … of delusion … of anger … of hostility … of denigration … of insolence … of envy … of miserliness … of deceitfulness … of craftiness … of obstinacy … of vehemence … of conceit … of arrogance … of intoxication … of heedlessness … these ten things are to be developed.”
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge … for full understanding … for the utter destruction … for the abandoning … for the destruction … for the vanishing … for the fading away … for the cessation … for the giving up … for the relinquishment of hatred … of delusion … of anger … of hostility … of denigration … of insolence … of envy … of miserliness … of deceitfulness … of craftiness … of obstinacy … of vehemence … of conceit … of arrogance … of intoxication … of heedlessness, five things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge … for full understanding … for the utter destruction … for the abandoning … for the destruction … for the vanishing … for the fading away … for the cessation … for the giving up … for the relinquishment of hatred … of delusion … of anger … of hostility … of denigration … of insolence … of envy … of miserliness … of deceitfulness … of craftiness … of obstinacy … of vehemence … of conceit … of arrogance … of intoxication … of heedlessness, these four things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for direct knowledge … for full understanding … for the utter destruction … for the abandoning … for the destruction … for the vanishing … for the fading away … for the cessation … for the giving up … for the relinquishment of hatred … of delusion … of anger … of hostility … of denigration … of insolence … of envy … of miserliness … of deceitfulness … of craftiness … of obstinacy … of vehemence … of conceit … of arrogance … of intoxication … of heedlessness, these two things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for full understanding of lust … for the utter destruction of lust … for the abandoning of lust … for the destruction of lust … for the vanishing of lust … for the fading away of lust … for the cessation of lust … for the giving up of lust … for the relinquishment of lust, these two things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for full understanding of lust … for the utter destruction … for the abandoning … for the destruction … for the vanishing … for the fading away … for the cessation … for the giving up … for the relinquishment of lust … these eight things are to be developed.”
“Bhikkhus, for full understanding of lust … for the utter destruction … for the abandoning … for the destruction … for the vanishing … for the fading away … for the cessation … for the giving up … for the relinquishment of lust … these eleven things are to be developed.” 
“Bhikkhus, for full understanding of lust … for the utter destruction … for the abandoning … for the destruction … for the vanishing … for the fading away … for the cessation … for the giving up … for the relinquishment of lust … these nine things are to be developed.”
“Bhikkhus, for full understanding of lust … for the utter destruction … for the abandoning … for the destruction … for the vanishing … for the fading away … for the cessation … for the giving up … for the relinquishment of lust … these seven things are to be developed.”
“Bhikkhus, for full understanding of lust … for the utter destruction … for the abandoning … for the destruction … for the vanishing … for the fading away … for the cessation … for the giving up … for the relinquishment of lust … these six things are to be developed.”
“Bhikkhus, for full understanding of lust … for the utter destruction … for the abandoning … for the destruction … for the vanishing … for the fading away … for the cessation … for the giving up … for the relinquishment of lust … these ten things are to be developed.”
“Bhikkhus, for full understanding of lust … for the utter destruction … for the abandoning … for the destruction … for the vanishing … for the fading away … for the cessation … for the giving up … for the relinquishment of lust, five things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for full understanding of lust … for the utter destruction … for the abandoning … for the destruction … for the vanishing … for the fading away … for the cessation … for the giving up … For the relinquishment of lust, these three things are to be developed.
“Bhikkhus, for full understanding of lust … for the utter destruction … for the abandoning … … for the destruction … for the vanishing … for the fading away … for the cessation … for the giving up … For the relinquishment of lust, these four things are to be developed.”
“Bhikkhus, for one who holds right view one of two destinations is to be expected: the deva realm or the human realm.”
“Bhikkhus, for one who holds wrong view one of two destinations is to be expected: hell or the animal realm.”
“Bhikkhus, for one with concealed actions one of two destinations is to be expected: hell or the animal realm.
“Bhikkhus, for the instructed noble disciple, what is subject to old age grows old.
“Bhikkhus, for the uninstructed worldling, what is subject to old age grows old.
“Bhikkhus, for two reasons fauns do not utter human speech.
“Bhikkhus, four facts can be known from four facts.
“Bhikkhus, growing in five ways, a female noble disciple grows by a noble growth, and she absorbs the essence and the best of this life.
“Bhikkhus, growing in five ways, a male noble disciple grows by a noble growth, and he absorbs the essence and the best of this life.
“Bhikkhus, growing in ten ways, a noble disciple grows by a noble growth, and he absorbs the essence and the best of this life.
“Bhikkhus, having abandoned nine things, one is capable of realizing arahantship.
“Bhikkhus, having abandoned six things, one is capable of contemplating the body in the body.
“Bhikkhus, having abandoned six things, one is capable of entering and dwelling in the first jhāna.
“Bhikkhus, having abandoned six things, one is capable of entering and dwelling in the first jhāna.
“Bhikkhus, having abandoned six things, one is capable of realizing a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
“Bhikkhus, having abandoned six things, one is capable of realizing accomplishment in view.
“Bhikkhus, having abandoned six things, one is capable of realizing arahantship.
“Bhikkhus, having abandoned six things, one is capable of realizing arahantship.
“Bhikkhus, having abandoned six things, one is capable of realizing the fruit of non-returning.
“Bhikkhus, having abandoned these five things, one is capable of entering and dwelling in the first jhāna.
“Bhikkhus, having abandoned these five things, one is capable of entering and dwelling in the first jhāna.
“Bhikkhus, having abandoned these five things, one is capable of entering and dwelling in the second jhāna … the third jhāna … the fourth jhāna … one is capable of realizing the fruit of stream-entry … the fruit of once-returning … the fruit of non-returning … the fruit of arahantship.
“Bhikkhus, having abandoned these five things, one is capable of entering and dwelling in the second jhāna … the third jhāna … the fourth jhāna … one is capable of realizing the fruit of stream-entry … the fruit of once-returning … the fruit of non-returning … the fruit of arahantship.
“Bhikkhus, having abandoned these ten things, one is capable of realizing arahantship.
“Bhikkhus, having abandoned these three things, one is capable of abandoning birth, old age, and death.
“Bhikkhus, I am not repeating something that I heard from another ascetic or brahmin, but rather I am speaking about a matter that I have actually known, seen, and understood myself.”
“Bhikkhus, I approached those ascetics and brahmins who hold such a doctrine and view as this: ‘Whatever this person experiences—whether pleasure, pain, or neither-pain-nor-pleasure—all that is caused by past deeds,’ and I said to them: ‘Is it true that you venerable ones hold such a doctrine and view?’
When I ask them this, they affirm it.
“Bhikkhus, I claim to have attained the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge regarding things not heard before.
“Bhikkhus, I do not praise even a standstill in wholesome qualities, much less decline.
“Bhikkhus, I do not praise the wrong practice of two: a layperson and one gone forth.
“Bhikkhus, I do not say that there is a termination of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated so long as one has not experienced, and that may be in this very life, or in the rebirth, or on some subsequent occasion.
“Bhikkhus, I do not say that there is a termination of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated so long as one has not experienced, and that may be in this very life, or in the rebirth, or on some subsequent occasion.
“Bhikkhus, I do not say that there is a termination of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated so long as one has not experienced, and that may be in this very life, or in the rebirth, or on some subsequent occasion.
“Bhikkhus, I do not say that there is a termination of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated so long as one has not experienced, and that may be in this very life, or in the rebirth, or on some subsequent occasion.
“Bhikkhus, I do not say that there is a termination of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated so long as one has not experienced, and that may be in this very life, or in the rebirth, or on some subsequent occasion.
“Bhikkhus, I do not say that there is a termination of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated so long as one has not experienced, and that may be in this very life, or in the rebirth, or on some subsequent occasion.
“Bhikkhus, I do not say that there is a termination of volitional kamma that has been done and accumulated so long as one has not experienced, and that may be in this very life, or in the rebirth, or on some subsequent occasion.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see a single thing that so causes unarisen unwholesome qualities to arise and arisen wholesome qualities to decline as heedlessness.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see a single thing that so causes unarisen unwholesome qualities to arise and arisen wholesome qualities to decline as laziness.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see a single thing that so causes unarisen wholesome qualities to arise and arisen unwholesome qualities to decline as heedfulness.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single person who is acting so much for the harm of many people, the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings, as the hollow man Makkhali.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single person who properly continues to keep in motion the unsurpassed wheel of the Dhamma set in motion by the Tathāgata as does Sāriputta.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing on account of which unarisen right view arises and arisen right view increases so much as careful attention.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing on account of which unarisen unwholesome qualities arise and arisen unwholesome qualities increase and expand so much as wrong view.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing on account of which unarisen unwholesome qualities do not arise and arisen unwholesome qualities decline so much as right view.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing on account of which unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities increase and expand so much as right view.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing on account of which unarisen wholesome qualities do not arise and arisen wholesome qualities decline so much as wrong view.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing on account of which unarisen wrong view arises and arisen wrong view increases so much as careless attention.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing on account of which, with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world, so much as right view.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing on account of which, with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell, so much as wrong view.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing so blameworthy as wrong view.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that leads to such great good as heedfulness.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that leads to such great harm as heedlessness.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that leads to such great harm as laziness … … that leads to such great good as arousal of energy …”
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen factors of enlightenment not to arise and arisen factors of enlightenment not to reach fulfillment by development as careless attention.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen factors of enlightenment to arise and arisen factors of enlightenment to reach fulfillment by development as careful attention.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen unwholesome qualities to arise and arisen wholesome qualities to decline as bad friendship.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen unwholesome qualities to arise and arisen wholesome qualities to decline as careless attention.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen unwholesome qualities to arise and arisen wholesome qualities to decline as lack of clear comprehension.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen unwholesome qualities to arise and arisen wholesome qualities to decline as non-contentment.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen unwholesome qualities to arise and arisen wholesome qualities to decline as strong desire.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen unwholesome qualities to arise and arisen wholesome qualities to decline as the pursuit of unwholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of wholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen wholesome qualities to arise and arisen unwholesome qualities to decline as arousal of energy.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen wholesome qualities to arise and arisen unwholesome qualities to decline as careful attention.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen wholesome qualities to arise and arisen unwholesome qualities to decline as clear comprehension.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen wholesome qualities to arise and arisen unwholesome qualities to decline as contentment.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen wholesome qualities to arise and arisen unwholesome qualities to decline as fewness of desires.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen wholesome qualities to arise and arisen unwholesome qualities to decline as good friendship.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen wholesome qualities to arise and arisen unwholesome qualities to decline as the pursuit of wholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of unwholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so leads to the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma as heedfulness.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so leads to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma as heedlessness.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so leads to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma as laziness … … that so leads to the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma as arousal of energy …”
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other form that so obsesses the mind of a man as the form of a woman.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other form that so obsesses the mind of a woman as the form of a man.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other odor that so obsesses the mind of a man as the odor of a woman.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other odor that so obsesses the mind of a woman as the odor of a man.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other sound that so obsesses the mind of a man as the sound of a woman.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other sound that so obsesses the mind of a woman as the sound of a man.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other taste that so obsesses the mind of a man as the taste of a woman.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other taste that so obsesses the mind of a woman as the taste of a man.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen doubt arises and arisen doubt increases and expands so much as careless attention.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen doubt does not arise and arisen doubt is abandoned so much as careful attention.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen dullness and drowsiness arise and arisen dullness and drowsiness increase and expand so much as discontent, lethargy, lazy stretching, drowsiness after meals, and sluggishness of mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen dullness and drowsiness do not arise and arisen dullness and drowsiness are abandoned so much as the element of instigation, the element of persistence, the element of exertion.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen ill will arises and arisen ill will increases and expands so much as the mark of the repulsive.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen ill will does not arise and arisen ill will is abandoned so much as the liberation of the mind by loving-kindness.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen restlessness and remorse arise and arisen restlessness and remorse increase and expand so much as an unsettled mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen restlessness and remorse do not arise and arisen restlessness and remorse are abandoned so much as pacification of the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen sensual desire arises and arisen sensual desire increases and expands so much as the mark of the attractive.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen sensual desire does not arise and arisen sensual desire is abandoned so much as the mark of the unattractive.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that changes so quickly as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when developed is so wieldy as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when developed leads to such great good as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when guarded leads to such great good as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when protected leads to such great good as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when restrained leads to such great good as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when tamed leads to such great good as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when undeveloped is so unwieldy as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when undeveloped leads to such great harm as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when unguarded leads to such great harm as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when unprotected leads to such great harm as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when unrestrained leads to such great harm as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when untamed leads to such great harm as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that, when developed and cultivated, brings such happiness as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads to such great good as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that, when developed and manifested, leads to such great good as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that, when tamed, guarded, protected, and restrained, leads to such great good as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that, when undeveloped and uncultivated, brings such suffering as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that, when undeveloped and uncultivated, leads to such great harm as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that, when undeveloped and unmanifested, leads to such great harm as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that, when untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained, leads to such great harm as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other touch that so obsesses the mind of a man as the touch of a woman.
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other touch that so obsesses the mind of a woman as the touch of a man.
“Bhikkhus, I have personally known two things: non-contentment in regard to wholesome qualities and indefatigability in striving.
“Bhikkhus, I praise the right practice of two: a layperson and one gone forth.
“Bhikkhus, I say that the destruction of the taints occurs in dependence on the first jhāna.
“Bhikkhus, I say that this person is like the warrior who can endure the cloud of dust, the crests of the standards, the uproar, and the blow, and who, having triumphed in that battle, emerges victorious and settles at the head of the battlefield.
“Bhikkhus, I set out seeking the gratification in the world.
“Bhikkhus, I teach the Dhamma through direct knowledge, not without direct knowledge.
“Bhikkhus, I was delicately nurtured, most delicately nurtured, extremely delicately nurtured.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach the attainment of these nine progressive dwellings.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you a Dhamma exposition on union and disengagement.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you a penetrative exposition of the Dhamma.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you about co-residency among the bad and about co-residency among the good.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you about craving—the ensnarer, streaming, widespread, and sticky—by which this world has been smothered and enveloped, and by which it has become a tangled skein, a knotted ball of thread, a mass of reeds and rushes, so that it does not pass beyond the plane of misery, the bad destination, the lower world, saṃsāra.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you about one of bad character and about one of still worse character.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you about the bad person and the person inferior to the bad person; about the good person and the person superior to the good person.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you an exposition of the Dhamma on creeping.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you seven destinations of persons and attainment of nibbāna through non-clinging.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you seven principles of non-decline.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you seven principles of non-decline.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you seven principles of non-decline.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you seven principles of non-decline.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you seven principles of non-decline.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you the dark path and the bright path … … the good Dhamma and the bad Dhamma …  … the Dhamma of a good person and that of a bad person … … the Dhamma to be aroused and that not to be aroused … … the Dhamma to be pursued and that not to be pursued …  … the Dhamma to be developed and that not to be developed … … the Dhamma to be cultivated and that not to be cultivated … … the Dhamma to be recollected and that not to be recollected …  … the Dhamma to be realized and that not to be realized….
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you the dark path and the bright path … … … the good Dhamma and the bad Dhamma … … the Dhamma of a good person and that of a bad person … … the Dhamma to be aroused and the one not to be aroused … … … the Dhamma to be pursued and the one not to be pursued … … the Dhamma to be developed and the one not to be developed … … the Dhamma to be cultivated and the one not to be cultivated …  … the Dhamma to be recollected and the one not to be recollected … … the Dhamma to be realized and the one not to be realized….
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you the development of noble five-factored right concentration.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you the eight kinds of wild colts and the eight faults of a horse, and I will teach you the eight kinds of persons who are like wild colts and the eight faults of a person.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you the near shore and the far shore.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you the near shore and the far shore.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you the noble Dhamma and the ignoble Dhamma … … the wholesome and the unwholesome … … what is beneficial and what is harmful … … … the Dhamma and what is non-Dhamma … … the tainted Dhamma and the taintless one … … the blameworthy Dhamma and the blameless one …  … the tormenting Dhamma and the untormenting one … … the Dhamma that leads to building up and the one that leads to dismantling … … the Dhamma with suffering as its outcome and the one with happiness as its outcome …  … the Dhamma that results in suffering and the one that results in happiness….
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you the noble Dhamma and the ignoble Dhamma … … the wholesome and the unwholesome … … … what is beneficial and what is harmful … … the Dhamma and what is non-Dhamma … … the tainted Dhamma and the taintless one … … … the blameworthy Dhamma and the blameless one … … the tormenting Dhamma and the untormenting one … … the Dhamma that leads to building up and the one that leads to dismantling … … … the Dhamma with suffering as its outcome and the one with happiness as its outcome … … the Dhamma that results in suffering and the one that results in happiness….
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you the noble paccorohaṇī festival.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you the noble paccorohaṇī festival.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you the noble path and the ignoble path.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you the noble path and the ignoble path.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you the plane of the bad person and the plane of the good person.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you the three kinds of excellent thoroughbred horses and the three kinds of excellent thoroughbred persons.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you the three kinds of good horses and the three kinds of persons who are like good horses.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you the three kinds of wild colts and the three kinds of persons who are like wild colts.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you the three kinds of wild colts and the three kinds of persons who are like wild colts; the three kinds of good horses and the three kinds of persons who are like good horses; the three kinds of excellent thoroughbred horses and the three kinds of excellent thoroughbred persons.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you these four great references.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you these six qualities that lead to non-decline.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you what is bad and what is worse than that bad.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you what is good and what is bad.
“Bhikkhus, I will teach you what is good and what is bad.
“Bhikkhus, if a bhikkhu has gotten rid of longing and ill will while walking; if he has abandoned dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt; if his energy is aroused without slackening; if his mindfulness is established and unmuddled; if his body is tranquil and undisturbed; if his mind is concentrated and one-pointed, then that bhikkhu is said to be ardent and to dread wrongdoing; he is constantly and continuously energetic and resolute while walking.
“Bhikkhus, if a sensual thought, a thought of ill will, or a thought of harming arises in a bhikkhu while walking, and he tolerates it, does not abandon it, dispel it, terminate it, and obliterate it, then that bhikkhu is said to be devoid of ardor and moral dread; he is constantly and continuously lazy and lacking in energy while walking.
“Bhikkhus, if an assigner of meals possesses four qualities, he is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, if an assigner of meals possesses four qualities, he is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, if any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī develops and cultivates five things, one of two fruits is to be expected: either final knowledge in this very life or, if there is a residue remaining, the state of non-returning.
“Bhikkhus, if any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī has abandoned five kinds of mental barrenness and eradicated five bondages of the mind, then, whether night or day comes, only growth in wholesome qualities and not deterioration is to be expected for that person.
“Bhikkhus, if any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī has not abandoned five kinds of mental barrenness and eradicated five bondages of the mind, then, whether night or day comes, only deterioration in wholesome qualities and not growth is to be expected for this person.
“Bhikkhus, if both husband and wife wish to behold one another not only in this present life but also in future lives, they should have the same faith, the same virtuous behavior, the same generosity, and the same wisdom.
“Bhikkhus, if five things do not slip away from a frail and sick bhikkhu, it can be expected of him: ‘In no long time, with the destruction of the taints, he will realize for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he will dwell in it.’
What five?
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu attends to a mind of loving-kindness, he is called a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu develops a mind of loving-kindness, he is called a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu develops the first jhāna, he is called a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu develops the second jhāna … the third jhāna … the fourth jhāna … the liberation of the mind by loving-kindness … the liberation of the mind by compassion …  the liberation of the mind by altruistic joy … the liberation of the mind by equanimity, he is called a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu pursues a mind of loving-kindness, he is called a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
“Bhikkhus, if I were to say, ‘In this world with its devas … whatever is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, examined by the mind—that I both know and do not know,’ that too would be just the same.
“Bhikkhus, if I were to say, ‘In this world with its devas … whatever is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, examined by the mind—that I do not know,’ that would be a falsehood on my part.
“Bhikkhus, if I were to say, ‘In this world with its devas … whatever is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, examined by the mind—that I neither know nor do not know,’ that would be a fault on my part.
“Bhikkhus, if one were to say thus: ‘A person experiences kamma in precisely the same way that he created it,’ in such a case there could be no living of the spiritual life and no opportunity would be seen for completely making an end of suffering.
“Bhikkhus, if one who possesses five qualities is appointed an assigner of meals, he should not be sent.
“Bhikkhus, if there were no gratification in the world, beings would not become enamored of it; but because there is gratification in the world, beings become enamored of it.
“Bhikkhus, if these three things were not found in the world, the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One would not arise in the world, and the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by him would not shine in the world.
“Bhikkhus, if wanderers of other sects should ask you such a question, you should answer them as follows: ‘Lust, friends, is slightly blameworthy but slow to fade away; hatred is very blameworthy but quick to fade away; delusion is very blameworthy and slow to fade away.’
“Bhikkhus, if wanderers of other sects should ask you: ‘What, friends, are all things rooted in?
“Bhikkhus, if wanderers of other sects should ask you: ‘What, friends, are all things rooted in?
“Bhikkhus, if wanderers of other sects should ask you: ‘What, friends, is the proximate cause for the development of the aids to enlightenment?’ you should answer them as follows.
“Bhikkhus, if wanderers of other sects were to ask you thus: ‘Friends, do you lead the spiritual life under the ascetic Gotama for the sake of rebirth in the deva world?’ wouldn’t you be repelled, humiliated, and disgusted?”
“Bhikkhus, if, in regard to a particular disciplinary issue, the bhikkhu who has committed an offense and the bhikkhu who reproves him do not each thoroughly reflect upon themselves, it can be expected that this disciplinary issue will lead to acrimony and animosity for a long time and the bhikkhus will not dwell at ease.
“Bhikkhus, ignorance—accompanied by moral shamelessness and moral recklessness—is the forerunner in entering upon unwholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, in dependence on the wrong course there is failure, not success.
“Bhikkhus, in the evening the lion, the king of beasts, comes out from his lair, stretches his body, surveys the four quarters all around, and roars his lion’s roar three times.
“Bhikkhus, in the evening the lion, the king of beasts, comes out from his lair, stretches his body, surveys the four quarters all around, and roars his lion’s roar three times.
“Bhikkhus, in the evening the lion, the king of beasts, comes out from his lair, stretches his body, surveys the four quarters all around, and roars his lion’s roar three times.
“Bhikkhus, in the Noble One’s discipline, singing is wailing.
“Bhikkhus, in the past a battle was fought between the devas and the asuras.
“Bhikkhus, in the past there was a king named Pacetana.
“Bhikkhus, in the past there was a teacher named Araka, the founder of a spiritual sect, one without lust for sensual pleasures.
“Bhikkhus, in the past there was a teacher named Sunetta, the founder of a spiritual sect, one without lust for sensual pleasures.
“Bhikkhus, in this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, among this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, the Tathāgata is the vanquisher, the unvanquished, the universal seer, the wielder of mastery; therefore he is called the Tathāgata.”
“Bhikkhus, in this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, among this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, whatever is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, examined by the mind—all that the Tathāgata has fully awakened to; therefore he is called the Tathāgata.
“Bhikkhus, in this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, among this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, whatever is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, examined by the mind—that I have directly known.
“Bhikkhus, in this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, among this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, whatever is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, examined by the mind—that I know.
“Bhikkhus, in three cases ardor should be exercised.
“Bhikkhus, in three cases one may be understood to have faith and confidence.
“Bhikkhus, in three cases talk flows smoothly.
“Bhikkhus, in three respects the people of Uttarakuru surpass the Tāvatiṃsa devas and the people of Jambudīpa.
“Bhikkhus, in whatever quarter he might dwell, a head-anointed khattiya king who possesses five factors dwells in his own realm.
“Bhikkhus, isn’t poverty suffering in the world for one who enjoys sensual pleasures?”
“Bhikkhus, it is because of the streaming away that one is a scholar….”
“Bhikkhus, it is because of the washing away that one is washed….” 
“Bhikkhus, it is because one has the knowledge that one is a master of Vedic knowledge….”
“Bhikkhus, it is for these two reasons that the Tathāgata has prescribed the Pātimokkha for his disciples … “Bhikkhus, it is for these two reasons that the Tathāgata has prescribed the training rules for his disciples.
“Bhikkhus, it is good for a bhikkhu from time to time to review his own failings.
“Bhikkhus, it is impossible that a bhikkhu who considers any conditioned phenomenon to be permanent will possess a conviction in conformity.
“Bhikkhus, it is impossible that a bhikkhu who considers any phenomenon to be a self will possess a conviction in conformity.
“Bhikkhus, it is impossible that a bhikkhu who considers nibbāna to be suffering will possess a conviction in conformity.
“Bhikkhus, it is impossible that a bhikkhu who delights in company, who is delighted with company, who is devoted to delight in company; who delights in a group, who is delighted with a group, who is devoted to delight in a group, will find delight in solitude when he is alone.
“Bhikkhus, it is impossible that a bhikkhu, without concentration that is peaceful, sublime, gained through tranquilization, and attained to unification could wield the various kinds of psychic potency: having been one, he could become many … … he could exercise mastery with the body as far as the brahmā world.
“Bhikkhus, it is not suitable for you clansmen who have gone forth out of faith from the household life into homelessness to take to arguing and quarreling and to fall into a dispute, stabbing each other with piercing words.
“Bhikkhus, it is not suitable for you, clansmen who have gone forth from the household life into homelessness out of faith, to engage in various kinds of pointless talk, that is: talk about kings, thieves, and ministers of state … talk about becoming this or that.
“Bhikkhus, it is possible that a bhikkhu who considers all conditioned phenomena to be impermanent will possess a conviction in conformity.
“Bhikkhus, it is possible that a bhikkhu who considers all conditioned phenomena to be suffering will possess a conviction in conformity.
“Bhikkhus, it is possible that a bhikkhu who considers all phenomena to be non-self will possess a conviction in conformity.
“Bhikkhus, it is possible that a bhikkhu who considers nibbāna to be happiness will possess a conviction in conformity.
“Bhikkhus, it is possible that a bhikkhu who does not delight in company, who is not delighted with company, who is not devoted to delight in company; who does not delight in a group, who is not delighted with a group, who is not devoted to delight in a group, will find delight in solitude when he is alone.
“Bhikkhus, it is possible that a bhikkhu, with concentration that is peaceful, sublime, gained through tranquilization, and attained to unification could wield the various kinds of psychic potency … could hear both kinds of sounds, the divine and human, those that are far as well as near … could understand the minds of other beings and persons, having encompassed them with his own mind … could recollect his manifold past abodes with their aspects and details … could, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, see beings passing away and being reborn … and could understand how beings fare in accordance with their kamma … with the destruction of the taints, could realize for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, could dwell in it.”
“Bhikkhus, it is rare to find one gone forth in old age who possesses five qualities.
“Bhikkhus, it is rare to find one gone forth in old age who possesses five qualities.
“Bhikkhus, it is said: ‘A first point of craving for existence, bhikkhus, is not seen such that before this there was no craving for existence and afterward it came into being.’
Still, craving for existence is seen to have a specific condition.
“Bhikkhus, it is through the breaking of seven things that one is a bhikkhu.
“Bhikkhus, it is through the expulsion that one is a brahmin….”
“Bhikkhus, it is through the foe-slaying that one is a noble one….”
“Bhikkhus, it is through the pacifying of seven things that one is an ascetic….”
“Bhikkhus, it is through the remoteness that one is an arahant.
“Bhikkhus, it may be that even a single bhikkhu has some doubt or uncertainty about the Buddha, the Dhamma, or the Saṅgha, about the path or the practice.
“Bhikkhus, just as even a trifling amount of feces is foul smelling, so too I do not praise even a trifling amount of existence, even for a mere finger snap.”
“Bhikkhus, just as even a trifling amount of urine is foul smelling … a trifling amount of saliva is foul smelling … a trifling amount of pus is foul smelling … … a trifling amount of blood is foul smelling, so too I do not praise even a trifling amount of existence, even for a mere finger snap.”
“Bhikkhus, just as it is not easy to measure the water in the great ocean thus: ‘There are so many gallons of water,’ or ‘There are so many hundreds of gallons of water,’ or ‘There are so many thousands of gallons of water,’ or ‘There are so many hundreds of thousands of gallons of water,’ but rather it is reckoned simply as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of water; so too, when a noble disciple possesses these five streams of merit … it is reckoned simply as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit.”
“Bhikkhus, just as it is not easy to measure the water in the great ocean thus: ‘There are so many gallons of water,’ or ‘There are so many hundreds of gallons of water,’ or ‘There are so many thousands of gallons of water,’ or ‘There are so many hundreds of thousands of gallons of water,’ but rather it is reckoned simply as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of water; so too, when a noble disciple possesses these four streams of merit … it is reckoned simply as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit.”
“Bhikkhus, just as sandalwood is declared to be the best of trees with respect to malleability and wieldiness, so too I do not see even one other thing that, when developed and cultivated, is so malleable and wieldy as the mind.
“Bhikkhus, just as the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise, so right view is the forerunner and precursor of wholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, just as, in the autumn, when the sky is clear and cloudless, the sun, ascending in the sky, dispels all darkness from space as it shines and beams and radiates, so too, when the dust-free, stainless Dhamma-eye arises in the noble disciple, then, together with the arising of vision, the noble disciple abandons three fetters: personal-existence view, doubt, and wrong grasp of behavior and observances.
“Bhikkhus, last night, when the night had advanced, a number of deities of stunning beauty, illuminating the entire Jeta’s Grove, approached me, paid homage to me, and stood to one side.
“Bhikkhus, live under a protector, not without a protector.
“Bhikkhus, live under a protector, not without a protector.
“Bhikkhus, live under a protector, not without a protector.
“Bhikkhus, live under a protector, not without a protector.
“Bhikkhus, mindfulness of death, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation.
“Bhikkhus, mindfulness of death, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation.
“Bhikkhus, mindfulness of death, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation.
“Bhikkhus, mindfulness of death, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation.
“Bhikkhus, observed complete in eight factors, the uposatha is of great fruit and benefit, extraordinarily brilliant and pervasive.
“Bhikkhus, observed complete in eight factors, the uposatha is of great fruit and benefit, extraordinarily brilliant and pervasive.
“Bhikkhus, of the speculative views held by outsiders, this is the foremost, namely: ‘I might not be and it might not be mine; I shall not be, it will not be mine.’
For it can be expected that one who holds such a view will not be unrepelled by existence and will not be repelled by the cessation of existence.
“Bhikkhus, on five grounds a bhikkhu is suspected and distrusted as ‘an evil bhikkhu’ though he be of unshakable character.
“Bhikkhus, on one occasion I was dwelling at Uruvelā, by the goatherds’ banyan tree on the bank of the Neranjarā River, just after I had attained full enlightenment.
“Bhikkhus, on one occasion I was dwelling at Uruvelā, by the goatherds’ banyan tree on the bank of the Neranjarā River, just after I had attained full enlightenment.
“Bhikkhus, on the eighth of the fortnight, the ministers and assembly members of the four great kings wander over this world,: ‘We hope there are many people who behave properly toward their mother and father, behave properly toward ascetics and brahmins, honor the elders of the family, observe the uposatha, keep the extra observance days, and do meritorious deeds.’
On the fourteenth of the fortnight, the sons of the four great kings wander over this world,: ‘We hope there are many people who behave properly toward their mother and father … … and do meritorious deeds.’
On the fifteenth, the uposatha day, the four great kings themselves wander over this world,: ‘We hope there are many people who behave properly toward their mother and father … and do meritorious deeds.’
“Bhikkhus, once in the past, when Sakka, ruler of the devas, was guiding the Tāvatiṃsa devas, he recited this verse: 
“Bhikkhus, once in the past, when Sakka, ruler of the devas, was guiding the Tāvatiṃsa devas, on that occasion he recited this verse:
“Bhikkhus, one accomplished in view has abandoned these six things.
“Bhikkhus, one accomplished in view is incapable of giving rise to these six things.
“Bhikkhus, one bent on his own welfare should practice heedfulness, mindfulness, and guarding of the mind in four instances.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing five qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing five qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing five qualities may be appointed an assigner of meals.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing five qualities should not be appointed an assigner of meals.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing four qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing ten qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing ten qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing three qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one possessing three qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one should associate with a bhikkhu friend who possesses seven qualities; one should resort to him and attend on him even if he dismisses you.
“Bhikkhus, one should associate with a friend who possesses seven factors.
“Bhikkhus, one should associate with a friend who possesses three factors.
“Bhikkhus, one should associate with a person who possesses ten qualities.
“Bhikkhus, one should associate with a person who possesses ten qualities.
“Bhikkhus, one should not associate with a person who possesses ten qualities.
“Bhikkhus, one should not associate with a person who possesses ten qualities.
“Bhikkhus, one should not resort to a person who possesses ten qualities … one should resort to … … one should not attend on … one should attend on … … one should not venerate … one should venerate … … one should not praise … one should praise … … one should not revere … one should revere … … one should not show deference to … one should show deference to a person who possesses ten qualities … … a person who possesses ten qualities is not successful … is successful … … is not purified … is purified … … does not overcome conceit … overcomes conceit … … does not grow in wisdom … grows in wisdom … … generates much demerit … generates much merit.
“Bhikkhus, one should not resort to a person who possesses ten qualities … one should resort to … … one should not attend on … one should attend on … … one should not venerate … one should venerate … … one should not praise … one should praise … … one should not revere … one should revere … … one should not show deference to … one should show deference to a person who possesses ten qualities….
“Bhikkhus, one should not take as a friend a bhikkhu who possesses five qualities.
“Bhikkhus, one should take as a friend a bhikkhu who possesses five qualities.
“Bhikkhus, one speaking rightly would say of Nanda that he is a clansman, that he is strong, that he is graceful, and that he is strongly prone to lust.
“Bhikkhus, one thing, when developed and cultivated, leads to differentiation by wisdom … leads to nibbāna through non-clinging.
“Bhikkhus, one thing, when developed and cultivated, leads to realization of the fruit of stream-entry … to realization of the fruit of once-returning … to realization of the fruit of non-returning … to realization of the fruit of arahantship.
“Bhikkhus, one thing, when developed and cultivated, leads to the obtaining of wisdom … to the growth of wisdom … to the expansion of wisdom … to greatness of wisdom … to diversity of wisdom … to vastness of wisdom … to depth of wisdom … to a state of unsurpassed wisdom … to breadth of wisdom … to abundance of wisdom … to rapidity of wisdom … to buoyancy of wisdom … to joyousness of wisdom … to swiftness of wisdom … to keenness of wisdom … to penetrativeness of wisdom.
“Bhikkhus, one who does not possess four things is said to have fallen from this Dhamma and discipline.
“Bhikkhus, one who encourages in a badly expounded Dhamma and discipline, and the one whom he encourages, and the one who, thus encouraged, practices in accordance with it, all generate much demerit.
“Bhikkhus, one who encourages in a well-expounded Dhamma and discipline, and the one whom he encourages, and the one who, thus encouraged, practices in accordance with it, all generate much merit.
“Bhikkhus, one who has a sense of moral shame and moral dread is heedful.
“Bhikkhus, one who is morally shameless and morally reckless is heedless.
“Bhikkhus, one who looks on cruelly at captive animals as they are brought for slaughter will not travel around by elephant or horse, by chariot or vehicle, or enjoy wealth or live off a large accumulation of wealth.
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities may be appointed a supervisor of novices.
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities should not be appointed a dispenser of small accessories … he does not know which have been dispensed and which have not been dispensed….
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities should not be appointed a distributor of cakes … he does not know which have been distributed and which have not been distributed….
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities should not be appointed a distributor of fruit … he does not know which has been distributed and which has not been distributed….
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities should not be appointed a distributor of rice porridge … he does not know which has been distributed and which has not been distributed….
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities should not be appointed a distributor of robe-material … he does not know which has been distributed and which has not been distributed….
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities should not be appointed a guardian of the storeroom … he does not know which are being protected and which are not being protected….
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities should not be appointed a receiver of robe-material … he does not know which has been received and which has not been received….
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities should not be appointed a supervisor of monastery attendants … he does not know which has been supervised and which has not been supervised….
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities should not be appointed a supervisor of novices.
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities should not be appointed an allocator of bowls … he does not know which have been allocated and which have not been allocated….
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities should not be appointed an allocator of lodgings … he does not know which has been allocated and which has not been allocated….
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities should not be appointed an allocator of rains cloth … he does not know which has been allocated and which has not been allocated….
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities should not be appointed an appointer of lodgings.
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities, if appointed a supervisor of novices, should be sent.
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities, if appointed a supervisor of novices, should not be sent.
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses five qualities, if appointed an assigner of meals, should be sent.
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses four qualities can be understood to be a bad person.
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses four qualities can be understood to be a good person.
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses four qualities is cast into hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses three qualities should be known as a fool.
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses three qualities should be known as a fool.
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses three qualities should be known as a fool.
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses three qualities should be known as a fool.
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses three qualities should be known as a fool.
“Bhikkhus, one who possesses three qualities should be known as a fool.
“Bhikkhus, physicians prescribe a purgative for eliminating ailments originating from bile, phlegm, and wind.
“Bhikkhus, physicians prescribe an emetic for eliminating ailments originating from bile, phlegm, and wind.
“Bhikkhus, possessing another three qualities, a bhikkhu is best among devas and humans: one who has … gained the ultimate consummation.
“Bhikkhus, possessing another three qualities, a bhikkhu is best among devas and humans: one who has … gained the ultimate consummation.
“Bhikkhus, possessing eight factors, a king’s excellent thoroughbred horse is worthy of a king, an accessory of a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship.
“Bhikkhus, possessing eight factors, a master thief does not quickly get into trouble and lasts long.
“Bhikkhus, possessing eight factors, a master thief quickly gets into trouble and does not last long.
“Bhikkhus, possessing eight qualities, a bhikkhu is displeasing and disagreeable to his fellow monks and is neither respected nor esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing eight qualities, a bhikkhu is displeasing and disagreeable to his fellow monks and is neither respected nor esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing eight qualities, a bhikkhu is pleasing and agreeable to his fellow monks and is respected and esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing eight qualities, a bhikkhu is pleasing and agreeable to his fellow monks and is respected and esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing eight qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, possessing eight qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of going on a mission.
“Bhikkhus, possessing eight qualities, Sāriputta is worthy of going on a mission.
“Bhikkhus, possessing eleven factors, a cowherd is capable of keeping and rearing a herd of cattle.
“Bhikkhus, possessing eleven factors, a cowherd is capable of keeping and rearing a herd of cattle.
“Bhikkhus, possessing eleven factors, a cowherd is incapable of keeping and rearing a herd of cattle.
“Bhikkhus, possessing eleven factors, a cowherd is incapable of keeping and rearing a herd of cattle.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five factors, a king’s bull elephant is a consumer of food, an occupant of space, a discharger of dung, a ticket-taker, and yet still is reckoned as a king’s bull elephant.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five factors, a king’s bull elephant is not worthy of a king, not an accessory of a king, and not reckoned as a factor of kingship.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five factors, a king’s bull elephant is worthy of a king, an accessory of a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five factors, a king’s bull elephant is worthy of a king, an accessory of a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five factors, a king’s excellent thoroughbred horse is worthy of a king, an accessory of a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five factors, a master thief breaks into houses, plunders wealth, commits banditry, and ambushes highways.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five factors, a wheel-turning monarch sets the wheel in motion solely through the Dhamma, a wheel that cannot be turned back by any hostile creature in human form.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five factors, speech is well spoken, not badly spoken; it is blameless and beyond reproach by the wise.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five factors, the eldest son of a head-anointed khattiya king yearns for kingship.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five factors, the eldest son of a head-anointed khattiya king yearns to be the viceroy.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five factors, the eldest son of a wheel-turning monarch continues, solely through the Dhamma, to turn the wheel set in motion by his father, a wheel that cannot be turned back by any hostile creature in human form.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities a bhikkhu does not fall away but is established in the good Dhamma.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities a bhikkhu falls away and is not established in the good Dhamma.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities an elder bhikkhu is pleasing and agreeable to his fellow monks and is respected and esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu dwells happily in this very life—without distress, anguish, and fever—and with the breakup of the body, after death, a good destination can be expected for him.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu dwells in suffering in this very life—with distress, anguish, and fever—and with the breakup of the body, after death, a bad destination can be expected for him.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is a delicate ascetic among ascetics.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is at home in the four quarters.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is capable of entering and dwelling in right concentration.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is fit to live apart from the Saṅgha.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is fit to resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is incapable of entering and dwelling in right concentration.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is not fit to live apart from the Saṅgha.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is overcome by timidity.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is practicing both for his own welfare and for the welfare of others.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is practicing for his own welfare but not for the welfare of others.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is practicing for the welfare of others but not for his own welfare.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is practicing neither for his own welfare nor for the welfare of others.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is self-confident.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts … an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu may be attended upon by a novice.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu may give dependence.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu may give full ordination.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu who is a visitor of families is displeasing and disagreeable to them and is neither respected nor esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu who is a visitor of families is pleasing and agreeable to them and is respected and esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhunī is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhunī is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhunī is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhunī is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhunī is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhunī is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhunī is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhunī is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhunī … a female probationer … a male novice … a female novice is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhunī … a female probationer … a male novice … a female novice is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a lay follower dwells self-confident at home.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a lay follower dwells without self-confidence at home.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a lay follower is a caṇḍāla of a lay follower, a stain of a lay follower, the last among lay followers.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a lay follower is a gem of a lay follower, a red lotus of a lay follower, a white lotus of a lay follower.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a lay follower is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a lay follower is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a lay follower is overcome by timidity.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a lay follower is self-confident.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a male lay follower … a female lay follower is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a male lay follower … a female lay follower is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a Nigaṇṭha … a shaven-headed disciple … a matted-hair ascetic … a wanderer … a māgandika … a tedaṇḍika … an āruddhaka … a gotamaka … a devadhammika is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a patient is difficult to take care of.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a patient is easy to take care of.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a resident bhikkhu beautifies a monastery.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a resident bhikkhu is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a resident bhikkhu is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a resident bhikkhu is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a resident bhikkhu is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a resident bhikkhu is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a resident bhikkhu is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a resident bhikkhu is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a resident bhikkhu is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a resident bhikkhu is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a resident bhikkhu is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a resident bhikkhu is not to be esteemed.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a resident bhikkhu is pleasing and agreeable to his fellow monks and is respected and esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a resident bhikkhu is to be esteemed.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a resident bhikkhu is very helpful to a monastery.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a resident bhikkhu shows compassion to laypeople.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a reverential and deferential bhikkhu does not fall away but is established in the good Dhamma.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a reverential and deferential bhikkhu is capable of achieving growth, progress, and maturity in this Dhamma and discipline.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, an attendant is not qualified to take care of a patient.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, an attendant is qualified to take care of a patient.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, an elder bhikkhu is acting for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and humans.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, an elder bhikkhu is acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, an elder bhikkhu is displeasing and disagreeable to his fellow monks and is neither respected nor esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, an elder bhikkhu is displeasing and disagreeable to his fellow monks and is neither respected nor esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, an elder bhikkhu is displeasing and disagreeable to his fellow monks and is neither respected nor esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, an elder bhikkhu is displeasing and disagreeable to his fellow monks and is neither respected nor esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, an elder bhikkhu is displeasing and disagreeable to his fellow monks and is neither respected nor esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, an elder bhikkhu is pleasing and agreeable to his fellow monks and is respected and esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, an elder bhikkhu is pleasing and agreeable to his fellow monks and is respected and esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, an elder bhikkhu is pleasing and agreeable to his fellow monks and is respected and esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, an elder bhikkhu is pleasing and agreeable to his fellow monks and is respected and esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, an elder bhikkhu is pleasing and agreeable to his fellow monks and is respected and esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, an elder bhikkhu is pleasing and agreeable to his fellow monks and is respected and esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, an irreverent and undeferential bhikkhu falls away and is not established in the good Dhamma.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, an irreverent and undeferential bhikkhu is not capable of achieving growth, progress, and maturity in this Dhamma and discipline.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, an Ājīvaka is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, even while listening to the good Dhamma one is incapable of entering upon the fixed course rightness in wholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, even while listening to the good Dhamma one is incapable of entering upon the fixed course rightness in wholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, even while listening to the good Dhamma one is incapable of entering upon the fixed course rightness in wholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, someone may be taken along as an attendant monk.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, someone should not be taken along as an attendant monk.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, while listening to the good Dhamma one is capable of entering upon the fixed course rightness in wholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, while listening to the good Dhamma one is capable of entering upon the fixed course rightness in wholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, while listening to the good Dhamma one is capable of entering upon the fixed course rightness in wholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five things, a bhikkhu cultivating mindfulness of breathing in no long time penetrates to the unshakable.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five things, a bhikkhu developing mindfulness of breathing in no long time penetrates to the unshakable.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five things, a bhikkhu in no long time penetrates to the unshakable.
“Bhikkhus, possessing five things, a bhikkhu pursuing mindfulness of breathing in no long time penetrates to the unshakable.
“Bhikkhus, possessing forty qualities, one is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing four factors a king’s bull elephant is worthy of a king, an accessory of a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship.
“Bhikkhus, possessing four factors a king’s excellent thoroughbred horse is worthy of a king, an accessory of a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship.
“Bhikkhus, possessing four factors a king’s excellent thoroughbred horse is worthy of a king, an accessory of a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship.
“Bhikkhus, possessing four factors, a warrior is worthy of a king, an accessory of a king, and reckoned a factor of kingship.
“Bhikkhus, possessing four qualities a bhikkhu is not fit to resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
“Bhikkhus, possessing four qualities, a woman is heading for victory in the present world and her life in this world succeeds.
“Bhikkhus, possessing four qualities, the foolish, incompetent, bad person maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition; he is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise; and he generates much demerit.
“Bhikkhus, possessing four qualities, the foolish, incompetent, bad person maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition; he is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise; and he generates much demerit.
“Bhikkhus, possessing four qualities, the foolish, incompetent, bad person maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition; he is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise; and he generates much demerit.
“Bhikkhus, possessing four qualities, the foolish, incompetent, bad person maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition; he is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise; and he generates much demerit.
“Bhikkhus, possessing four qualities, the foolish, incompetent, bad person maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition; he is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise; and he generates much demerit.
“Bhikkhus, possessing four qualities, the wise, competent, good person preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured; he is blameless and beyond reproach by the wise; and he generates much merit.
“Bhikkhus, possessing four qualities, the wise, competent, good person preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured; he is blameless and beyond reproach by the wise; and he generates much merit.
“Bhikkhus, possessing four qualities, the wise, competent, good person preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured; he is blameless and beyond reproach by the wise; and he generates much merit.
“Bhikkhus, possessing four qualities, the wise, competent, good person preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured; he is blameless and beyond reproach by the wise; and he generates much merit.
“Bhikkhus, possessing four qualities, the wise, competent, good person preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured; he is blameless and beyond reproach by the wise; and he generates much merit.
“Bhikkhus, possessing nine factors, a family that has not yet been approached is not worth approaching, or one that has been approached is not worth sitting with.
“Bhikkhus, possessing nine factors, a family that has not yet been approached is worth approaching or one that has been approached is worth sitting with.
“Bhikkhus, possessing seven factors, a family that has not yet been approached is not worth approaching, or one that has been approached is not worth sitting with.
“Bhikkhus, possessing seven factors, a family that has not yet been approached is worth approaching or one that has been approached is worth sitting with.
“Bhikkhus, possessing seven qualities, a bhikkhu can before long, with the destruction of the taints, realize for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwell in it.
“Bhikkhus, possessing seven qualities, a bhikkhu exercises mastery over his mind and is not a servant of his mind.
“Bhikkhus, possessing seven qualities, a bhikkhu is an expert in the discipline.
“Bhikkhus, possessing seven qualities, a bhikkhu is an expert in the discipline.
“Bhikkhus, possessing seven qualities, a bhikkhu is an expert in the discipline.
“Bhikkhus, possessing seven qualities, a bhikkhu is an expert in the discipline.
“Bhikkhus, possessing seven qualities, a bhikkhu is displeasing and disagreeable to his fellow monks and is neither respected nor esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing seven qualities, a bhikkhu is displeasing and disagreeable to his fellow monks and is neither respected nor esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing seven qualities, a bhikkhu is pleasing and agreeable to his fellow monks and is respected and esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing seven qualities, a bhikkhu is pleasing and agreeable to his fellow monks and is respected and esteemed by them.
“Bhikkhus, possessing seven qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, possessing seven qualities, an expert in the discipline is resplendent.
“Bhikkhus, possessing seven qualities, an expert in the discipline is resplendent.
“Bhikkhus, possessing seven qualities, an expert in the discipline is resplendent.
“Bhikkhus, possessing seven qualities, an expert in the discipline is resplendent.
“Bhikkhus, possessing seven qualities, Sāriputta exercises mastery over his mind and is not a servant of his mind.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six factors, a king’s excellent thoroughbred horse is worthy of a king, an accessory of a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six factors, a king’s excellent thoroughbred horse is worthy of a king, an accessory of a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six factors, a king’s excellent thoroughbred horse is worthy of a king, an accessory of a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities a bhikkhu is capable of attaining strength in concentration.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities a bhikkhu is capable of realizing arahantship, the foremost state.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities a bhikkhu is incapable of attaining strength in concentration.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities a bhikkhu is incapable of realizing arahantship, the foremost state.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, a bhikkhu abounds in happiness and joy in this very life, and he has laid the foundation for the destruction of the taints.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, a bhikkhu in no long time attains to greatness and vastness in qualities.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, a bhikkhu is able both himself and others.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, a bhikkhu is capable of realizing a particular state, there being a suitable basis.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, a bhikkhu is capable of realizing the unsurpassed coolness.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, a bhikkhu is incapable of realizing a particular state, there is a suitable basis.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, a bhikkhu is incapable of realizing the unsurpassed coolness.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, a bhikkhu might split the Himalayas, the king of mountains, how much more then vile ignorance!
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, even while listening to the good Dhamma one is incapable of entering upon the fixed course rightness in wholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, even while listening to the good Dhamma one is incapable of entering upon the fixed course rightness in wholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, even while listening to the good Dhamma one is incapable of entering upon the fixed course rightness in wholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, one is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, one is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, one is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, one is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, the householder Bhallika … the householder Sudatta Anāthapiṇḍika … the householder Citta of Macchikāsaṇḍa … the householder Hatthaka of Āḷavī … the householder Mahānāma the Sakyan … the householder Ugga of Vesālī … the householder Uggata … the householder Sūra of Ambaṭṭha … the householder Jīvaka Komārabhacca … the householder Nakulapitā … the householder Tavakaṇṇika … the householder Pūraṇa … the householder Isidatta … the householder Sandhāna … the householder Vijaya … the householder Vajjiyamāhita … the householder Meṇḍaka … the lay follower Vāseṭṭha … the lay follower Ariṭṭha … the lay follower Sāragga has reached certainty about the Tathāgata and become a seer of the deathless, one who lives having realized the deathless.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, the householder Tapussa has reached certainty about the Tathāgata and become a seer of the deathless, one who lives having realized the deathless.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, while listening to the good Dhamma one is capable of entering upon the fixed course rightness in wholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, while listening to the good Dhamma one is capable of entering upon the fixed course rightness in wholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six qualities, while listening to the good Dhamma one is capable of entering upon the fixed course rightness in wholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six things, a bhikkhu dwells happily in this very life—without distress, anguish, and fever—and with the breakup of the body, after death, a good destination can be expected for him.
“Bhikkhus, possessing six things, a bhikkhu dwells in suffering in this very life—with distress, anguish, and fever—and with the breakup of the body, after death, a bad destination can be expected for him.
“Bhikkhus, possessing ten qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, possessing ten qualities, a female lay follower dwells self-confident at home.
“Bhikkhus, possessing ten qualities, a female lay follower dwells without self-confidence at home.
“Bhikkhus, possessing ten qualities, a female lay follower is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing ten qualities, a female lay follower is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing ten qualities, an elder bhikkhu dwells at ease in whatever quarter he lives.
“Bhikkhus, possessing ten qualities, one is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing ten qualities, one is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing ten qualities, one is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing ten qualities, one maintains oneself in a maimed and injured condition … preserves oneself unmaimed and uninjured …”
“Bhikkhus, possessing ten qualities, one may be understood as a fool … one may be understood as a wise person.”
“Bhikkhus, possessing ten qualities, with the breakup of the body, after death, someone here is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell … someone here is reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.”
“Bhikkhus, possessing ten qualities, women are deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing ten qualities, women are deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing thirty qualities, one is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three factors a king’s excellent thoroughbred horse is worthy of a king, an accessory of a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three factors, a master thief breaks into houses, plunders wealth, commits banditry, and ambushes highways.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three factors, a shopkeeper is capable of acquiring wealth not yet acquired and of increasing wealth already acquired.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three factors, a shopkeeper is incapable of acquiring wealth not yet acquired or of increasing wealth already acquired.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three factors, a shopkeeper soon attains vast and abundant wealth.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three factors, a warrior is worthy of a king, an accessory of a king, and reckoned a factor of kingship.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities and having abandoned three stains, one is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities and without having abandoned three stains, one is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities … Blameworthy bodily action, blameworthy verbal action, and blameworthy mental action….
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities … Impure bodily action, impure verbal action, and impure mental action….
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities … Pure bodily action, pure verbal action, and pure mental action.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities … Righteous bodily action, righteous verbal action, and righteous mental action….”
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities … Unrighteous bodily action, unrighteous verbal action, and unrighteous mental action….
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities, a bhikkhu is best among devas and humans: one who has reached the ultimate conclusion, won ultimate security from bondage, lived the ultimate spiritual life, and gained the ultimate consummation.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities, a bhikkhu is best among devas and humans: one who has reached the ultimate conclusion, won ultimate security from bondage, lived the ultimate spiritual life, and gained the ultimate consummation.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities, a bhikkhu is best among devas and humans: one who has reached the ultimate conclusion, won ultimate security from bondage, lived the ultimate spiritual life, and gained the ultimate consummation.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities, a bhikkhu is best among devas and humans: one who has reached the ultimate conclusion, won ultimate security from bondage, lived the ultimate spiritual life, and gained the ultimate consummation.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities, a bhikkhu is practicing the unmistaken way and has laid the groundwork for the destruction of the taints.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities, a well-known bhikkhu is acting for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities, a well-known bhikkhu is acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities, one is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities, one is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities, one is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities, one is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities, the foolish, incompetent, bad person maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition; he is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise; and he generates much demerit.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities, the foolish, incompetent, bad person maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition; he is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise; and he generates much demerit.
“Bhikkhus, possessing three qualities, the wise, competent, good person preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured; he is blameless and beyond reproach by the wise; and he generates much merit.
“Bhikkhus, possessing twenty qualities … thirty qualities … forty qualities, one maintains oneself in a maimed and injured condition … preserves oneself unmaimed and uninjured …”
“Bhikkhus, possessing twenty qualities … thirty qualities … forty qualities, one may be understood as a fool … one may be understood as a wise person.”
“Bhikkhus, possessing twenty qualities … thirty qualities … forty qualities, someone here is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell … someone here is reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.”
“Bhikkhus, possessing twenty qualities, one is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing two qualities, a bhikkhu is best among devas and humans: one who has … gained the ultimate consummation.
“Bhikkhus, possessing two qualities, one dwells happily.
“Bhikkhus, possessing two qualities, one dwells in suffering.
“Bhikkhus, possessing two qualities, one is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing two qualities, one is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Bhikkhus, possessing two qualities, the foolish, incompetent, bad person maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition; he is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise; and he generates much demerit.
“Bhikkhus, possessing two qualities, the foolish, incompetent, bad person maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition; he is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise; and he generates much demerit.
“Bhikkhus, possessing two qualities, the wise, competent, good person preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured; he is blameless and beyond reproach by the wise; and he generates much merit.
“Bhikkhus, possessing two qualities, the wise, competent, good person preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured; he is blameless and beyond reproach by the wise; and he generates much merit.
“Bhikkhus, possessing two qualities, with the breakup of the body, after death, someone here is reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
“Bhikkhus, possessing two qualities, with the breakup of the body, after death, someone here is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
“Bhikkhus, saying ‘a heap of the unwholesome,’ it is about the five hindrances that one could rightly say this.
“Bhikkhus, seeing two advantages, I resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
“Bhikkhus, Sineru, the king of mountains, is, yojanas in length and, yojanas in width; it is submerged, yojanas in the great ocean and rises up, yojanas above the great ocean.
“Bhikkhus, suppose a donkey was following right behind a herd of cattle,: ‘I’m a cow too, I’m a cow too.’
But his appearance would not be like that of the cows, his braying would not be like that of the cows, and his footprint would not be like that of the cows.
“Bhikkhus, suppose a misdirected spike of hill rice or barley were pressed by the hand or foot.
“Bhikkhus, suppose a well-directed spike of hill rice or barley were pressed by the hand or foot.
“Bhikkhus, suppose there was a boil many years old.
“Bhikkhus, suppose there were a pool of water that was clear, serene, and limpid.
“Bhikkhus, suppose there were a pool of water that was cloudy, turbid, and muddy.
“Bhikkhus, take first the case of the deed that is disagreeable to do which will prove harmful.
“Bhikkhus, take the case of a sheep merchant or butcher, who can execute, imprison, fine, or otherwise penalize someone who has stolen one of his sheep but can’t do so to someone else who has stolen his sheep.
“Bhikkhus, the Blessed Ones, Arahants, Perfectly Enlightened Ones of the past taught a doctrine of kamma, a doctrine of deeds, a doctrine of energy.
“Bhikkhus, the deathless has not been partaken of by those who have not partaken of mindfulness directed to the body.
“Bhikkhus, the destruction of life, I say, is threefold: caused by greed, caused by hatred, and caused by delusion.
“Bhikkhus, the destruction of life, repeatedly pursued, developed, and cultivated, is conducive to hell, to the animal realm, and to the sphere of afflicted spirits; for one reborn as a human being the destruction of life at minimum conduces to a short life span.
“Bhikkhus, the female lay follower Veḷukaṇṭakī Nandamātā is preparing an offering possessed of six factors for the Saṅgha of bhikkhus headed by Sāriputta and Moggallāna.
“Bhikkhus, the fool has these three characteristics of a fool, marks of a fool, manifestations of a fool.
“Bhikkhus, the fool is characterized by his actions; the wise person is characterized by his actions.
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who are learned is Ānanda.”
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who create a mind-made body is Cullapanthaka.”
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who desire the training is Rāhula.”
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples in seniority is Aññākoṇḍañña.”
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhunī disciples in seniority is Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī.”
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my female lay followers in being the first to go for refuge is Sujātā, daughter of Senānī.”
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my male lay followers in being the first to go for refuge are the merchants Tapussa and Bhallika.”
“Bhikkhus, the heat element in the upper regions of the sky becomes disturbed.
“Bhikkhus, the manifestation of one person is rare in the world … … there is one person arising in the world who is extraordinary … … the death of one person is lamented by many people … … there is one person arising in the world who is unique, without a peer, without counterpart, incomparable, matchless, unrivaled, unequaled, without equal, the foremost of bipeds.
“Bhikkhus, the manifestation of one person is the manifestation of great vision … … the manifestation of great light … … the manifestation of great radiance … … the manifestation of the six things unsurpassed … … the realization of the four analytical knowledges … … the penetration of numerous elements … … the penetration of the diversity of elements … … the realization of the fruit of true knowledge and liberation … … the realization of the fruit of stream-entry … … the realization of the fruit of once-returning … … the realization of the fruit of non-returning … … the realization of the fruit of arahantship.
“Bhikkhus, the manifestation of six things is rare in the world.
“Bhikkhus, the manifestation of three is rare in the world.
“Bhikkhus, the Nigaṇṭhas have ten bad qualities.
“Bhikkhus, the person among these who gains internal serenity of mind but not the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena should approach one who gains the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena and inquire of him: ‘How, friend, should conditioned phenomena be seen?
“Bhikkhus, the person among these who gains internal serenity of mind but not the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena should base himself on internal serenity of mind and make an effort to gain the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena.
“Bhikkhus, the person among these who is practicing for the welfare of others but not for his own welfare is the more excellent and sublime of the two persons.
“Bhikkhus, the person among these who violates and then becomes remorseful, and does not understand as it really is the liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where these arisen bad unwholesome states of his cease without remainder, should be told: ‘Taints born of violation are found in you, and taints born of remorse increase.
“Bhikkhus, the spiritual life is lived for the abandoning and eradication of five kinds of miserliness.
“Bhikkhus, the spiritual life is lived to abandon and eradicate seven fetters.
“Bhikkhus, the spiritual life is lived to abandon and eradicate the seven underlying tendencies.
“Bhikkhus, the taints do not increase for two.
“Bhikkhus, the taints do not increase for two.
“Bhikkhus, the taints do not increase for two.
“Bhikkhus, the taints do not increase for two.
“Bhikkhus, the taints do not increase for two.
“Bhikkhus, the taints increase for two.
“Bhikkhus, the taints increase for two.
“Bhikkhus, the taints increase for two.
“Bhikkhus, the taints increase for two.
“Bhikkhus, the taints increase for two.
“Bhikkhus, the Tathāgata has fully awakened to the world; the Tathāgata is detached from the world.
“Bhikkhus, the Tathāgata has these two kinds of Dhamma teaching.
“Bhikkhus, the Tathāgata is one whose bodily behavior is purified.
“Bhikkhus, the uninstructed worldling says: ‘The world has gained the opportunity!
“Bhikkhus, the uninstructed worldling speaks of these three perils that separate mother and son.
“Bhikkhus, there are four occasions when heedfulness should be practiced.
“Bhikkhus, there are gross defilements of gold: soil, grit, and gravel.
“Bhikkhus, there are some ascetics and brahmins who proclaim supreme nibbāna in this very life.
“Bhikkhus, there are some ascetics and brahmins who proclaim supreme purification.
“Bhikkhus, there are these eight accomplishments.
“Bhikkhus, there are these eight accomplishments.
“Bhikkhus, there are these eight assemblies.
“Bhikkhus, there are these eight bases of overcoming.
“Bhikkhus, there are these eight bases of overcoming.
“Bhikkhus, there are these eight causes and conditions that lead to obtaining the wisdom fundamental to the spiritual life when it has not been obtained and to its increase, maturation, and fulfillment by development after it has been obtained.
“Bhikkhus, there are these eight emancipations.
“Bhikkhus, there are these eight gifts of a good person.
“Bhikkhus, there are these eight gifts.
“Bhikkhus, there are these eight grounds for arousing energy.
“Bhikkhus, there are these eight grounds for giving.
“Bhikkhus, there are these eight grounds for laziness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these eight ignoble declarations.
“Bhikkhus, there are these eight kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these eight kinds of rebirth on account of giving.
“Bhikkhus, there are these eight noble declarations.
“Bhikkhus, there are these eight powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these eight stains.
“Bhikkhus, there are these eight streams of merit, streams of the wholesome, nutriments of happiness—heavenly, ripening in happiness, conducive to heaven—that lead to what is wished for, desired, and agreeable, to one’s welfare and happiness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five accomplishments.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five accomplishments.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five accomplishments.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five accomplishments.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five aggregates subject to clinging.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five ancient brahmin practices that are now seen among dogs but not among brahmins.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five bases of liberation by means of which, if a bhikkhu dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute, his unliberated mind is liberated, his undestroyed taints are utterly destroyed, and he reaches the as-yet-unreached unsurpassed security from bondage.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits for a family that prepares their meal at the proper time.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits for a person of judicious speech.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits for a virtuous person because of his accomplishment in virtuous behavior.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits for one who falls asleep mindfully and with clear comprehension.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in bodily good conduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in bodily good conduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in brushing one’s teeth.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in conduct that inspires confidence.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in conduct that inspires confidence.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in good conduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in good conduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in listening to the Dhamma.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in mental good conduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in mental good conduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in patience.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in patience.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in periodic wandering.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in periodic wandering.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in residing for a balanced period.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in residing for a balanced period.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in rice porridge.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in verbal good conduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in verbal good conduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits in wealth.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits of giving.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five benefits of walking meditation.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five bondages of the mind.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five bondages of the mind.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers for a family that prepares their meal late in the day.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers for a person who speaks much.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers for an immoral person because of his deficiency in virtuous behavior.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers for one who engages in lengthy and unsettled wandering.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers for one who engages in lengthy and unsettled wandering.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers for one who falls asleep with a muddled mind, lacking clear comprehension.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers for one who visits families.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in a black snake.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in a black snake.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in a charnel ground.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in basing one’s confidence on a person.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in bodily misconduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in bodily misconduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in conduct that does not inspire confidence.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in conduct that does not inspire confidence.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in fire.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in impatience.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in impatience.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in Madhurā.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in mental misconduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in mental misconduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in misconduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in misconduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in not brushing one’s teeth.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in reciting the Dhamma with a drawn-out, song-like intonation.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in residing too long.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in residing too long.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in verbal misconduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in verbal misconduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers in wealth.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five dangers when a bhikkhu who visits families bonds too closely with them.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five declarations of final knowledge.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five defilements of gold, defiled by which gold is not malleable, wieldy, and luminous, but brittle and not properly fit for work.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five destinations.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five disasters.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five elements of escape.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five factors that assist striving.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five future perils as yet unarisen that will arise in the future.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five future perils as yet unarisen that will arise in the future.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five gifts of a bad person.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five gifts of a good person.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five gifts of a good person.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five higher fetters.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five hindrances.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five incurable lesions that lead to the plane of misery, that lead to hell.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five kinds of dwelling at ease.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five kinds of forest dwellers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five kinds of happiness for an ascetic.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five kinds of mental barrenness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five kinds of mental barrenness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five kinds of miserliness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five kinds of miserliness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five kinds of persons found in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five kinds of persons found in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five kinds of suffering for an ascetic.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five kinds of warriors found in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five kinds of warriors found in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five kinds of wealth.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five kinds of wearers of rag-robes … these five who dwell at the foot of a tree … … these five who dwell in a charnel ground … these five who dwell in the open air … these five who observe the sitter’s practice … these five who observe the any-bed-user’s practice … these five who observe the one-session practice … these five who observe the later-food-refuser’s practice … these five who observe the practice of eating only food in the almsbowl.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five lower fetters.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five means of dwelling at ease.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five objects of sensual pleasure.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five obstacles to rain that the forecasters do not know about, where their eyes do not tread.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five obstructions, hindrances, encumbrances of the mind, states that weaken wisdom.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five qualities that make for self-confidence in a trainee.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five setbacks in the training.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five setbacks in the training.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five setbacks in the training.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five situations that are unobtainable by an ascetic or a brahmin, by a deva, Māra, or Brahmā, or by anyone in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five streams of merit, streams of the wholesome, nutriments of happiness—heavenly, ripening in happiness, conducive to heaven—that lead to what is wished for, desired, and agreeable, to one’s welfare and happiness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five themes that should often be reflected upon by a woman or a man, by a householder or one gone forth.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five things that increase vitality.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five things that increase vitality.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five things that lead to the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five things that lead to the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five things that lead to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five things that lead to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five things that lead to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five things that reduce vitality.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five things that reduce vitality.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five timely gifts.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five trainee’s powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five trainee’s powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five trainee’s powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five unfavorable occasions for striving.
“Bhikkhus, there are these five ways of removing resentment by which a bhikkhu should entirely remove resentment when it has arisen toward anyone.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four acquisitions of individuality.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four astounding and amazing things about a wheel-turning monarch.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four astounding and amazing things about Ānanda.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four bonds.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four cases of deeds.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four cores.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four defilements of the sun and moon because of which the sun and moon do not shine, blaze, and radiate.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four developments of concentration.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four Dhamma factors, primal, of long standing, traditional, ancient, unadulterated and never before adulterated, which are not being adulterated and will not be adulterated, which are not repudiated by wise ascetics and brahmins.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four faculties.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four foremost kinds of confidence.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four ignoble declarations.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four ignoble declarations.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four ignoble quests.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four incalculable divisions of an eon.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four inconceivable matters that one should not try to conceive; one who tries to conceive them would reap either madness or frustration.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four inversions of perception, inversions of mind, and inversions of view.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of bulls.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of clouds.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of clouds.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of Dhamma speakers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of excellent thoroughbred horses found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of exquisiteness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of kamma proclaimed by me after I realized them for myself with direct knowledge.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of kamma proclaimed by me after I realized them for myself with direct knowledge.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of kamma proclaimed by me after I realized them for myself with direct knowledge.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of kamma proclaimed by me after I realized them for myself with direct knowledge.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of mangoes.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of mice.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of poets.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of pools of water.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of pots.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of self-confidence that the Tathāgata has, possessing which he claims the place of the chief bull, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets in motion the brahma wheel.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of trees.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of verbal good conduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of verbal good conduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of verbal misconduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of verbal misconduct.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of vipers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four lights.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four luminaries.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four lusters.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four means of sustaining a favorable relationship.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four means of sustaining a favorable relationship.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four modes of perception.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four modes of practice.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four modes of practice.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four modes of practice.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four modes of practice.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four modes of practice.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four modes of practice.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four noble declarations.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four noble declarations.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four noble lineages, primal, of long standing, traditional, ancient, unadulterated and never before adulterated, which are not being adulterated and will not be adulterated, which are not repudiated by wise ascetics and brahmins.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four pairs of things extremely far apart.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four perils of offenses.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four perils to be expected for one who enters the water.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four perils.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four perils.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four perils.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four postures for lying down.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four proclamations of the foremost.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four purifications of offerings.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four radiances.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four right strivings.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four speakers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four splendors.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four streams of merit, streams of the wholesome, nutriments of happiness—heavenly, ripening in happiness, conducive to heaven—that lead to what is wished for, desired, and agreeable, to one’s welfare and happiness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four streams of merit, streams of the wholesome, nutriments of happiness—heavenly, ripening in happiness, conducive to heaven—that lead to what is wished for, desired, and agreeable, to one’s welfare and happiness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four strivings.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four strivings.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four things contrary to the good Dhamma.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four things that are born.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four things that are foremost.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four things that are foremost.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four things that the Tathāgata does not need to hide and three things about which he is irreproachable.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four things to be realized.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four things.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four trifles, easily gained and blameless.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four ways in which craving arises in a bhikkhu.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four ways of answering questions.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four ways of living together.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four ways of not taking a wrong course.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four ways of not taking a wrong course.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four ways of taking a wrong course.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four ways of taking a wrong course.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four wheels.
“Bhikkhus, there are these nine abodes of beings.
“Bhikkhus, there are these nine grounds for resentment.
“Bhikkhus, there are these nine kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these nine progressive cessations.
“Bhikkhus, there are these nine progressive dwellings.
“Bhikkhus, there are these nine ways of removing resentment.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven bases for ‘ten-less.’
What seven?
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven failures of a lay follower.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven fetters.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven fetters.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven fires.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven kinds of persons found existing in the world similar to those in water.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven kinds of persons who are worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven kinds of persons who are worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven kinds of persons who are worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven kinds of persons who are worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven kinds of persons who are worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven kinds of persons who are worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven kinds of wealth.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven kinds of wealth.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven principles for the settlement of disciplinary issues, for settling and pacifying any disciplinary issues that may arise.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven ruins for a lay follower.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven stations for consciousness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven things that are gratifying and advantageous to an enemy that come upon an angry man or woman.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven underlying tendencies.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven who are not of good character.
“Bhikkhus, there are these seven who are of good character.
“Bhikkhus, there are these six benefits in realizing the fruit of stream-entry.
“Bhikkhus, there are these six cases of incapability.
“Bhikkhus, there are these six cases of incapability.
“Bhikkhus, there are these six cases of incapability.
“Bhikkhus, there are these six cases of incapability.
“Bhikkhus, there are these six elements of escape.
“Bhikkhus, there are these six principles of cordiality that create affection and respect and conduce to cohesiveness, non-dispute, concord, and unity.
“Bhikkhus, there are these six principles of cordiality.
“Bhikkhus, there are these six roots of disputes.
“Bhikkhus, there are these six subjects of recollection.
“Bhikkhus, there are these six subjects of recollection.
“Bhikkhus, there are these six Tathāgata’s powers that the Tathāgata has, possessing which he claims the place of the chief bull, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets in motion the brahma wheel.
“Bhikkhus, there are these six unsurpassed things.
“Bhikkhus, there are these six unsurpassed things.
“Bhikkhus, there are these ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones abide in the past, present, or future.
“Bhikkhus, there are these ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones of the past, present, or future abide.
“Bhikkhus, there are these ten cases of wearing away.
“Bhikkhus, there are these ten dangers in entering the king’s inner palace.
“Bhikkhus, there are these ten fetters.
“Bhikkhus, there are these ten grounds for praise.
“Bhikkhus, there are these ten grounds for resentment.
“Bhikkhus, there are these ten kasiṇa bases.
“Bhikkhus, there are these ten kasiṇa bases.
“Bhikkhus, there are these ten qualities of one beyond training.
“Bhikkhus, there are these ten right courses.
“Bhikkhus, there are these ten Tathāgata’s powers that the Tathāgata has, possessing which he claims the place of the chief bull, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets in motion the brahma wheel.
“Bhikkhus, there are these ten things that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and rarely gained in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these ten things that one who has gone forth should often reflect upon.
“Bhikkhus, there are these ten things to be ejected.
“Bhikkhus, there are these ten ways of removing resentment.
“Bhikkhus, there are these ten wrong courses.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three accomplishments.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three ascetic tasks to be practiced by an ascetic.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three authorities.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three bases of meritorious activity.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three bases of talk.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three causes for the origination of kamma.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three causes for the origination of kamma.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three causes for the origination of kamma.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three causes for the origination of kamma.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three causes for the origination of kamma.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three characteristics that define the conditioned.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three characteristics that define the unconditioned.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three divine messengers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three failures.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three failures.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three failures.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of assemblies.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of assemblies.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of craving, and these three kinds of conceit, that are to be abandoned.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of existence that are to be abandoned; one is to train in the three trainings.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of growth.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of homage.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of patients found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of sagacity.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three preliminary tasks of a farmer.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three purities.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three purities.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three sectarian tenets which, when questioned, interrogated, and cross-examined by the wise, and taken to their conclusion, will eventuate in non-doing.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three that a head-anointed khattiya king should remember all his life.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three things prescribed by the wise, prescribed by good people.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three things that flourish when concealed, not when exposed.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three things that shine when exposed, not when concealed.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three things.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three things.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three things.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three things.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three things.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three things.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three things.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three things.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three things.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three things.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three trainings.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three trainings.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three unwholesome roots.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three urgent tasks of a farmer.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three ways of practice.
“Bhikkhus, there are these three ways of practice.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two afflictive qualities.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two blameless qualities.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two blameworthy qualities.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two bright qualities.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two conditions for the arising of greed.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two conditions for the arising of hatred.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two conditions for the arising of right view.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two conditions for the arising of wrong view.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two dark qualities.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two enlightened ones.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two entering upon the rains.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two faults.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of accumulation.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of assemblies.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of assemblies.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of assemblies.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of assemblies.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of assemblies.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of assemblies.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of assemblies.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of assemblies.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of assemblies.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of assemblies.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of assistance.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of compassion.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of enjoyment.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of expansion.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of fools.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of fools.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of fools.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of fools.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of fools.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of fools.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of gems.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of generosity.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of gifts to present to a guest.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of gifts.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of growth.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of happiness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of happiness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of happiness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of happiness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of happiness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of happiness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of happiness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of happiness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of happiness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of happiness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of happiness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of happiness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of happiness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of hospitality.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of illness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of munificence.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of offenses.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of offenses.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of offenses.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of offerings.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of quests.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of relinquishment.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of search.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of seeking.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of sharing.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of success.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of veneration.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of wealth.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of wise people.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of wise people.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of wise people.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of wise people.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of wise people.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of wise people.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two non-afflictive qualities.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two people arising in the world who are extraordinary humans.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two people who arise in the world for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of devas and humans.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two people whose passing away is mourned by many people.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two powers.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two qualities that have happiness as their outcome.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two qualities that have suffering as their outcome.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two qualities that result in happiness.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two qualities that result in suffering.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two qualities.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two qualities.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two qualities.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two qualities.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two strivings that are hard to achieve in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two that are not terrified by a bursting thunderbolt.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two that are not terrified by a bursting thunderbolt.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two that are not terrified by a bursting thunderbolt.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two things that cause torment.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two things that do not cause torment.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two things that lead to the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two things that lead to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two things.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two things.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two things.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two things.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two things.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two things.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two unwholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two ways of sustaining a favorable relationship.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two who are worthy of a stupa.
“Bhikkhus, there are these two wholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, there are things to be abandoned by body, not by speech.
“Bhikkhus, there are three kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Bhikkhus, there are three things that give no satiation by indulging in them.
“Bhikkhus, there are three who, if they do not abandon this, are bound for the plane of misery, bound for hell.
“Bhikkhus, there are two persons that cannot easily be repaid.
“Bhikkhus, there is a country in the south named Dhovana, where there is food, drink, victuals, comestibles, refreshments, tonics, dancing, singing, and music.
“Bhikkhus, there is no entering upon the unwholesome so long as faith is securely settled in wholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, there is one person who arises in the world for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
“Bhikkhus, there is one person who arises in the world for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
“Bhikkhus, there is one person who arises in the world for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, out of compassion for the world, for the good, welfare, and happiness of devas and human beings.
“Bhikkhus, there is one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.
“Bhikkhus, there is one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.
“Bhikkhus, these eight persons are worthy of gifts … an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, these eight persons are worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, these eight qualities lead to the decline of a bhikkhu who is a trainee.
“Bhikkhus, these eight qualities lead to the non-decline of a bhikkhu who is a trainee.
“Bhikkhus, these eight worldly conditions revolve around the world, and the world revolves around these eight worldly conditions.
“Bhikkhus, these eight worldly conditions revolve around the world, and the world revolves around these eight worldly conditions.
“Bhikkhus, these five benefits come to a clansman endowed with faith.
“Bhikkhus, these five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as their consummation.
“Bhikkhus, these five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as their consummation.
“Bhikkhus, these five qualities lead to the decline of a bhikkhu who is a trainee.
“Bhikkhus, these five qualities lead to the non-decline of a bhikkhu who is a trainee.
“Bhikkhus, these five sleep little at night but mostly keep awake.
“Bhikkhus, these five things lead to the decline of a bhikkhu who is a trainee.
“Bhikkhus, these five things lead to the decline of a temporarily liberated bhikkhu.
“Bhikkhus, these five things lead to the decline of a temporarily liberated bhikkhu.
“Bhikkhus, these five things lead to the non-decline of a bhikkhu who is a trainee.
“Bhikkhus, these five things lead to the non-decline of a temporarily liberated bhikkhu.
“Bhikkhus, these five things lead to the non-decline of a temporarily liberated bhikkhu.
“Bhikkhus, these five things, once arisen, are hard to dispel.
“Bhikkhus, these five things, when developed and cultivated, have liberation of mind as their fruit, liberation of mind as their fruit and benefit; they have liberation by wisdom as their fruit, liberation by wisdom as their fruit and benefit.
“Bhikkhus, these five things, when developed and cultivated, have liberation of mind as their fruit, liberation of mind as their fruit and benefit; they have liberation by wisdom as their fruit, liberation by wisdom as their fruit and benefit.
“Bhikkhus, these five things, when developed and cultivated, lead exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.
“Bhikkhus, these five things, when developed and cultivated, lead to the destruction of the taints.
“Bhikkhus, these four are adornments of an assembly.
“Bhikkhus, these four are blemishes of an assembly.
“Bhikkhus, these four are worthy of a stupa.
“Bhikkhus, these four inspiring places should be seen by a clansman endowed with faith.
“Bhikkhus, these four kinds of persons who are competent, disciplined, self-confident, learned, experts on the Dhamma, practicing in accordance with the Dhamma, adorn the Saṅgha.
“Bhikkhus, these four kinds of persons who are competent, disciplined, self-confident, learned, upholders of the Dhamma, practicing in accordance with the Dhamma, adorn the Saṅgha.”
“Bhikkhus, these four things are helpful to a human being.
“Bhikkhus, these four things lead to the growth of wisdom.
“Bhikkhus, these four times, rightly developed and coordinated, gradually culminate in the destruction of the taints.
“Bhikkhus, these nine perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as their consummation.
“Bhikkhus, these nine persons are worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, these seven perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as their consummation.
“Bhikkhus, these seven perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as their consummation.
“Bhikkhus, these seven persons are worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, these seven qualities lead to the decline of a bhikkhu who is a trainee.
“Bhikkhus, these seven qualities lead to the non-decline of a bhikkhu who is a trainee.
“Bhikkhus, these seven things lead to the decline of a lay follower.
“Bhikkhus, these seven things lead to the non-decline of a lay follower.
“Bhikkhus, these six qualities lead to the decline of a bhikkhu who is a trainee.
“Bhikkhus, these six qualities lead to the non-decline of a bhikkhu who is a trainee.
“Bhikkhus, these six things pertain to true knowledge.
“Bhikkhus, these ten perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as their consummation.
“Bhikkhus, these ten perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as their consummation.
“Bhikkhus, these ten persons are worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Bhikkhus, these ten things are of great fruit and benefit nowhere else but in the Fortunate One’s discipline.
“Bhikkhus, these ten things are purified and cleansed nowhere else but in the Fortunate One’s discipline.
“Bhikkhus, these ten things culminate in the removal of lust, hatred, and delusion nowhere else but in the Fortunate One’s discipline.
“Bhikkhus, these ten things lead exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna, nowhere else but in the Fortunate One’s discipline.
“Bhikkhus, these ten things subsist through the body.
“Bhikkhus, these ten things when unarisen arise nowhere else but in the Fortunate One’s discipline.
“Bhikkhus, these ten things, developed and cultivated, when unarisen arise nowhere else but in the Fortunate One’s discipline.
“Bhikkhus, these ten things, when developed and cultivated, are of great fruit and benefit nowhere else but in the Fortunate One’s discipline.
“Bhikkhus, these ten things, when developed and cultivated, culminate in the removal of lust, hatred, and delusion nowhere else but in the Fortunate One’s discipline.
“Bhikkhus, these ten things, when developed and cultivated, lead exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna, nowhere else but in the Fortunate One’s discipline.
“Bhikkhus, these ten things, when developed and cultivated, lead to the destruction of the taints.
“Bhikkhus, these three persons are helpful to another person.
“Bhikkhus, these three qualities lead to one’s own affliction, the affliction of others, and the affliction of both.
“Bhikkhus, these two bright qualities protect the world.
“Bhikkhus, these two desires are hard to abandon.
“Bhikkhus, these two do not misrepresent the Tathāgata.
“Bhikkhus, these two do not misrepresent the Tathāgata.
“Bhikkhus, these two kinds of persons are easy to satisfy.
“Bhikkhus, these two kinds of persons are hard to satisfy.
“Bhikkhus, these two kinds of persons are rare in the world.
“Bhikkhus, these two kinds of persons are rare in the world.
“Bhikkhus, these two misrepresent the Tathāgata.
“Bhikkhus, these two misrepresent the Tathāgata.
“Bhikkhus, these two misrepresent the Tathāgata.
“Bhikkhus, these two qualities lead to the decline of a bhikkhu who is a trainee.
“Bhikkhus, these two qualities lead to the non-decline of a bhikkhu who is a trainee.
“Bhikkhus, these two things pertain to true knowledge.
“Bhikkhus, they are heedless about the deathless who are heedless about mindfulness directed to the body.
“Bhikkhus, they do not partake of the deathless who do not partake of mindfulness directed to the body.
“Bhikkhus, they have fallen away from the deathless who have fallen away from mindfulness directed to the body.
“Bhikkhus, they have forgotten the deathless who have forgotten mindfulness directed to the body.
“Bhikkhus, they have neglected the deathless who have neglected mindfulness directed to the body.
“Bhikkhus, they have not cultivated the deathless who have not cultivated mindfulness directed to the body.
“Bhikkhus, they have not developed the deathless who have not developed mindfulness directed to the body.
“Bhikkhus, they have not directly known the deathless who have not directly known mindfulness directed to the body.
“Bhikkhus, they have not fully understood the deathless who have not fully understood mindfulness directed to the body.
“Bhikkhus, they have not pursued the deathless who have not pursued mindfulness directed to the body.
“Bhikkhus, they have not realized the deathless who have not realized mindfulness directed to the body.
“Bhikkhus, this assembly is free from prattle; this assembly is without prattle, pure, established in the core.
“Bhikkhus, this Dhamma offers a means of avoidance.
“Bhikkhus, this is certainly a type of gain, namely, being a forest-dweller, being one who lives on food acquired on alms round, being a wearer of rag robes, having just three robes, being a speaker on the Dhamma, being an upholder of the discipline, great learning, long-standing, having proper deportment, the acquisition of a retinue, having a large retinue, coming from a good family, being handsome, being an excellent speaker, having few desires, having good health.”
“Bhikkhus, this is how Nanda guards the doors of the sense faculties: If he needs to look to the east, he does so after he has fully considered the matter and clearly comprehends it thus: ‘When I look to the east, bad unwholesome states of longing and dejection will not flow in upon me.’
If he needs to look to the west … to the north … to the south … to look up … to look down … to survey the intermediate directions, he does so after he has fully considered the matter and clearly comprehends it thus: ‘When I look to the intermediate directions, bad unwholesome states of longing and dejection will not flow in upon me.’
That is how Nanda guards the doors of the sense faculties.
“Bhikkhus, this is how women are of virulent venom: for the most part they have strong lust.
“Bhikkhus, this is said: ‘A first point of ignorance, bhikkhus, is not seen such that before this there was no ignorance and afterward it came into being.’
Still, ignorance is seen to have a specific condition.
“Bhikkhus, this morning I dressed, took my bowl and robe, and entered Bārāṇasī for alms.
“Bhikkhus, this spiritual life is lived with the training as its benefit, with wisdom as its supervisor, with liberation as its core, and with mindfulness as its authority.
“Bhikkhus, this spiritual life is not lived for the sake of deceiving people and cajoling them; nor for the benefit of gain, honor, and praise; nor for the benefit of winning in debates; nor with the thought: ‘Let the people know me thus.’
But rather, this spiritual life is lived for the sake of restraint, abandoning, dispassion, and cessation.”
“Bhikkhus, those ascetics or brahmins who do not understand as it really is the gratification in the world as gratification, the danger as danger, and the escape from it as escape: these I do not consider to be ascetics among ascetics or brahmins among brahmins, and these venerable ones do not, by realizing it for themselves with direct knowledge, in this very life enter and dwell in the goal of asceticism or the goal of brahminhood.
“Bhikkhus, those beings who engage in good conduct by body, speech, and mind in the morning have a good morning.
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who are deceivers, stubborn, talkers, imposters, haughty, and unconcentrated are not bhikkhus of mine.
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who conform to the meaning and the Dhamma with well-acquired discourses whose phrasing is not semblance are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who exclude the meaning and the Dhamma by means of badly acquired discourses whose phrasing is a semblance are acting for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain an offense as an offense … … a light offense as a light offense … … a grave offense as a grave offense … … a coarse offense as a coarse offense … … an offense that is not coarse as not a coarse offense … … a remediable offense as a remediable offense … … an irremediable offense as an irremediable offense … … an offense with redress as an offense with redress … … an offense without redress as an offense without redress are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and humans.
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain Dhamma as Dhamma … … non-discipline as non-discipline … … discipline as discipline … … what has not been stated and uttered by the Tathāgata as not having been stated and uttered by him … … what has been stated and uttered by the Tathāgata as having been stated and uttered by him …  … what has not been practiced by the Tathāgata as not having been practiced by him … … what has been practiced by the Tathāgata as having been practiced by him … … what has not been prescribed by the Tathāgata as not having been prescribed by him … … what has been prescribed by the Tathāgata as having been prescribed by him are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain Dhamma as non-Dhamma … … non-discipline as discipline … … discipline as non-discipline … … what has not been stated and uttered by the Tathāgata as having been stated and uttered by him …  … what has been stated and uttered by the Tathāgata as not having been stated and uttered by him … … what has not been practiced by the Tathāgata as having been practiced by him … … what has been practiced by the Tathāgata as not having been practiced by him … … what has not been prescribed by the Tathāgata as having been prescribed by him … … what has been prescribed by the Tathāgata as not having been prescribed by him are acting for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain non-Dhamma as Dhamma are acting for the harm of many people, the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain non-Dhamma as non-Dhamma are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is an offense as no offense … … a light offense as a grave offense … … a grave offense as a light offense … … a coarse offense as not a coarse offense … … an offense that is not coarse as a coarse offense … … a remediable offense as an irremediable offense …  … an irremediable offense as a remediable offense … … an offense with redress as an offense without redress … … an offense without redress as an offense with redress are acting for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is no offense as no offense are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and humans.
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is not an offense as an offense are acting for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
“Bhikkhus, those families dwell with Brahmā where at home the mother and father are revered by their children.
“Bhikkhus, those families dwell with Brahmā where at home the mother and father are revered by their children.
“Bhikkhus, though he had such a long life span and continued on for such a long time, the teacher Sunetta was still not freed from birth, from old age and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish.
“Bhikkhus, though I assert and declare in such a way, some ascetics and brahmins untruthfully, baselessly, falsely, and wrongly misrepresent me,: ‘The ascetic Gotama does not proclaim the full understanding of sensual pleasures, the full understanding of forms, or the full understanding of feelings.’
But, bhikkhus, I do proclaim the full understanding of sensual pleasures, the full understanding of forms, and the full understanding of feelings.
“Bhikkhus, to whatever extent there are beings, whether footless or with two feet, four feet, or many feet, whether having form or formless, whether percipient or non-percipient, or neither percipient nor non-percipient, the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One is declared foremost among them.
“Bhikkhus, true knowledge—accompanied by a sense of moral shame and moral dread—is the forerunner in entering upon wholesome qualities.
“Bhikkhus, wanderers of other sects may ask you: ‘Friends, there are these three things.
“Bhikkhus, wanderers of other sects may ask you: ‘In what, friends, are all things rooted?
“Bhikkhus, wanderers of other sects may ask you: ‘In what, friends, are all things rooted?
“Bhikkhus, wanderers of other sects may ask you: ‘What, friends, is the proximate cause for the development of the aids to enlightenment?’
If you are asked thus, how would you answer them?”
“Bhikkhus, wanderers of other sects prescribe these three kinds of solitude.
“Bhikkhus, what discussion were you engaged in just now as you were sitting together here?
“Bhikkhus, what discussion were you engaged in just now as you were sitting together here?
“Bhikkhus, what do you think?
“Bhikkhus, what do you think?
“Bhikkhus, what do you think?
“Bhikkhus, what do you think?
“Bhikkhus, what do you think?
“Bhikkhus, what do you think?
“Bhikkhus, what is non-Dhamma and harmful should be understood, and what is the Dhamma and beneficial should also be understood.
“Bhikkhus, what is non-Dhamma and harmful should be understood, and what is the Dhamma and beneficial should also be understood.
“Bhikkhus, what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma should be understood, and what is harmful and what is beneficial should also be understood.
“Bhikkhus, what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma should be understood, and what is harmful and what is beneficial should also be understood.
“Bhikkhus, what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma should be understood, and what is harmful and what is beneficial should also be understood.
“Bhikkhus, what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma should be understood, and what is harmful and what is beneficial should also be understood.
“Bhikkhus, what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma should be understood, and what is harmful and what is beneficial should be understood.
“Bhikkhus, whatever families do not last long after attaining abundance of wealth, all do not last long for four reasons, or a particular one among them.
“Bhikkhus, whatever families last long after attaining abundance of wealth, all last long for four reasons, or a particular one among them.
“Bhikkhus, whatever noble ones in the past abided in noble abodes, all abided in these same ten noble abodes.
“Bhikkhus, whatever perils arise all arise on account of the fool, not on account of the wise person.
“Bhikkhus, whatever qualities are unwholesome, partake of the unwholesome, and pertain to the unwholesome, all have the mind as their forerunner.
“Bhikkhus, whatever qualities are wholesome, partake of the wholesome, and pertain to the wholesome, all have the mind as their forerunner.
“Bhikkhus, whatever the Tathāgata speaks, utters, or expounds in the interval between the night when he awakens to the unsurpassed perfect enlightenment and the night when he attains final nibbāna, all that is just so and not otherwise; therefore he is called the Tathāgata.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu considers six benefits, it is enough for him to establish the unlimited perception of impermanence in all conditioned phenomena.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu considers six benefits, it is enough for him to establish the unlimited perception of non-self in all phenomena.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu considers six benefits, it is enough for him to establish the unlimited perception of suffering in all conditioned phenomena.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu considers these six benefits, it is enough for him to establish the unlimited perception of impermanence in all conditioned phenomena.”
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu considers these six benefits, it is enough for him to establish the unlimited perception of non-self in all phenomena.”
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu considers these six benefits, it is enough for him to establish the unlimited perception of suffering in all conditioned phenomena.”
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu has abandoned bodily misconduct and developed bodily good conduct; when he has abandoned verbal misconduct and developed verbal good conduct; when he has abandoned mental misconduct and developed mental good conduct; when he has abandoned wrong view and developed right view, then he need not fear death in the future.”
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu has bad friends, bad companions, and bad comrades, when he follows, resorts to, and attends upon bad friends and follows their example, it is impossible that he will fulfill the duty of proper conduct.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu has good friends, good companions, and good comrades, when he follows, resorts to, and attends upon good friends and follows their example, it is possible that he will fulfill the duty of proper conduct.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is a maker of arguments, quarrels, disputes, contentious talk, and disciplinary issues in the Saṅgha, five dangers can be expected for him.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is devoted to the higher mind, from time to time he should give attention to three marks.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is intent on development, even though he does not form the wish: ‘May my mind be liberated from the taints by non-clinging!’ yet his mind is liberated from the taints by non-clinging.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is not intent on development, even though he forms the wish: ‘May my mind be liberated from the taints by non-clinging!’ yet his mind is not liberated from the taints by non-clinging.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is one who insults and disparages his fellow monks, a reviler of the noble ones, five dangers can be expected for him.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is one who insults and disparages his fellow monks, a reviler of the noble ones, it is impossible and inconceivable that he will not incur at least one of these eleven disasters.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is one who insults and disparages his fellow monks, a reviler of the noble ones, it is impossible and inconceivable that he will not incur at least one of these ten disasters.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu possesses eight qualities, lay followers, if they wish, may proclaim their confidence in him.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu possesses eight qualities, lay followers, if they wish, may proclaim their lack of confidence in him.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu possesses eight qualities, the Saṅgha, if it wishes, may enjoin an act of reconciliation on him.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu possesses eight qualities, the Saṅgha, if it wishes, may revoke an act of reconciliation.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu possesses five qualities, it is fitting for his fellow monks to hold a discussion with him.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu possesses five qualities, it is fitting for his fellow monks to live together with him.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu possesses six qualities, whether night or day comes, only deterioration in wholesome qualities, not growth, can be expected for him.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu possesses six qualities, whether night or day comes, only growth in wholesome qualities, not deterioration, is to be expected for him.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu possesses these four noble lineages, if he dwells in the east he vanquishes discontent, discontent does not vanquish him; if he dwells in the west he vanquishes discontent, discontent does not vanquish him; if he dwells in the north he vanquishes discontent, discontent does not vanquish him; if he dwells in the south he vanquishes discontent, discontent does not vanquish him.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu who possesses five factors resorts to and uses a lodging that possesses five factors, in no long time, with the destruction of the taints, he might realize for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwell in it.
“Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu’s mind is not excited by things that provoke lust because he has gotten rid of lust; when his mind is not full of hate toward things that provoke hatred because he has gotten rid of hatred; when his mind is not deluded by things that cause delusion because he has gotten rid of delusion; when his mind is not intoxicated by things that intoxicate because he has gotten rid of intoxication, then he does not cower, does not shake, does not tremble or become terrified, nor is he swayed by the words of ascetics.”
“Bhikkhus, when a bride is first brought into the home, whether at night or during the day, at first she sets up a keen sense of moral shame and moral dread toward her mother-in-law, her father-in-law, her husband, and even the slaves, workers, and servants.
“Bhikkhus, when a donor gives food, he gives the recipients four things.
“Bhikkhus, when a forest bhikkhu considers five future perils, it is enough for him to dwell heedful, ardent, and resolute for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
“Bhikkhus, when a forest bhikkhu considers five future perils, it is enough for him to dwell heedful, ardent, and resolute for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.
“Bhikkhus, when a forest-dwelling bull elephant is heading for its feeding ground, and other elephants—males, females, young ones, and babies—precede him and break the tops of the grass, the bull elephant is repelled, humiliated, and disgusted with this.
“Bhikkhus, when a good person is born in a family, it is for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people.
“Bhikkhus, when a good person is born in a family, it is for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people.
“Bhikkhus, when a king’s frontier fortress is well provided with seven appurtenances of a fortress and readily gains, without trouble or difficulty, four kinds of food, it can be called a king’s frontier fortress that cannot be assailed by external foes and enemies.
“Bhikkhus, when a lay follower possesses eight qualities, the Saṅgha, if it so wishes, may overturn the almsbowl on him.
“Bhikkhus, when a lay follower possesses eight qualities, the Saṅgha, if it so wishes, may turn the almsbowl upright on him.
“Bhikkhus, when any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī develops and cultivates five things, one of two fruits is to be expected: either final knowledge in this very life or, if there is a residue remaining, the state of non-returning.
“Bhikkhus, when he possessed seven qualities, Sāriputta realized for himself with direct knowledge the four analytical knowledges and acquired mastery over them.
“Bhikkhus, when he possesses seven qualities, a bhikkhu might soon realize for himself with direct knowledge the four analytical knowledges and acquire mastery over them.
“Bhikkhus, when it is new, cloth made of bark fabric is ugly, uncomfortable, and of little value.
“Bhikkhus, when it is observed complete in nine factors, the uposatha is of great fruit and benefit, very brilliant and pervasive.
“Bhikkhus, when kings are righteous, the royal vassals become righteous.
“Bhikkhus, when kings are strong, robbers are weak.
“Bhikkhus, when kings are unrighteous, the royal vassals become unrighteous.
“Bhikkhus, when one has followed the teachings by ear, recited them verbally, examined them with the mind, and penetrated them well by view, four benefits are to be expected.
“Bhikkhus, when one sees three advantages, it is enough to teach others the Dhamma.
“Bhikkhus, when one thing is developed and cultivated, ignorance is abandoned … true knowledge arises … the conceit ‘I am’ is abandoned … the underlying tendencies are uprooted … the fetters are abandoned.
“Bhikkhus, when one thing is developed and cultivated, penetration of numerous elements occurs … penetration of the diversity of elements occurs … analytical knowledge of numerous elements occurs.
“Bhikkhus, when one thing is developed and cultivated, the body becomes tranquil, the mind becomes tranquil, thought and examination subside, and all wholesome qualities that pertain to true knowledge reach fulfillment by development.
“Bhikkhus, when one thing is developed and cultivated, unarisen unwholesome qualities do not arise and arisen unwholesome qualities are abandoned.
“Bhikkhus, when one thing is developed and cultivated, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities increase and expand.
“Bhikkhus, when right view is assisted by five factors, it has liberation of mind as its fruit, liberation of mind as its fruit and benefit; it has liberation by wisdom as its fruit, liberation by wisdom as its fruit and benefit.
“Bhikkhus, when robbers are strong, kings are weak.
“Bhikkhus, when the elder bhikkhus left, why did you newly ordained ones sleep, snoring away until sunrise?
“Bhikkhus, when the foliage of the Tāvatiṃsa devas’ pāricchattaka coral tree has turned yellow, the Tāvatiṃsa devas are elated,: ‘The foliage of the pāricchattaka coral tree now has turned yellow.
“Bhikkhus, when the liberation of the mind by loving-kindness has been pursued, developed, and cultivated, made a vehicle and basis, carried out, consolidated, and properly undertaken, eight benefits are to be expected.
“Bhikkhus, when the liberation of the mind by loving-kindness has been pursued, developed, and cultivated, made a vehicle and basis, carried out, consolidated, and properly undertaken, eleven benefits are to be expected.
“Bhikkhus, when the mind of a bhikkhu is well consolidated by wisdom, he is able to assert: ‘Destroyed is birth, the spiritual life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming back to any state of being.’
“Bhikkhus, when there is a sense of moral shame and moral dread, for one possessing a sense of moral shame and moral dread, restraint of the sense faculties possesses its proximate cause.
“Bhikkhus, when there is mindfulness and clear comprehension, for one possessing mindfulness and clear comprehension, the sense of moral shame and moral dread possess their proximate cause.
“Bhikkhus, when there is no mindfulness and clear comprehension, for one deficient in mindfulness and clear comprehension, the sense of moral shame and moral dread lack their proximate cause.
“Bhikkhus, when there is no restraint of the sense faculties, for one deficient in restraint of the sense faculties, virtuous behavior lacks its proximate cause.
“Bhikkhus, when there is no sense of moral shame and moral dread, for one deficient in a sense of moral shame and moral dread, restraint of the sense faculties lacks its proximate cause.
“Bhikkhus, when there is restraint of the sense faculties, for one who exercises restraint over the sense faculties, virtuous behavior possesses its proximate cause.
“Bhikkhus, when there is the body, then because of bodily volition pleasure and pain arise internally; when there is speech, then because of verbal volition pleasure and pain arise internally; when there is the mind, then because of mental volition pleasure and pain arise internally—with ignorance itself as condition.
“Bhikkhus, when these seven factors of enlightenment are developed and cultivated, they fulfill the three true knowledges.
“Bhikkhus, when these three ascetic perceptions are developed and cultivated, they fulfill seven things.
“Bhikkhus, when three things are present, a clansman endowed with faith generates much merit.
“Bhikkhus, when virtuous renunciants dwell in dependence on a village or a town, the people there generate much merit in three ways.
“Bhikkhus, when wanderers of other sects speak thus, they should be answered in this way: ‘A question about one, a concise statement about one, an explanation of one.
“Bhikkhus, when, in regard to a disciplinary issue, the exchange of words between both parties, the insolence about views, and the resentment, bitterness, and exasperation are not settled internally, it can be expected that this disciplinary issue will lead to acrimony and animosity for a long time, and the bhikkhus will not dwell at ease.
“Bhikkhus, when, in regard to a disciplinary issue, the exchange of words between both parties, the insolence about views, and the resentment, bitterness, and exasperation are well settled internally, it can be expected that this disciplinary issue will not lead to acrimony and animosity for a long time, and the bhikkhus will dwell at ease.”
“Bhikkhus, whenever virtuous monastics come to a home, the people there generate much merit on five grounds.
“Bhikkhus, where is Sāriputta?
“Bhikkhus, wherever bhikkhus are dwelling in concord, harmoniously, without disputes, blending like milk and water, viewing each other with eyes of affection, I am at ease about going there, let alone about directing my attention there.
“Bhikkhus, wherever bhikkhus take to arguing and quarreling and fall into a dispute, stabbing each other with piercing words, I am uneasy even about directing my attention there, let alone about going there.
“Bhikkhus, whether Tathāgatas arise or not, there persists that law, that stableness of the Dhamma, that fixed course of the Dhamma: ‘All conditioned phenomena are impermanent.’
A Tathāgata awakens to this and breaks through to it, and then he explains it, teaches it, proclaims it, establishes it, discloses it, analyzes it, and elucidates it thus: ‘All conditioned phenomena are impermanent.’
“Bhikkhus, whether Tathāgatas arise or not, there persists that law, that stableness of the Dhamma, that fixed course of the Dhamma: ‘All conditioned phenomena are suffering.’
A Tathāgata awakens to this and breaks through to it, and then he explains it, teaches it, proclaims it, establishes it, discloses it, analyzes it, and elucidates it thus: ‘All conditioned phenomena are suffering.’
“Bhikkhus, whether Tathāgatas arise or not, there persists that law, that stableness of the Dhamma, that fixed course of the Dhamma: ‘All phenomena are non-self.’
A Tathāgata awakens to this and breaks through to it, and then he explains it, teaches it, proclaims it, establishes it, discloses it, analyzes it, and elucidates it thus: ‘All phenomena are non-self.’”
“Bhikkhus, while the Fortunate One or the Fortunate One’s discipline remains in the world, this is for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, out of compassion for the world, for the good, welfare, and happiness of devas and humans.
“Bhikkhus, while walking, a woman obsesses the mind of a man; while standing … while sitting … while lying down … while laughing … while speaking … while singing … while crying a woman obsesses the mind of a man.
“Bhikkhus, who except those who have seen the truth would think or believe: ‘This great earth and Sineru, the king of mountains, will burn up, be destroyed, and will no longer exist’?
“Bhikkhus, whoever arouses energy in a badly expounded Dhamma and discipline dwells in suffering.
“Bhikkhus, whoever arouses energy in a well-expounded Dhamma and discipline dwells in happiness.
“Bhikkhus, whoever is lazy in a badly expounded Dhamma and discipline dwells in happiness.
“Bhikkhus, whoever is lazy in a well-expounded Dhamma and discipline dwells in suffering.
“Bhikkhus, with a badly expounded Dhamma and discipline, moderation should be known by the giver, not by the recipient.
“Bhikkhus, with a well-expounded Dhamma and discipline, moderation should be known by the recipient, not by the giver.
“Bhikkhus, with the manifestation of a Tathāgata, an Arahant, a Perfectly Enlightened One, four astounding and amazing things become manifest.
“Bhikkhus, with the manifestation of a Tathāgata, an Arahant, a Perfectly Enlightened One, four astounding and amazing things become manifest.
“Bhikkhus, without having abandoned nine things, one is incapable of realizing arahantship.
“Bhikkhus, without having abandoned six things, one is incapable of contemplating the body in the body internally … externally … both internally and externally … contemplating feelings in feelings … internally … externally … both internally and externally … contemplating mind in mind … internally … externally … both internally and externally … contemplating phenomena in phenomena … internally … externally … both internally and externally.
“Bhikkhus, without having abandoned six things, one is incapable of contemplating the body in the body.
“Bhikkhus, without having abandoned six things, one is incapable of entering and dwelling in the first jhāna.
“Bhikkhus, without having abandoned six things, one is incapable of entering and dwelling in the first jhāna.
“Bhikkhus, without having abandoned six things, one is incapable of realizing accomplishment in view.
“Bhikkhus, without having abandoned six things, one is incapable of realizing any superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
“Bhikkhus, without having abandoned six things, one is incapable of realizing arahantship.
“Bhikkhus, without having abandoned six things, one is incapable of realizing arahantship.
“Bhikkhus, without having abandoned six things, one is incapable of realizing the fruit of non-returning.
“Bhikkhus, without having abandoned these five obstructions, hindrances, encumbrances of the mind, states that weaken wisdom, it is impossible that a bhikkhu, with his powerless and feeble wisdom, might know his own good, the good of others, or the good of both, or realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
“Bhikkhus, without having abandoned these five things one is incapable of entering and dwelling in the first jhāna.
“Bhikkhus, without having abandoned these five things one is incapable of entering and dwelling in the first jhāna.
“Bhikkhus, without having abandoned these five things one is incapable of entering and dwelling in the second jhāna … the third jhāna … the fourth jhāna … one is incapable of realizing the fruit of stream-entry … the fruit of once-returning … the fruit of non-returning … the fruit of arahantship.
“Bhikkhus, without having abandoned these five things one is incapable of entering and dwelling in the second jhāna … the third jhāna … the fourth jhāna … one is incapable of realizing the fruit of stream-entry … the fruit of once-returning … the fruit of non-returning … the fruit of arahantship.
“Bhikkhus, without having abandoned these ten things, one is incapable of realizing arahantship.
“Bhikkhus, women die unsatisfied and discontent in two things.
“Bhikkhus, you should remember Hatthaka of Āḷavī as one who possesses seven astounding and amazing qualities.
“Bhikkhus, you should remember the householder Ugga of Hatthigāma as one who possesses eight astounding and amazing qualities.”
This is what the Blessed One said.
“Bhikkhus, you should remember the householder Ugga of Vesālī as one who possesses eight astounding and amazing qualities.”
This is what the Blessed One said.
“Bhikkhus, ‘Ascetic’ is a designation for the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
“Bhikkhus, ‘only here is there an ascetic, a second ascetic, a third ascetic, and a fourth ascetic.
“Bhikkhus, ‘only here is there an ascetic, a second ascetic, a third ascetic, and a fourth ascetic.
“Bhikkhus, ‘peril’ is a designation for sensual pleasures.
“Bhikkhus, ‘peril’ is a designation for sensual pleasures.
“Birth is suffering; old age is suffering; illness is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish are suffering; not to get what one wants is suffering; in brief, the five aggregates subject to clinging are suffering.
“Bojjhā, observed complete in eight factors, the uposatha is of great fruit and benefit, extraordinarily brilliant and pervasive….” 
“Both Pātimokkhas have been well transmitted to him in detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well determined in terms of the rules and their detailed explication.
“Brahmin, a master of the threefold knowledge in the Noble One’s discipline is quite different from a brahmin who is a master of the threefold knowledge as the brahmins describe him.”
“Brahmin, a master of the threefold knowledge in the Noble One’s discipline is quite different from the one that the brahmins describe.”
“Brahmin, I assert a doctrine of deeds and a doctrine of nondoing.”
“Brahmin, I have abandoned those taints because of which I might have become a deva; I have cut them off at the root, made them like palm stumps, obliterated them so that they are no longer subject to future arising.
“Brahmin, I have never seen or heard of anyone holding such a thesis and view as this.
“Brahmin, I have never seen or heard of anyone holding such a thesis and view.
“Brahmin, I posit even on the wrong occasion.
“Brahmin, in the world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, in this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, I do not see one to whom I should pay homage, or for whom I should stand up, or whom I should offer a seat.
“Brahmin, one excited by lust, overcome by lust, with mind obsessed by it, intends for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, and for the affliction of both, and he experiences mental suffering and dejection.
“Brahmin, one excited by lust, overcome by lust, with mind obsessed by it, intends for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he experiences mental suffering and dejection.
“Brahmin, one excited by lust, overcome by lust, with mind obsessed by it, intends for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he experiences mental suffering and dejection.
“Brahmin, one kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial post, even before the sacrifice, arouses such a thought as this: ‘Let so many bulls be slain in sacrifice!
“Brahmin, one kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial post, even before the sacrifice, raises these three knives that are unwholesome and have suffering as their outcome and result.
“Brahmin, one kindling the sacrificial fire and raising the sacrificial post, even before the sacrifice, raises three knives that are unwholesome and have suffering as their outcome and result.
“Brahmin, righteous conduct, conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, is threefold by way of the body, fourfold by way of speech, and threefold by way of the mind.
“Brahmin, the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One, knowing and seeing, has proclaimed the stage of an elder and the stage of a youth.
“Brahmin, the destruction of life is the near shore, abstention from the destruction of life the far shore.
“Brahmin, there are those subject to death that are frightened and terrified of death, but there are also those subject to death that are not frightened and terrified of death.
“Brahmin, those high and luxurious kinds of bedding are rarely obtained by those who have gone forth, and if they are obtained, they are not allowed.
“Brahmin, unrighteous conduct, conduct contrary to the Dhamma, is threefold by way of the body, fourfold by way of speech, and threefold by way of the mind.
“Brahmin, when one dwells with a mind obsessed and oppressed by sensual lust, and one does not understand as it really is the escape from arisen sensual lust, on that occasion one does not know and see as it really is one’s own good, the good of others, and the good of both.
“Brahmin, when one dwells with a mind that is not obsessed and oppressed by sensual lust, and one understands as it really is the escape from arisen sensual lust, on that occasion one knows and sees as it really is one’s own good, the good of others, and the good of both.
“Brahmin, wrong view is the near shore, right view the far shore.
“Brahmā Sanaṃkumāra, too, spoke this verse:
“Breathing in long, he knows: ‘I breathe in long’; or breathing out long, he knows: ‘I breathe out long.’
Breathing in short, he knows: ‘I breathe in short’; or breathing out short, he knows: ‘I breathe out short.’
He trains thus: ‘Experiencing the whole body, I will breathe in’; he trains thus: ‘Experiencing the whole body, I will breathe out.’
He trains thus: ‘Tranquilizing the bodily activity, I will breathe in’; he trains thus: ‘Tranquilizing the bodily activity, I will breathe out.’
“Briefly, Moggallāna, it is in this way that a bhikkhu is best among devas and humans: one who has reached the ultimate conclusion, won ultimate security from bondage, lived the ultimate spiritual life, and gained the ultimate consummation.”
“But a bhikkhu is not a maker of disciplinary issues and he speaks in praise of the settlement of disciplinary issues.
“But a bhikkhu might say: ‘In such and such a residence one elder bhikkhu is dwelling who is learned, an heir to the heritage, an expert on the Dhamma, an expert on the discipline, an expert on the outlines.
“But a bhikkhu might say: ‘In the presence of the Blessed One I heard this; in his presence I learned this: “This is the Dhamma; this is the discipline; this is the Teacher’s teaching!”’ That bhikkhu’s statement should neither be approved nor rejected.
“But among knowledges, Ānanda, this one is unsurpassed, namely, the knowledge of these things and those things as they really are.
“But as the goldsmith or his apprentice continues to fan, melt, and smelt the gold, a time comes when the gold is settled and the dross has been entirely removed, so that the gold becomes malleable, wieldy, and luminous, pliant and properly fit for work.
“But at that time, bhikkhus, the human life span was, years, and girls were marriageable at the age of five hundred.
“But even though someone is young, a youth with black hair, endowed with the blessing of youth, in the prime of life, if he speaks at a proper time, speaks what is truthful, speaks what is beneficial, speaks on the Dhamma and the discipline, and if at a proper time he speaks words that are worth recording, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial, then he is reckoned as a wise elder.
“But how do the brahmins observe the paccorohaṇī festival?”
“But how rich is Migāra of Rohaṇa?
“But how, Bhante, could he obtain such a state of concentration?”
“But how, Bhante, could he obtain such a state of concentration?”
“But how, Bhante, could he obtain such a state of concentration?”
“But how, Bhante, could he obtain such a state of concentration?”
“But how, Bhante, could he obtain such a state of concentration?” 
“But how, Bhante, could he obtain such a state of concentration?” 
“But how, Bhante, does an ascetic follow the duty of an ascetic?”
“But how, Bhante, does purification come about in the Noble One’s discipline?
“But how, bhikkhu, do you develop mindfulness of death?”
“But how, bhikkhu, do you develop mindfulness of death?”
“But how, bhikkhu, do you develop mindfulness of death?”
“But how, bhikkhu, do you develop mindfulness of death?”
“But how, bhikkhu, do you develop mindfulness of death?”
“But how, bhikkhu, do you develop mindfulness of death?”
“But how, bhikkhu, do you develop mindfulness of death?”
“But how, bhikkhu, do you develop mindfulness of death?”
“But how, bhikkhu, do you develop mindfulness of death?”
“But how, bhikkhu, do you develop mindfulness of death?”
“But how, bhikkhu, do you develop mindfulness of death?”
“But how, bhikkhu, do you develop mindfulness of death?”
“But how, bhikkhu, do you develop mindfulness of death?”
“But how, bhikkhu, do you develop mindfulness of death?”
“But how, brahmin, do the brahmins describe a brahmin who is a master of the threefold knowledge?”
“But how, brahmin, do the brahmins describe a brahmin who is a master of the threefold knowledge?”
“But how, brahmin, do the brahmins observe the paccorohaṇī festival?”
“But how, friend Sāriputta, could he obtain such a state of concentration?”
“But how, friend Sāriputta, could he obtain such a state of concentration?”
“But how, Master Gotama, is the paccorohaṇī festival observed in the Noble One’s discipline?
“But how, Master Gotama, is the paccorohaṇī festival observed in the Noble One’s discipline?
“But I praise a non-violent sacrifice at which cattle, goats, rams, chickens, and pigs are not slain, where various creatures are not slaughtered, that is, a regular giving, a sacrifice offered by family custom.
“But I will teach, bhikkhus, a noble emetic that always succeeds and never fails.
“But I will teach, bhikkhus, a noble purgative that always succeeds and never fails.
“But I will teach, bhikkhus, a noble washing that leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.
“But if one should understand: ‘This goodcannot be obtained by me or anyone else,’one should accept the situation without sorrowing,thinking: ‘The kamma is strong; what can I do now?’” 
“But if there are many people who behave properly toward their mother and father … and do meritorious deeds, the four great kings report this to the Tāvatiṃsa devas when they meet and are sitting together in the Sudhamma council hall: ‘Revered sirs, there are many people who behave properly toward their mother and father, behave properly toward ascetics and brahmins, honor the elders of the family, observe the uposatha, keep the extra observance days, and do meritorious deeds.’
Then, because of this, the Tāvatiṃsa devas become elated,: ‘Indeed, the celestial company will flourish and the company of asuras will decline!’”
“But if this person is asked a question and he does not answer evasively, divert the discussion to an irrelevant subject, or display anger, hatred, and bitterness, in such a case this person is fit to talk.
“But if this person is asked a question and he does not overwhelm, or crush him, or ridicule him, or seize upon a slight error, in such a case this person is fit to talk.
“But if this person is asked a question and he stands firm in regard to his position and the opposing position; if he stands firm in his stratagem; if he stands firm in an assertion about what is known; if he stands firm in the procedure, in such a case this person is fit to talk.
“But if this person is asked a question that should be answered categorically and he answers it categorically; a question that should be answered after making a distinction and he answers it after making a distinction; a question that should be answered with a counter-question and he answers it with a counter-question; a question that should be set aside and he sets it aside, in such a case this person is fit to talk.
“But if you cannot abandon your drowsiness in such a way, you should attend to the perception of light; you should undertake the perception of day thus: ‘As by day, so at night; as at night, so by day.’
Thus, with a mind that is open and uncovered, you should develop a mind imbued with luminosity.
“But if you cannot abandon your drowsiness in such a way, you should get up from your seat, rub your eyes with water, survey all the quarters, and look up at the constellations and stars.
“But if you cannot abandon your drowsiness in such a way, you should lie down on the right side in the lion’s posture, with one foot overlapping the other, mindful and clearly comprehending, after noting in your mind the idea of rising.
“But if you cannot abandon your drowsiness in such a way, you should ponder, examine, and mentally inspect the Dhamma as you have heard it and learned it.
“But if you cannot abandon your drowsiness in such a way, you should pull both ears and rub your limbs with your hands.
“But if you cannot abandon your drowsiness in such a way, you should recite in detail the Dhamma as you have heard it and learned it.
“But if you cannot abandon your drowsiness in such a way, you should undertake walking back and forth, perceiving what is behind you and what is in front, with your sense faculties drawn in and your mind collected.
“But if, by such self-examination, a bhikkhu knows: ‘I am often without longing, without ill will, free from dullness and drowsiness, calm, free from doubt, without anger, undefiled in mind, unagitated in body, energetic, and concentrated,’ he should base himself on those same wholesome qualities and make a further effort to reach the destruction of the taints.”
“But if, by such self-examination, a bhikkhu sees all these wholesome qualities present in himself, he should base himself on those same wholesome qualities and make a further effort to reach the destruction of the taints.”
“But if, by such self-examination, a bhikkhu sees some wholesome qualities present in himself but not others, he should base himself on those wholesome qualities that he sees in himself and put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to obtain those wholesome qualities that he does not see in himself.
“But if, by such self-examination, he knows: ‘I gain both internal serenity of mind and the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena,’ he should base himself on those same wholesome qualities and make a further effort to reach the destruction of the taints.
“But if, by such self-examination, he knows: ‘I gain neither internal serenity of mind nor the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena,’ he should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to obtain both those wholesome qualities.
“But if, by such self-examination, he knows: ‘I gain the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena but not internal serenity of mind,’ he should base himself on the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena and make an effort to gain internal serenity of mind.
“But if, upon review, the bhikkhu knows thus: ‘I do not have any bad unwholesome qualities that have not been abandoned, which might become an obstacle for me if I were to die tonight,’ then he should dwell in that same rapture and joy, training day and night in wholesome qualities.
“But if, upon review, the bhikkhu knows: ‘I do not have any bad unwholesome qualities that have not been abandoned, which might become an obstacle for me if I were to die tonight,’ then he should dwell in that same rapture and joy, training day and night in wholesome qualities.
“But if, upon review, the bhikkhu knows: ‘I do not have any bad unwholesome qualities that I have not yet abandoned, which might become an obstacle for me if I were to die this day,’ then he should dwell in that same rapture and joy, training day and night in wholesome qualities.
“But if, upon review, the bhikkhu knows: ‘I do not have any bad unwholesome qualities that I have not yet abandoned, which might become an obstacle for me if I were to die this day,’ then he should dwell in that same rapture and joy, training day and night in wholesome qualities.
“But in another case, by dwelling together with another person, one comes to know him thus: ‘For a long time this venerable one’s conduct has been unbroken, flawless, unblemished, and unblotched, and he consistently observes and follows virtuous behavior.
“But in another case, someone is afflicted with the loss of relatives, wealth, or health, but he does reflect thus: ‘Human life in the world is such that the eight worldly conditions revolve around the world, and the world revolves around these eight worldly conditions, namely, gain and loss, disrepute and fame, blame and praise, and pleasure and pain.’
Thus when afflicted with the loss of relatives, wealth, or health, he does not sorrow, languish, and lament; he does not weep beating his breast and become confused.
“But in another case, when conversing with someone, one comes to know: ‘Judging from the way this venerable one initiates, formulates, and poses a question, he is wise, not unwise.
“But in another case, when dealing with a person, one comes to know him thus: ‘In the same way as he deals with one, he deals with two, three, or many.
“But in what way does Master Gotama assert a doctrine of deeds and a doctrine of non-doing?”
“But in what way, Bhante, can the Tathāgata convey his voice as far as he wants in a thousand-to-the-third-power great world system?”
“But in what way, Master Gotama, is one a master of the threefold knowledge in the Noble One’s discipline?
“But in what way, Master Gotama, is one a master of the threefold knowledge in the Noble One’s discipline?
“But is there a path, friend, is there a way to the abandoning of lust, hatred, and delusion?”
“But nowadays, bhikkhus, one could rightly say: ‘Short is the life of human beings, limited and fleeting; it has much suffering, much misery.
“But of what was the Venerable Sāriputta percipient on that occasion?”
“But some person here has abandoned the lower fetters.
“But suppose a man would drop a lump of salt into the river Ganges.
“But the bhikkhu who develops mindfulness of death thus: ‘May I live just the length of time it takes to chew and swallow a single mouthful of food so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
“But the bhikkhu who develops mindfulness of death thus: ‘May I live just the length of time it takes to chew and swallow a single mouthful of food so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
“But the bhikkhus who are meditators praise only bhikkhus who are also meditators, not those who are Dhamma specialists.
“But the instructed noble disciple understands remorse, its origin, its cessation, and the way leading to its cessation.
“But the instructed noble disciple understands views, their origin, their cessation, and the way leading to their cessation.
“But the meditating bhikkhus disparage the bhikkhus who are Dhamma specialists, saying: ‘They are restless, puffed up, vain, talkative, rambling in their talk, muddle-minded, lacking clear comprehension, unconcentrated, with wandering minds, with loose sense faculties,: “We are Dhamma specialists, we are Dhamma specialists!” Why are they Dhamma specialists?
“But the types of wives here calledmother, sister, friend, and slave,firm in virtue, long restrained,with the body’s breakup go to heaven.
“But those ascetics and brahmins who understand as it really is the gratification in the world as gratification, the danger as danger, and the escape from it as escape: these I consider to be ascetics among ascetics and brahmins among brahmins, and these venerable ones, by realizing it for themselves with direct knowledge, in this very life enter and dwell in the goal of asceticism and the goal of brahminhood.” 
“But those devas of Brahmā’s company who are not content with a brahmā’s life span, a brahmā’s beauty, a brahmā’s happiness, a brahmā’s glory, a brahmā’s authority, and who understand as it really is an escape higher than this, know one who has a residue remaining as ‘one with a residue remaining’ and one who has no residue remaining as ‘one without residue remaining.’
“But what is the danger that you have seen on account of which you prescribe the abandoning of lust, hatred, and delusion?”
“But what is the path, what is the way to the abandoning of lust, hatred, and delusion?”
“But what, Master Gotama, is a breach, flaw, blemish, and blotch of the celibate life?”
“But when a bhikkhu is dwelling in solitude, living independently, a desire arises in him for gain.
“But when a bhikkhu is dwelling in solitude, living independently, a desire arises in him for gain.
“But when a bhikkhu is dwelling in solitude, living independently, a desire arises in him for gain.
“But when a bhikkhu is dwelling in solitude, living independently, a desire arises in him for gain.
“But when a bhikkhu is dwelling in solitude, living independently, a desire arises in him for gain.
“But when a bhikkhu is dwelling in solitude, living independently, a desire arises in him for gain.
“But when a bhikkhu is dwelling in solitude, living independently, a desire arises in him for gain.
“But when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith, virtuous, and learned; a speaker on the Dhamma; one who frequents assemblies; one who confidently teaches the Dhamma to an assembly; an expert on the discipline; a forest-dweller who resorts to remote lodgings; one who dwells having contacted with the body those peaceful emancipations, transcending forms, that are formless; and one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it, then he is complete with respect to that factor.
“But when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith, virtuous, and learned; a speaker on the Dhamma; one who frequents assemblies; one who confidently teaches the Dhamma to an assembly; an expert on the discipline; a forest-dweller who resorts to remote lodgings; one who gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life; and one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it, then he is complete with respect to that factor.
“But when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith, virtuous, and learned; a speaker on the Dhamma; one who frequents assemblies; one who confidently teaches the Dhamma to an assembly; an expert on the discipline; one who recollects his manifold past abodes … with their aspects and details; one who, with the divine eye … understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma; and one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it, then he is complete with respect to that factor.
“But when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith, virtuous, and learned; a speaker on the Dhamma; one who frequents assemblies; one who confidently teaches the Dhamma to an assembly; one who contacts with the body and dwells in those peaceful emancipations, transcending forms, that are formless; and he is also one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it, then he is complete with respect to that factor.
“But when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith, virtuous, and learned; a speaker on the Dhamma; one who frequents assemblies; one who confidently teaches the Dhamma to an assembly; one who gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life; and he is also one who, with the destruction of the taints, has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it, then he is complete with respect to that factor.
“But when Master Gotama, through direct knowledge, teaches the Dhamma to his disciples for the purification of beings, for the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, for the passing away of pain and dejection, for the achievement of the method, for the realization of nibbāna, will the entire world be thereby emancipated, or half the world, or a third of the world?”
“But when night has receded and day has approached, a bhikkhu reflects thus: ‘I could die on account of many causes.
“But when night has receded and day has approached, a bhikkhu reflects thus: ‘I could die on account of many causes.
“But where are those bhikkhus presently dwelling?” 
“But who, Nandamātā, told you that the Saṅgha of bhikkhus would be approaching?”
“But why is it, Master Gotama, that some beings here with the breakup of the body, after death, are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world?”
“But why, Mahānāma, do you say: ‘They will be Vajjis!
“But … if, when you check for them in the discourses and seek them in the discipline, they are included among the discourses and are to be seen in the discipline, you should draw the conclusion: ‘Surely, this is the word of the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
“But … if, when you check for them in the discourses and seek them in the discipline, they are included among the discourses and are to be seen in the discipline, you should draw the conclusion: ‘Surely, this is the word of the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
“But, Bhaddiya, though I speak thus and declare in such a way, some ascetics and brahmins untruthfully, baselessly, falsely, and wrongly misrepresent me when they say: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a magician who knows a converting magic by which he converts the disciples of teachers of other sects.’” 
“But, Bhante, how many astounding and amazing qualities do the bhikkhus see in this Dhamma and discipline because of which they take delight in it?”
“But, Bhante, if a person to be tamed by you won’t submit to discipline by any of these methods, how does the Blessed One deal with him?”
“But, Bhante, if both attain arahantship, would there still be some distinction or difference between them after they have attained arahantship?”
“But, Bhante, if these two pass away from there and again become human beings, would there still be some distinction or difference between them?”
“But, Bhante, if these two should go forth from the household life into homelessness, would there still be some distinction or difference between them?”
“But, Bhante, it isn’t allowable for the Blessed One to destroy life.
“But, Bhante, might there be another way by which a bhikkhu can dwell at ease while living in the Saṅgha?”
“But, Bhante, might there be another way by which a bhikkhu can dwell at ease while living in the Saṅgha?”
“But, Bhante, might there be another way by which a bhikkhu can dwell at ease while living in the Saṅgha?”
“But, Bhante, might there be another way by which a bhikkhu can dwell at ease while living in the Saṅgha?”
“But, Bhante, the winter nights are cold.
“But, Bhante, there are clansmen who have gone forth from the household life into homelessness out of faith, who are not crafty, hypocritical, deceptive, restless, puffed up, vain, talkative, and rambling in their talk; who keep guard over the doors of the senses; who are moderate in eating, intent on wakefulness, intent upon the ascetic life, keenly respectful of the training; who are not luxurious and lax; who discard backsliding and take the lead in solitude; who are energetic, resolute, mindful, clearly comprehending, concentrated, with one-pointed minds, wise, intelligent.
“But, Bhante, was this your own discernment, or was it the word of the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One?”
“But, Bhante, what is divine merit?”
“But, Bhante, what is that evil lasting for an eon?”
“But, Bhante, what is that fragrance?”
“But, Bhante, when one reconciles a divided Saṅgha, what does one generate?”
“But, bhikkhus, having abandoned these five obstructions, hindrances, encumbrances of the mind, states that weaken wisdom, it is possible that a bhikkhu, with his powerful wisdom, might know his own good, the good of others, and the good of both, and realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
“But, bhikkhus, if a sensual thought, a thought of ill will, or a thought of harming arises in a bhikkhu while walking, and he does not tolerate it but abandons it, dispels it, terminates it, and obliterates it, then that bhikkhu is said to be ardent and to dread wrongdoing; he is constantly and continuously energetic and resolute while walking.
“But, bhikkhus, if, when one’s parents lack faith, one encourages, settles, and establishes them in faith; if, when one’s parents are immoral, one encourages, settles, and establishes them in virtuous behavior; if, when one’s parents are miserly, one encourages, settles, and establishes them in generosity; if, when one’s parents are unwise, one encourages, settles, and establishes them in wisdom: in such a way, one has done enough for one’s parents, repaid them, and done more than enough for them.”
“But, bhikkhus, one who possesses four things is said to be secure in this Dhamma and discipline.
“But, bhikkhus, there comes a time when his mind becomes internally steady, composed, unified, and concentrated.
“But, bhikkhus, this Dhamma taught by me is unrefuted, undefiled, irreproachable, and uncensured by wise ascetics and brahmins.
“But, bhikkhus, when an instructed noble disciple meets with gain, he reflects thus: ‘This gain that I have met is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change.’
He thus understands it as it really is.
“But, brahmin, there are three kinds of high and luxurious beds that at present I gain at will, without trouble or difficulty.
“But, brahmin, this wood fire should at certain times be ignited, at certain times be looked upon with equanimity, at certain times be extinguished, and at certain times be put aside.”
“But, friend, of what is one percipient when one does not experience that base?”
“But, friend, what is it that one has not known, seen, attained, realized, and penetrated?”
“But, great king, what reasons do you have for showing such supreme honor to this body and displaying such an offering of loving-kindness?”
“But, Kesi, if a horse to be tamed by you won’t submit to discipline by any of these methods, how do you deal with him?”
“But, Master Gotama, is there even one other bhikkhu apart from Master Gotama who can perform these three wonders?”
“But, Master Gotama, what is a right occasion and what is a wrong occasion?”
“But, Master Gotama, what is the aim of ascetics?
“But, Master Gotama, what is the aim of brahmins?
“But, Master Gotama, what is the aim of householders?
“But, Master Gotama, what is the aim of thieves?
“But, Master Gotama, what is the aim of women?
“But, Master Gotama, what is the celestial high and luxurious bed that at present you gain at will, without trouble or difficulty?”
“But, Master Gotama, what is the divine high and luxurious bed that at present you gain at will, without trouble or difficulty?”
“But, Master Gotama, what is the noble high and luxurious bed that at present you gain at will, without trouble or difficulty?”
“But, Master Gotama, when someone performs this wonder by which he instructs thus: ‘Think in this way and not in that way!
“But, Master Gotama, who partakes of the gift if neither that deceased relative or family member nor any others have been reborn in that place?”
“But, Master Gotama, who partakes of the gift if that deceased relative or family member has not been reborn in that place?”
“But, Moggallāna, didn’t the brahmā Tissa teach you about the seventh person, the one who dwells in the markless?”
“But, Moggallāna, have you encompassed his mind with your mind and understood of the young deva Kakudha: ‘Whatever the young deva Kakudha says is all true and not otherwise’?”
“But, Moggallāna, I am one whose behavior is purified and I claim: ‘I am one whose behavior is purified.
“But, Pahārāda, how many astounding and amazing qualities do the asuras see in the great ocean because of which they take delight in it?”
“But, Puṇṇiya, when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith,  approaches, attends, asks questions, and listens to the Dhamma with eager ears; and having heard the Dhamma, he retains it in mind, examines the meaning of the teachings he has retained in mind, and understands the meaning and the Dhamma and then practices in accordance with the Dhamma, the Tathāgata is disposed to teach the Dhamma.
“But, Puṇṇiya, when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith, approaches, attends on, asks questions, and listens to the Dhamma with eager ears; and having heard the Dhamma, he retains it in mind, examines the meaning of the teachings he has retained in mind, and understands the meaning and the Dhamma and then practices in accordance with the Dhamma; and he is a good speaker with a good delivery, one gifted with speech that is polished, clear, articulate, expressive of the meaning; and he instructs, encourages, inspires, and gladdens his fellow monks, the Tathāgata is disposed to teach the Dhamma.
“But, Soṇa, when its strings were neither too tight nor too loose but adjusted to a balanced pitch, was your lute well tuned and easy to play?”
“But, Sāriputta, someone does not give a gift with expectations, with a bound mind, looking for rewards; he does not give a gift,: ‘Having passed away, I will make use of this.’
Rather, he gives a gift,: ‘Giving is good.’“But, Sāḷha, those ascetics and brahmins who do not advocate austerity and disgust, who do not regard austerity and disgust as the essence, and who do not adhere to austerity and disgust are capable of crossing the flood.
“But, Vaccha, I say that one acquires merit even if one throws away dishwashing water in a refuse dump or cesspit with the thought: ‘May the living beings here sustain themselves with this!’ How much more, then, when one gives to human beings!
“But, Ānanda, has the whole world authorized Pūraṇa Kassapa to describe these six classes?”
“But, Ānanda, when has Anuruddha ever concerned himself with disciplinary issues in the midst of the Saṅgha?
“By completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, one enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling.
“By completely surmounting the base of nothingness, one enters and dwells in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
“By completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness, ‘there is nothing,’ one enters and dwells in the base of nothingness.
“By completely surmounting the base of the infinity of space, ‘consciousness is infinite,’ one enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of consciousness.
“By conversation their wisdom can be known, and this only after a long time, not casually; by one who is attentive, not by one who is inattentive; and by one who is wise, not by one who is unwise.
“By dealing their integrity can be known, and this only after a long time, not casually; by one who is attentive, not by one who is inattentive; and by one who is wise, not by one who is unwise.
“By dwelling together their virtuous behavior can be known, and this only after a long time, not casually; by one who is attentive, not by one who is inattentive; and by one who is wise, not by one who is unwise.
“By what are they headed?”
“Byagghapajjas, there are these four factors of striving for purity that the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One, knowing and seeing, has rightly expounded for the purification of beings, for the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, for the passing away of pain and dejection, for the achievement of the method, for the realization of nibbāna.
“Bāhuna, it is because the Tathāgata is released, detached, and emancipated from ten things that he dwells with a mind free from boundaries.
“Can you train in the three trainings, bhikkhu: the training in the higher virtuous behavior, the training in the higher mind, and the training in the higher wisdom?”
“Certainly not, Bhante.”
“Certainly not, friend.
“Certainly not, friend.
“Certainly not, friend.
“Certainly not, friend.
“Certainly not, friend.
“Certainly not, friend.
“Certainly not, friend.”
“Certainly not, friend.”
“Certainly not, friend.”
“Certainly not, friend.”
“Certainly not, friend.”
“Certainly not, friend.”
“Certainly not, friend.”
“Certainly not, friend.”
“Certainly not, friend.”
“Certainly not, friend.”
“Come now, householder, give gifts to the Saṅgha.
“Come, Bhaddiya, do not go by oral tradition, by lineage of teaching, by hearsay, by a collection of scriptures, by logical reasoning, by inferential reasoning, by reasoned cogitation, by the acceptance of a view after pondering it, by the seeming competence, or because you think: ‘The ascetic is our guru.’
But when you know for yourself: ‘These things are unwholesome; these things are blameworthy; these things are censured by the wise; these things, if accepted and undertaken, lead to harm and suffering,’ then you should abandon them.
“Come, Bhaddiya, do not go by oral tradition, by lineage of teaching, by hearsay, by a collection of texts, by logical reasoning, by inferential reasoning, by reasoned cogitation, by the acceptance of a view after pondering it, by the seeming competence, or because you think: ‘The ascetic is our guru.’
But when you know for yourself: ‘These things are wholesome; these things are blameless; these things are praised by the wise; these things, if accepted and undertaken, lead to welfare and happiness,’ then you should live in accordance with them.
“Come, Kālāmas, do not go by oral tradition, by lineage of teaching, by hearsay, by a collection of scriptures, by logical reasoning, by inferential reasoning, by reasoned cogitation, by the acceptance of a view after pondering it, by the seeming competence, or because you think: ‘The ascetic is our guru.’
But when you know for yourselves: ‘These things are wholesome; these things are blameless; these things are praised by the wise; these things, if accepted and undertaken, lead to welfare and happiness,’ then you should live in accordance with them.
“Come, respected Moggallāna!
“Come, respected Moggallāna!
“Come, Sāḷha, do not go by oral tradition, by lineage of teaching, by hearsay, by a collection of scriptures, by logical reasoning, by inferential reasoning, by reasoned cogitation, by the acceptance of a view after pondering it, by the seeming competence, or because you think: ‘The ascetic is our guru.’
But when you know for yourselves: ‘These things are unwholesome; these things are blameworthy; these things are censured by the wise; these things, if accepted and undertaken, lead to harm and suffering,’ then you should abandon them.
“Come, Sāḷha, do not go by oral tradition, by lineage of teaching, by hearsay, by a collection of scriptures, by logical reasoning, by inferential reasoning, by reasoned cogitation, by the acceptance of a view after pondering it, by the seeming competence, or because you think: ‘The ascetic is our guru.’
But when you know for yourselves: ‘These things are wholesome; these things are blameless; these things are praised by the wise; these things, if accepted and undertaken, lead to welfare and happiness,’ then you should live in accordance with them.
“Come, Upāli, dwell within the Saṅgha.
“Comparing the incomparable and continued existence,the sage let go the force of existence.Rejoicing internally, concentrated,he broke his own existence like a coat of armor.”
“Contact, bhikkhus, is one end; the arising of contact is the second end; the cessation of contact is in the middle; and craving is the seamstress.
“Could it be the case, Bhante, that a gift given by someone here is not of great fruit and benefit?
“Could it then be that you do not know and see?”
“Could suffering affect him if he does no bad deed?”
“Could suffering affect him if he does no bad deed?” “No, Bhante.
“Could you be a deva, sir?”
“Could you be a gandhabba, sir?”
“Could you be a human being, sir?”
“Could you be a yakkha, sir?”
“Cunda, purification in the Noble One’s discipline is quite different from the rites of purity prescribed by the brahmins of the west who carry around waterpots, wear garlands of water plants, tend the sacred fire, and immerse themselves in water.” 
“Cunda, whose rites of purity do you prefer?”
“Cundī, to whatever extent there are beings, whether footless or with two feet, four feet, or many feet, whether having form or formless, whether percipient, non-percipient, or neither percipient nor non-percipient, the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One is declared the foremost among them.
“Delight in sensual pleasures does not lie within him; delight in ill will does not lie within him; delight in harming does not lie within him; delight in form does not lie within him; delight in personal existence does not lie within him.
“Delightful is Vesālī, Ānanda.
“Devoid of lust, devoid of hatred,devoid of delusion, without taints,the nāga, discarding his body,taintless, is utterly quenchedand attains final nibbāna.”
“Didn’t the Blessed One declare you to be a non-returner, friend?
“Dissatisfaction, friend, is suffering in this Dhamma and discipline.
“Divisive speech is non-Dhamma; abstention from divisive speech is the Dhamma.
“Divisive speech, repeatedly pursued, developed, and cultivated, is conducive to hell, to the animal realm, and to the sphere of afflicted spirits; for one reborn as a human being divisive speech at minimum conduces to being divided from one’s friends.
“Do all the devas of Brahmā’s company have such knowledge, Tissa?”
“Do all the devas the four great kings have such knowledge, Tissa?”
“Do all the devas who control what is created by others have such knowledge, Tissa?”
“Do not say so, friend.”
“Do not say so, friend.”
“Do not say so, friend.”
“Do not say so, friend.”
“Do not say so, Kokālika!
“Do not say so, Kokālika!
“Do not say so, Kokālika!
“Do only the devas the four great kings have such knowledge, or do the Tāvatiṃsa devas … … the Yāma devas … … the Tusita devas … … the devas who delight in creation … … the devas who control what is created by others have it?”
“Do you hold the view: – ‘The world is finite’ … ‘The world is infinite’ … – ‘The soul and the body are the same’ … ‘The soul is one thing, the body another’ … – ‘The Tathāgata exists after death’ … ‘The Tathāgata does not exist after death’ … ‘The Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death’ … ‘The Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death; this alone is true, anything else is wrong’?”
“Do you too claim to be a brahmin, Doṇa?”
“Does Master Gotama also claim to be one who lives the celibate life?”
“Does Master Gotama posit even on the wrong occasion?”
“Does Master Gotama praise sacrifice?”
“Doṇa, the ancient seers among the brahmin—that is, Aṭṭhaka, Vāmaka, Vāmadeva, Vessāmitta, Yamataggi, Aṅgīrasa, Bhāradvāja, Vāseṭṭha, Kassapa, and Bhagu—were the creators of the hymns and the composers of the hymns, and it is their ancient hymns, formerly chanted, declared, and compiled, that the brahmins nowadays still chant and repeat, repeating what was spoken, reciting what was recited, and teaching what was taught.
“Doṇa, the ancient seers among the brahmin—that is, Aṭṭhaka, Vāmaka, Vāmadeva, Vessāmitta, Yamataggi, Aṅgīrasa, Bhāradvāja, Vāseṭṭha, Kassapa, and Bhagu—were the creators of the hymns and the composers of the hymns, and it is their ancient hymns, formerly chanted, declared, and compiled, that the brahmins nowadays still chant and repeat, repeating what was spoken, reciting what was recited, and teaching what was taught.
“Drinking liquor and wine, repeatedly pursued, developed, and cultivated, is conducive to hell, to the animal realm, and to the sphere of afflicted spirits; for one reborn as a human being drinking liquor and wine at minimum conduces to madness.”
“During the day it is not disturbed by people and at night it is quiet and still.
“Either on one’s own, bhikkhus, one performs that bodily volitional activity conditioned by which pleasure and pain arise in one internally, or others make one generate that bodily volitional activity conditioned by which pleasure and pain arise in one internally.
“Either on one’s own, bhikkhus, one performs that mental volitional activity conditioned by which pleasure and pain arise in one internally, or others make one perform that mental volitional activity conditioned by which pleasure and pain arise in one internally.
“Either on one’s own, bhikkhus, one performs that verbal volitional activity conditioned by which pleasure and pain arise in one internally, or others make one perform that verbal volitional activity conditioned by which pleasure and pain arise in one internally.
“Engaging in impure bodily, verbal, and mental action, he dwells together with persons similar to himself.
“Enough, Brahmin Dhammika!
“Enough, brahmins, let this be: ‘When these two claimants to knowledge make claims that are mutually contradictory, who speaks truthfully and who falsely?’
I will teach you the Dhamma.
“Enough, good man.
“Enough, Gotamī!
“Enough, Gotamī!
“Enough, Ānanda!
“Enough, Ānanda!
“Even if one should carry about one’s mother on one shoulder and one’s father on the other, and should have a life span of a hundred years, live for a hundred years; and if one should attend to them by anointing them with balms, by massaging, bathing, and rubbing their limbs, and they even void their urine and excrement there, one still would not have done enough for one’s parents, nor would one have repaid them.
“Even more fruitful, householder, than the great alms offering that the brahmin Velāma gave, and feeding one person accomplished in view, and feeding a hundred persons accomplished in view; and feeding one once-returner, and feeding a hundred once-returners; and feeding one non-returner, and feeding a hundred non-returners; and feeding one arahant, and feeding a hundred arahants; and feeding one paccekabuddha, and feeding a hundred paccekabuddhas; and feeding the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One; and feeding the Saṅgha of bhikkhus headed by the Buddha; and building a dwelling dedicated to the Saṅgha of the four quarters; and for one with a mind of confidence to go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha; and for one with a mind of confidence to undertake the five training rules: to abstain from the destruction of life … to abstain from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness; and for one to develop a mind of loving-kindness even for the time it takes to pull a cow’s udder, would it be to develop the perception of impermanence just for the time of a finger snap.”
“Even some deities, Nāgita, may not gain at will, without trouble or difficulty, this bliss of renunciation, bliss of solitude, bliss of peace, bliss of enlightenment that I gain at will, without trouble or difficulty.
“Even though a warrior knows many different feats that can be done with arrows, it is only if he possesses three qualities that he is worthy of a king, an accessory of a king, and reckoned a factor of kingship.
“Every half-month a bhikkhunī should ask the Saṅgha of bhikkhus about two things: about of the uposatha, and about coming for the exhortation.
“Evil desire, bhikkhus, is to be abandoned neither by body nor by speech but by having repeatedly seen with wisdom.
“Evil envy, bhikkhus, is to be abandoned neither by body nor by speech but by having repeatedly seen with wisdom.
“Excellent is that converting magic, Bhante!
“Excellent, Bhante!
“Excellent, Bhante!
“Excellent, Bhante!
“Excellent, Bhante!
“Excellent, Bhante!
“Excellent, Bhante!
“Excellent, friend, is the path, excellent the way to the abandoning of lust, hatred, and delusion.
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Gotama!
“Excellent, Master Kaccāna!
“Excellent, Master Kaccāna!
“Excellent, Master Piṅgiyānī!
“False speech is non-Dhamma; abstention from false speech is the Dhamma.
“False speech, repeatedly pursued, developed, and cultivated, is conducive to hell, to the animal realm, and to the sphere of afflicted spirits; for one reborn as a human being false speech at minimum conduces to false accusations.
“Feelings should be understood; the source and origin of feelings should be understood; the diversity of feelings should be understood; the result of feelings should be understood; the cessation of feelings should be understood; the way leading to the cessation of feelings should be understood.
“Food and medicine and a competent attendant are prescribed particularly for the sake of the patient who will recover from his illness only if he gets suitable food, not if he fails to get it; only if he gets suitable medicine, not if he fails to get it; and only if he gets a competent attendant, not if he fails to get one.
“For a hundred thousandand thirty-six nirabbudas, plus five abbudas,the slanderer of noble ones goes to hell,having defamed them with evil speech and mind.” 
“For a long time, Bhante, I have understood the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One thus: ‘Knowledge occurs for one who is concentrated, not for one who lacks concentration.’
Does concentration precede knowledge, Bhante, or does knowledge precede concentration?”
“For example, when an iron bowl has been heated all day and is struck, a chip might be produced and fly up, and upon landing on the ground it would be extinguished.
“For example, when an iron bowl has been heated all day and is struck, a chip might fly off and be extinguished.
“For example, when an iron bowl has been heated all day and is struck, a chip might fly off, rise up, and be extinguished just before it lands on the ground.
“For example, when an iron bowl has been heated all day and is struck, a chip might fly off, rise up, and be extinguished.
“For example, when an iron bowl has been heated all day and is struck, a chip might fly off, rise up, and fall on a small pile of straw or sticks.
“For example, when an iron bowl has been heated all day and is struck, a chip might fly off, rise up, and then fall upon a large pile of straw or sticks.
“For example, when an iron bowl has been heated all day and is struck, a chip might fly off, rise up, and then fall upon a wide pile of straw or sticks.
“For his harm, Bhante.”
“For his harm, Bhante.”
“For his harm, Bhante.”
“For his harm, Bhante.”
“For his harm, Bhante.” 
“For his welfare, Bhante.”
“For his welfare, Bhante.”
“For his welfare, Bhante.”
“For his welfare, Bhante.”
“For his welfare, Bhante.”
“For it is possible that a person liberated by faith is practicing for arahantship, while a body witness and one attained to view are once-returners or non-returners.
“For one feeling pleasure no volition need be exerted: ‘Let my mind be concentrated.’
It is natural that the mind of one feeling pleasure is concentrated.
“For one feeling pleasure no volition need be exerted: ‘Let my mind be concentrated.’
It is natural that the mind of one feeling pleasure is concentrated.
“For one of right action, wrong action is worn away, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong action as condition are also worn away, and with right action as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.
“For one of right concentration, wrong concentration is worn away, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong concentration as condition are also worn away, and with right concentration as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.
“For one of right effort, wrong effort is worn away, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong effort as condition are also worn away, and with right effort as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.
“For one of right intention, wrong intention is worn away, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong intention as condition are also worn away, and with right intention as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.
“For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is worn away, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong knowledge as condition are also worn away, and with right knowledge as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.
“For one of right liberation, wrong liberation is ejected, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong liberation as condition are also ejected, and with right liberation as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.
“For one of right liberation, wrong liberation is purged, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong liberation as condition are also purged, and with right liberation as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.
“For one of right liberation, wrong liberation is vomited up, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong liberation as condition are also vomited up, and with right liberation as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.
“For one of right liberation, wrong liberation is washed away, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong liberation as condition are also washed away, and with right liberation as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.
“For one of right liberation, wrong liberation is worn away, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong liberation as condition are also worn away, and with right liberation as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.
“For one of right livelihood, wrong livelihood is worn away, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong livelihood as condition are also worn away, and with right livelihood as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.
“For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is worn away, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong mindfulness as condition are also worn away, and with right mindfulness as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.
“For one of right speech, wrong speech is worn away, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong speech as condition are also worn away, and with right speech as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.
“For one of right view, right intention originates.
“For one of right view, wrong view is ejected, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong view as condition are also ejected, and with right view as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.
“For one of right view, wrong view is purged, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong view as condition are also purged, and with right view as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.
“For one of right view, wrong view is vomited up, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong view as condition are also vomited up, and with right view as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.
“For one of right view, wrong view is washed away, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong view as condition are also washed away, and with right view as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.
“For one of right view, wrong view is worn away, and the numerous bad unwholesome qualities that originate with wrong view as condition are also worn away, and with right view as condition, numerous wholesome qualities reach fulfillment by development.
“For one of wrong view, wrong intention originates.
“For one tranquil in body no volition need be exerted: ‘Let me feel pleasure.’
It is natural that one tranquil in body feels pleasure.
“For one tranquil in body no volition need be exerted: ‘Let me feel pleasure.’
It is natural that one tranquil in body feels pleasure.
“For one who is concentrated no volition need be exerted: ‘Let me know and see things as they really are.’
It is natural that one who is concentrated knows and sees things as they really are.
“For one who is concentrated no volition need be exerted: ‘Let me know and see things as they really are.’
It is natural that one who is concentrated knows and sees things as they really are.
“For one who is disenchanted and dispassionate no volition need be exerted: ‘Let me realize the knowledge and vision of liberation.’
It is natural that one who is disenchanted and dispassionate realizes the knowledge and vision of liberation.
“For one who is disenchanted no volition need be exerted: ‘Let me become dispassionate.’
It is natural that one who is disenchanted becomes dispassionate.
“For one who is dispassionate no volition need be exerted: ‘Let me realize the knowledge and vision of liberation.’
It is natural that one who is dispassionate realizes the knowledge and vision of liberation.
“For one who is joyful no volition need be exerted: ‘Let rapture arise in me.’
It is natural that rapture arises in one who is joyful.
“For one who is joyful no volition need be exerted: ‘Let rapture arise in me.’
It is natural that rapture arises in one who is joyful.
“For one who knows and sees things as they really are no volition need be exerted: ‘Let me be disenchanted and dispassionate.’
It is natural that one who knows and sees things as they really are is disenchanted and dispassionate.
“For one who knows and sees things as they really are no volition need be exerted: ‘Let me be disenchanted.’
It is natural that one who knows and sees things as they really are is disenchanted.
“For one whose bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are protected, bodily, verbal, and mental actions do not become tainted.
“For one whose bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are unprotected, bodily, verbal, and mental actions become tainted.
“For one with a rapturous mind no volition need be exerted: ‘Let my body be tranquil.’
It is natural that the body of one with a rapturous mind is tranquil.
“For one with a rapturous mind no volition need be exerted: ‘Let my body become tranquil.’
It is natural that the body of one with a rapturous mind is tranquil.
“For one with unconcealed actions one of two destinations is to be expected: the deva realm or the human realm.”
“For one without regret no volition need be exerted: ‘Let joy arise in me.’
It is natural that joy arises in one without regret.
“For one without regret no volition need be exerted: ‘Let joy arise in me.’
It is natural that joy arises in one without regret.
“For the devas the four great kings, a single night and day is equivalent to fifty human years; thirty such days make up a month, and twelve such months make up a year.
“For the devas the four great kings, a single night and day is equivalent to fifty human years; thirty such days make up a month, and twelve such months make up a year.
“For the devas who control what is created by others, a single night and day is equivalent to sixteen hundred human years; thirty such days make up a month, and twelve such months make up a year.
“For the devas who control what is created by others, a single night and day is equivalent to sixteen hundred human years; thirty such days make up a month, and twelve such months make up a year.
“For the devas who delight in creation, a single night and day is equivalent to eight hundred human years; thirty such days make up a month, and twelve such months make up a year.
“For the devas who delight increation, a single night and day is equivalent to eight hundred human years; thirty such days make up a month, and twelve such months make up a year.
“For the sake of what benefit should a woman or a man, a householder or one gone forth, often reflect thus: ‘I am subject to old age; I am not exempt from old age’?
“For the Tusita devas, a single night and day is equivalent to four hundred human years; thirty such days make up a month, and twelve such months make up a year.
“For the Tusita devas, a single night and day is equivalent to four hundred human years; thirty such days make up a month, and twelve such months make up a year.
“For the Tāvatiṃsa devas a single night and day is equivalent to a hundred human years; thirty such days make up a month, and twelve such months make up a year.
“For the Tāvatiṃsa devas, a single night and day is equivalent to a hundred human years; thirty such days make up a month, and twelve such months make up a year.
“For the Yāma devas a single night and day is equivalent to two hundred human years; thirty such days make up a month, and twelve such months make up a year.
“For the Yāma devas, a single night and day is equivalent to two hundred human years; thirty such days make up a month, and twelve such months make up a year.
“For those who associate with him, resort to him, attend on him, and follow his example, this leads to their harm and suffering for a long time.
“For those who associate with him, resort to him, attend on him, and follow his example, this leads to their welfare and happiness for a long time.
“For what reason?
“For what reason?
“For, Bhante, the Blessed One is practicing for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people; he has established many people in the noble method, that is, in the way of the good Dhamma, in the way of the wholesome Dhamma.
“For, brahmin, if, when one speaks about what one has seen, unwholesome qualities increase and wholesome qualities decline, I say that one should not speak about what one has seen.
“Friend Anuruddha, when you think: ‘With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, I survey a thousandfold world system,’ this is your conceit.
“Friend Bhaddaji, what is the foremost of sights?
“Friend Koṭṭhita, of those three kinds of persons, I consider the one attained to view to be the most excellent and sublime.
“Friend Moggallāna, there are these four modes of practice.
“Friend Saviṭṭha, there are these three kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Friend Sāriputta, could a bhikkhu obtain such a state of concentration that he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth … he would not be percipient of anything seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, and examined by the mind, but he would still be percipient?”
“Friend Sāriputta, could a bhikkhu obtain such a state of concentration that he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth … of anything seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, and examined by the mind, but he would still be percipient?”
“Friend Sāriputta, could a bhikkhu obtain such a state of concentration that he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth; of water in relation to water; of fire in relation to fire; of air in relation to air; of the base of the infinity of space in relation to the base of the infinity of space;  of the base of the infinity of consciousness in relation to the base of the infinity of consciousness; of the base of nothingness in relation to the base of nothingness; of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception in relation to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception; of this world in relation to this world; of the other world in relation to the other world, but he would still be percipient?”
“Friend Sāriputta, does one become an end-maker by means of knowledge?”
“Friend Sāriputta, how does a bhikkhu get to hear a teaching he has not heard before, not forget those teachings he has already heard, bring to mind those teachings with which he is already familiar, and understand what he has not understood?”
“Friend Sāriputta, of those three kinds of persons, I consider the body witness to be the most excellent and sublime.
“Friend Sāriputta, of those three kinds of persons, I consider the one liberated by faith to be the most excellent and sublime.
“Friend Sāriputta, there are these four modes of practice….
“Friend Sāriputta, what is happiness in this Dhamma and discipline, and what is suffering?”
“Friend Sāriputta, what is happiness?
“Friend Sāriputta, when you are asked: ‘Now, friend Sāriputta, is the spiritual life lived under the Blessed One for this purpose: “Let kamma is to be experienced in this life become kamma I am to experience in a future life”?’ you say: ‘Certainly not, friend.’
And when you are asked: ‘Then is the spiritual life lived under the Blessed One for this purpose: “Let kamma is to be experienced in a future life become kamma I am to experience in this life”?’ you say: ‘Certainly not, friend.’ … … When you are asked: ‘Now, friend Sāriputta, is the spiritual life lived under the Blessed One for this purpose: “Let kamma is to be experienced become kamma I am not to experience”?’ you say: ‘Certainly not, friend.’
And when you are asked: ‘Then is the spiritual life lived under the Blessed One for this purpose: “Let kamma is not to be experienced become kamma I am to experience”?’ you say: ‘Certainly not, friend.’
Then for what purpose does one live the spiritual life under the Blessed One?”
“Friend Uttiya, you asked the Blessed One from a different angle the same question that you had already asked him.
“Friend Ānanda, do you prescribe the abandoning of lust, hatred, and delusion?”
“Friend!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend, as far as the range of the six bases for contact extends, just so far extends the range of proliferation.
“Friend, if one says: ‘With the remainderless fading away and cessation of the six bases for contact, there is something else,’ one proliferates that which is not to be proliferated.
“Friend, one deficient in conduct does not know and see things as they are.
“Friend, the Blessed One declared that you possess seven astounding and amazing qualities.
“Friend, when you are asked: ‘With the remainderless fading away and cessation of the six bases for contact, is there something else?’ you say: ‘Do not say so, friend.’
And when you are asked: ‘With the remainderless fading away and cessation of the six bases for contact, is there nothing else?
“Friend, with the remainderless fading away and cessation of the six bases for contact, is there anything else?”
“Friend,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friend,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Friends, a bhikkhu passes his time in such a way that he dies with regret.
“Friends, a bhikkhu passes his time in such a way that he dies without regret.
“Friends, a bhikkhu passes his time in such a way that he does not have a good death.
“Friends, a bhikkhu passes his time in such a way that he has a good death.
“Friends, a bhikkhu who is not skilled in the ways of others’ minds: ‘I will be skilled in the ways of my own mind.’
It is in this way that you should train yourselves.
“Friends, a bhikkhu who wishes to reprove another should first establish five things in himself.
“Friends, a person who is reproved should be established in two things: in truth and non-anger.
“Friends, any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī who observes four things inwardly can come to the conclusion: ‘I am declining in wholesome qualities.
“Friends, any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī who observes four things inwardly can come to the conclusion: ‘I am not declining in wholesome qualities.
“Friends, bhikkhus!”
“Friends, bhikkhus!”
“Friends, bhikkhus!”
“Friends, could a bhikkhu obtain such a state of concentration that he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth … he would not be percipient of anything seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, and examined by the mind, but he would still be percipient?”
“Friends, for one who does not have faith in wholesome qualities, who does not have a sense of moral shame … who does not have moral dread … who does not have energy … who does not have wisdom in wholesome qualities, whether night or day comes, only deterioration and not growth in wholesome qualities is to be expected.
“Friends, for one who does not have faith in wholesome qualities, who does not have a sense of moral shame … who does not have moral dread … who does not have energy … who does not have wisdom … who does not lend an ear … who does not retain the Dhamma in mind … who does not examine the meaning … who does not practice in accordance with the Dhamma … who is not heedful in wholesome qualities, whether night or day comes, only deterioration and not growth in wholesome qualities is to be expected.
“Friends, for one who has faith in wholesome qualities, for one who has a sense of moral shame … for one who has moral dread … for one who has energy … for one who has wisdom in wholesome qualities, whether night or day comes, only growth and not deterioration in wholesome qualities is to be expected.
“Friends, for one who has faith in wholesome qualities, who has a sense of moral shame … who has moral dread … who has energy … who has wisdom … who lends an ear … who retains the Dhamma in mind … who examines the meaning … who practices in accordance with the Dhamma … who is heedful wholesome qualities, whether night or day comes, only growth and not deterioration in wholesome qualities is to be expected.
“Friends, I encompassed Citta Hatthisāriputta’s mind with my own mind and understood: ‘Citta Hatthisāriputta gains such and such meditative dwellings and attainments, yet he will give up the training and return to the lower life.’
And also deities reported this matter to me.”
“Friends, I have not heard and learned this in the presence of the Blessed One, nor have I heard and learned this in the presence of esteemed bhikkhus.
“Friends, I will teach you about the person fettered internally and the person fettered externally.
“Friends, in the presence of the Blessed One I heard and learned this: ‘These, bhikkhu, are the six proper occasions for going to see an esteemed bhikkhu.’”
“Friends, it is as though a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood, would pass over the root and trunk of a great tree possessed of heartwood, thinking that heartwood should be sought among the branches and foliage.
“Friends, it is as though a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood, would pass over the root and trunk of a great tree possessed of heartwood, thinking that heartwood should be sought among the branches and foliage.
“Friends, it is good for a bhikkhu from time to time to review his own failings.
“Friends, it is in this way that I understand the detailed meaning of the Blessed One’s brief synopsis.
“Friends, it is in this way that I understand the detailed meaning of the Blessed One’s brief synopsis.
“Friends, it is said: ‘A person subject to decline, a person subject to decline.’
In what way has the Blessed One said that a person is subject to decline, and in what way that a person is not subject to decline?”
“Friends, making a declaration of development, a bhikkhu says: ‘I am developed in body, virtuous behavior, mind, and wisdom.’
If greed does not overcome that bhikkhu and persist; if hatred … evil desire does not overcome that bhikkhu and persist, he should be understood thus: ‘This venerable one understands in such a way that he has no greed; thus greed does not overcome him and persist.
“Friends, making a declaration of development, a bhikkhu says: ‘I am developed in body, virtuous behavior, mind, and wisdom.’
If, however, greed overcomes that bhikkhu and persists; if hatred … evil desire overcomes that bhikkhu and persists, he should be understood thus: ‘This venerable one does not understand in such a way that he would have no greed; thus greed overcomes him and persists.
“Friends, making a declaration of knowledge and development, a bhikkhu says: ‘I know this Dhamma, I see this Dhamma.
“Friends, making a declaration of knowledge and development, a bhikkhu says: ‘I know this Dhamma, I see this Dhamma.
“Friends, making a declaration of knowledge, a bhikkhu says: ‘I know this Dhamma, I see this Dhamma.’
If, however, greed overcomes that bhikkhu and persists; if hatred … delusion … anger … hostility … denigration … insolence … miserliness … evil envy … evil desire overcomes that bhikkhu and persists, he should be understood thus: ‘This venerable one does not understand in such a way that he would have no greed; thus greed overcomes him and persists.
“Friends, persons should be understood to be twofold: those to be associated with and those not to be associated with.
“Friends, possessing six qualities, a bhikkhu is able both himself and others.
“Friends, the ascetic Gotama teaches the Dhamma to his disciples in such a way as this: ‘Come, bhikkhus, directly know all phenomena.
“Friends, the bhikkhus who are Dhamma specialists praise only bhikkhus who are Dhamma specialists, not those who are meditators.
“Friends, the Blessed One taught this brief synopsis without expounding the detailed meaning: ‘Bhikkhus, what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma should be understood, and what is harmful and what is beneficial should also be understood.
“Friends, the Blessed One taught this brief synopsis without expounding the detailed meaning: ‘Bhikkhus, what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma should be understood, and what is harmful and what is beneficial should also be understood.
“Friends, there are these eight kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“Friends, there are these five ways of removing resentment by which a bhikkhu should entirely remove resentment when it has arisen toward anyone.
“Friends, whatever bhikkhu or bhikkhunī has declared the attainment of arahantship in my presence has done so by these four paths or by a certain one among them.
“Friends, when a bhikkhu is reproved in a way contrary to the Dhamma, non-remorse should be induced in him in five ways: ‘Friend, you were reproved at an improper time, not at a proper time; that is sufficient for you to be without remorse.
“Friends, when a bhikkhu is reproved in accordance with the Dhamma, remorse should be induced in him in five ways: ‘Friend, you were reproved at a proper time, not at an improper time; that is sufficient for you to feel remorse.
“Friends, when a bhikkhu reproves in a way contrary to the Dhamma, remorse should be induced in him in five ways: ‘Friend, you reproved him at an improper time, not at a proper time; that is sufficient for you to feel remorse.
“Friends, when a bhikkhu reproves in accordance with the Dhamma, non-remorse should be induced in him in five ways: ‘Friend, you reproved him at a proper time, not at an improper time; that is sufficient for you to be without remorse.
“Friends, whoever asks another person a question does so for five reasons or for a particular one among them.
“From the ascetics following the Sakyan son.”
“From today bhikkhunīs are prohibited from admonishing bhikkhus, but bhikkhus are not prohibited from admonishing bhikkhunīs.
“From today on, Bhante, we will observe the uposatha complete in eight factors.”
“From today on, Ānanda, bhikkhunīs are prohibited from admonishing bhikkhus, but bhikkhus are not prohibited from admonishing bhikkhunīs.
“From today, Bhante, I will not be prone to anger and often exasperated.
“From what do they originate?”
“From which group of bhikkhus, friend?”
“Further it was said: ‘By conversation their wisdom can be known, and this only after a long time, not casually; by one who is attentive, not by one who is inattentive; and by one who is wise, not by one who is unwise.’
On account of what was this said?
“Further it was said: ‘By dealing their integrity can be known, and this only after a long time, not casually; by one who is attentive, not by one who is inattentive; and by one who is wise, not by one who is unwise.’
On account of what was this said?
“Further it was said: ‘In misfortune their fortitude can be known, and this only after a long time, not casually; by one who is attentive, not by one who is inattentive; and by one who is wise, not by one who is unwise.’
On account of what was this said?
“Gain does not obsess his mind, and loss does not obsess his mind.
“Gain obsesses his mind, and loss obsesses his mind.
“Go, Mahānāma, and find a suitable rest house in Kapilavatthu where we might stay for the night.” 
“Go, Mahānāma, and prepare a mat for me.”
“Good, bhikkhus!
“Good, bhikkhus!
“Good, bhikkhus!
“Good, bhikkhus!
“Good, bhikkhus!
“Good, bhikkhus.
“Good, bhikkhus.
“Good, bhikkhus.
“Good, bhikkhus.
“Good, bhikkhus.
“Good, good, bhikkhu!
“Good, good, bhikkhu!
“Good, good, bhikkhu!
“Good, good, bhikkhu!
“Good, good, bhikkhu!
“Good, good, bhikkhu!
“Good, good, bhikkhu!
“Good, good, bhikkhus!
“Good, good, bhikkhus!
“Good, good, bhikkhus!
“Good, good, Hatthaka!
“Good, good, householder!
“Good, good, householder!
“Good, good, householders!
“Good, good, Mahānāma!
“Good, good, Nandiya!
“Good, good, Subhūti!
“Good, good, Sāriputta!
“Good, good, Sāriputta!
“Good, good, Sāriputta!
“Good, good, Sāriputta!
“Good, good, Sāriputta!
“Good, good, Upavāṇa!
“Good, good, Ānanda!
“Good, my dear!
“Good, sister!
“Gotamī, those things of which you might know: ‘These things lead to passion, not to dispassion; to bondage, not to detachment; to building up, not to dismantling; to strong desires, not to fewness of desires; to non-contentment, not to contentment; to company, not to solitude; to laziness, not to the arousing of energy; to being difficult to support, not to being easy to support,’ you should definitely recognize: ‘This is not the Dhamma; this is not the discipline; this is not the teaching of the Teacher.’
But, Gotamī, those things of which you might know: ‘These things lead to dispassion, not to passion; to detachment, not to bondage; to dismantling, not to building up; to fewness of desires, not to strong desires; to contentment, not to non-contentment; to solitude, not to company; to the arousing of energy, not to laziness; to being easy to support, not to being difficult to support,’ you should definitely recognize: ‘This is the Dhamma; this is the discipline; this is the teaching of the Teacher.’”
“Gotamī, why are you standing outside the entrance with your feet swollen and your body covered with dust, miserable and saddened, weeping with a tearful face?”
“Great king, that is his dwelling with the closed door.
“Great king, there are these five situations that are unobtainable by an ascetic or a brahmin, by a deva, Māra, or Brahmā, or by anyone in the world.
“Great king, there are these five situations that are unobtainable by an ascetic or a brahmin, by a deva, Māra, or Brahmā, or by anyone in the world.”
“Great king, this exposition of the Dhamma is named the extraction of the dart of sorrow.”
“Happiness, friends, is this nibbāna.
“Harsh speech is non-Dhamma; abstention from harsh speech is the Dhamma.
“Harsh speech, repeatedly pursued, developed, and cultivated, is conducive to hell, to the animal realm, and to the sphere of afflicted spirits; for one reborn as a human being harsh speech at minimum conduces to disagreeable sounds.
“Has that disciplinary issue been settled yet, Ānanda?”
“Hatthaka, do those teachings that you could recall in the past, when you were a human being, come back to you now?”
“Have you heard, Ānanda, about a thousandfold minor world system?”
“Have you heard, Ānanda, whether the Vajjis are assembling in harmony, adjourning their meetings in harmony, and conducting the affairs of the Vajjis in harmony?”
“Have you heard, Ānanda, whether the Vajjis do not abduct women and girls from their families and force them to live with them?”
“Have you heard, Ānanda, whether the Vajjis do not decree anything that has not been decreed and do not abolish anything that has already been decreed, but undertake and follow the ancient Vajji principles as they have been decreed?”
“Have you heard, Ānanda, whether the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and venerate the Vajji elders and think they should be heeded?”
“Have you heard, Ānanda, whether the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and venerate their traditional shrines, both those within and those outside, and do not neglect the righteous oblations as given and done to them in the past?”
“Have you heard, Ānanda, whether the Vajjis provide righteous protection, shelter, and guard for arahants,: ‘How can those arahants who have not yet come here come to our realm, and how can those arahants who have already come dwell at ease here?’”
“Having abandoned divisive speech, he abstains from divisive speech.
“Having abandoned divisive speech, he abstains from divisive speech.
“Having abandoned divisive speech, he abstains from divisive speech.
“Having abandoned false speech, he abstains from false speech.
“Having abandoned false speech, he abstains from false speech; he speaks truth, adheres to truth; he is trustworthy and reliable, no deceiver of the world.
“Having abandoned false speech, he abstains from false speech; he speaks truth, adheres to truth; he is trustworthy and reliable, no deceiver of the world.
“Having abandoned harsh speech, he abstains from harsh speech.
“Having abandoned harsh speech, he abstains from harsh speech.
“Having abandoned harsh speech, he abstains from harsh speech.
“Having abandoned idle chatter, he abstains from idle chatter.
“Having abandoned idle chatter, he abstains from idle chatter.
“Having abandoned idle chatter, he abstains from idle chatter.
“Having abandoned sexual misconduct, he abstains from sexual misconduct.
“Having abandoned sexual misconduct, he abstains from sexual misconduct.
“Having abandoned sexual misconduct, he abstains from sexual misconduct.
“Having abandoned the taking of what is not given, he abstains from taking what is not given.
“Having abandoned the taking of what is not given, he abstains from taking what is not given.
“Having abandoned the taking of what is not given, he abstains from taking what is not given.
“Having abandoned the taking of what is not given, someone abstains from taking what is not given … … abstains from sexual misconduct …  … abstains from false speech … … abstains from divisive speech … … abstains from harsh speech … … abstains from idle chatter … … is without longing … … is of good will … … holds right view and has a correct perspective thus: ‘There is what is given … there are in the world ascetics and brahmins of right conduct and right practice who, having realized this world and the other world for themselves by direct knowledge, make them known to others.’
He does not creep along by body, speech, and mind.
“Having abandoned these five hindrances, defilements of the mind that weaken wisdom, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he enters and dwells in the first jhāna … the fourth jhāna, neither painful nor pleasant, which has purification of mindfulness by equanimity.
“Having abandoned these five hindrances, defilements of the mind that weaken wisdom, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he enters and dwells in the first jhāna … the second jhāna … the third jhāna … the fourth jhāna, neither painful nor pleasant, which has purification of mindfulness by equanimity.
“Having abandoned these three things, one is capable of abandoning careless attention, following a wrong path, and mental sluggishness.
“Having abandoned these three things, one is capable of abandoning disrespect, being difficult to correct, and bad friendship.
“Having abandoned these three things, one is capable of abandoning lack of desire to see the noble ones, lack of desire to hear the noble Dhamma, and a mind bent on criticism.
“Having abandoned these three things, one is capable of abandoning lack of faith, uncharitableness, and laziness.
“Having abandoned these three things, one is capable of abandoning lust, hatred, and delusion.
“Having abandoned these three things, one is capable of abandoning muddle-mindedness, lack of clear comprehension, and mental distraction.
“Having abandoned these three things, one is capable of abandoning personal-existence view, doubt, and wrong grasp of behavior and observances.
“Having abandoned these three things, one is capable of abandoning restlessness, non-restraint, and immorality.
“Having based himself on these five things, the bhikkhu should develop further four things.
“Having based himself on these five things, the bhikkhu should develop further four things.
“Having comprehended the highs and lows in the world,he is not perturbed by anything in the world.Peaceful, fumeless, untroubled, wishless,he has, I say, crossed over birth and old age.”
“Having comprehended the world’s highs and lows,he is not perturbed by anything in the world.
“Having cut off all fetters and bonds,whether they be gross or subtle,in whatever direction he goes,he goes without concern.
“Having directly known these things,the Buddha taught the Dhamma to the bhikkhus.The Teacher, the end-maker of suffering,the One with Vision, has attained nibbāna.”
“Having directly known these things,the Buddha taught the Dhamma to the bhikkhus.The Teacher, the end-maker of suffering,the One with Vision, has attained nibbāna.”
“Having established yourself in these five qualities, Mahānāma, you should further develop six things.
“Having gained wealth righteously and having gained fame for oneself and for one’s relatives and preceptors, one thinks: ‘May I live long and enjoy a long life span!’ This is the third thing … rarely gained in the world.
“Having gained wealth righteously, having gained fame for oneself and for one’s relatives and preceptors, living long and enjoying a long life span, one thinks: ‘With the breakup of the body, after death, may I be reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world!’ This is the fourth thing … rarely gained in the world.
“Having gained wealth righteously, one thinks: ‘May fame come to me and to my relatives and preceptors!’ This is the second thing … rarely gained in the world.
“Having gone to the forest, to the foot of a tree, or to an empty hut, he sits down, folding his legs crosswise, straightening his body, and establishing mindfulness in front of him.
“Having heard that Dhamma, he resorts to two kinds of withdrawal: withdrawal in body and withdrawal in mind.
“Having investigated and scrutinized, he speaks dispraise of one who deserves dispraise.
“Having known the arahants to be like a fieldfor what is relinquished and offered, not held back,the good person gives what is hard to give:the giver of agreeable things gains what is agreeable.”
“Having learned his Dhamma,I delighted in his teaching.I have gained the three true knowledges;the Buddha’s teaching has been done.” 
“Having no faith, no sense of moral shame, no moral dread, no energy, no wisdom in wholesome qualities, that poor, destitute, indigent person engages in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
“Having provided such righteous protection, shelter, and guard in regard to bodily action, verbal action, and mental action, the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One, the righteous king of the Dhamma, sets in motion the unsurpassed wheel of the Dhamma solely through the Dhamma, a wheel that cannot be turned back by any ascetic, brahmin, deva, Māra, or Brahmā, or by anyone in the world.”
“Having provided such righteous protection, shelter, and guard, the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One, the righteous king of the Dhamma, sets in motion the unsurpassed wheel of the Dhamma solely through the Dhamma, a wheel that cannot be turned back by any ascetic, brahmin, deva, Māra, or Brahmā, or by anyone in the world.”
“Having seen a form with the eye, he does not grasp at its marks and features.
“Having seen a form with the eye, he does not grasp at its marks and features.
“Having seen him engaging in impure bodily, verbal, and mental action, his well-behaved fellow monks lodge complaints about him, saying: ‘Oh, what misery it is for us to live together with such persons!’ This, I say, is how there is weeping over him.
“Having seen these dangers in lust, hatred, and delusion, we prescribe their abandoning.”
“Having thus abandoned these five hindrances, defilements of the mind, qualities that weaken wisdom, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
“Having thus abandoned these five hindrances, defilements of the mind, qualities that weaken wisdom, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he enters upon and dwells in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
“Having thus abandoned these five hindrances, defilements of the mind, things that weaken wisdom, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he enters and dwells in the first jhāna ….Elated, he relieves his itches.
“Having thus gone forth and possessing the bhikkhus’ training and way of life, having abandoned the destruction of life, he abstains from the destruction of life; with the rod and weapon laid aside, conscientious and kindly, he dwells compassionate toward all living beings.
“Having thus gone forth and possessing the bhikkhus’ training and way of life, having abandoned the destruction of life, he abstains from the destruction of life; with the rod and weapon laid aside, conscientious and kindly, he dwells compassionate toward all living beings.
“Having understood my thoughts,the unsurpassed teacher in the worldcame to me by psychic potencyin a mind-made body.
“He abstains from injuring seeds and plants.
“He abstains from injuring seeds and plants.
“He acts with clear comprehension when going forward and returning; he acts with clear comprehension when looking ahead and looking away; he acts with clear comprehension when bending and stretching his limbs; he acts with clear comprehension when wearing his robes and carrying his outer robe and bowl; he acts with clear comprehension when eating, drinking, consuming food, and tasting; he acts with clear comprehension when defecating and urinating; he acts with clear comprehension when walking, standing, sitting, falling asleep, waking up, talking, and keeping silent.
“He acts with clear comprehension when going forward and returning; he acts with clear comprehension when looking ahead and looking away; he acts with clear comprehension when bending and stretching his limbs; he acts with clear comprehension when wearing his robes and carrying his outer robe and bowl; he acts with clear comprehension when eating, drinking, consuming food, and tasting; he acts with clear comprehension when defecating and urinating; he acts with clear comprehension when walking, standing, sitting, falling asleep, waking up, talking, and keeping silent.
“He could, bhikkhus.” 
“He could, friend Ānanda.”
“He could, friend Ānanda.”
“He could, Ānanda.”
“He could, Ānanda.”
“He could, Ānanda.” 
“He could, Ānanda.” 
“He does not give a gift,: ‘Giving is good,’ but rather he gives a gift,: ‘Giving was practiced before by my father and forefathers; I should not abandon this ancient family custom.’“He does not give a gift,: ‘Giving was practiced before … I should not abandon this ancient family custom,’ but rather he gives a gift,: ‘I cook; these people do not cook.
“He does not give a gift,: ‘I cook … to those who do not cook,’ but rather he gives a gift,: ‘Just as the seers of old—that is, Aṭṭhaka, Vāmaka, Vāmadeva, Vessāmitta, Yamataggi, Aṅgīrasa, Bhāradvāja, Vāseṭṭha, Kassapa, and Bhagu—held those great sacrifices, so I will share a gift.’… 
“He does not give a gift,: ‘Just as the seers of old … held those great sacrifices, so I will share a gift,’ but rather he gives a gift,: ‘When I am giving a gift my mind becomes placid, and elation and joy arise.’“He does not give a gift,: ‘When I am giving a gift my mind becomes placid, and elation and joy arise,’ but rather he gives a gift,: ‘It’s an ornament of the mind, an accessory of the mind.’
He gives that gift to an ascetic or a brahmin: food and drink; clothing and vehicles; garlands, scents, and unguents; bedding, dwellings, and lighting.
“He does not meditate in dependence on earth, in dependence on water, in dependence on fire, in dependence on air, in dependence on the base of the infinity of space, in dependence on the base of the infinity of consciousness, in dependence on the base of nothingness, in dependence on the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception,  in dependence on this world, in dependence on the other world, in dependence on what is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, or examined by the mind, and yet he meditates.
“He draws many people away from a bad Dhamma and establishes them in the good Dhamma.
“He draws many people away from the good Dhamma and establishes them in a bad Dhamma.
“He dwells contemplating arising and vanishing in the five aggregates subject to clinging: ‘Such is form, such its origin, such its passing away; such is feeling … such is perception … such are volitional activities … such is consciousness, such its origin, such its passing away.’
This is the eighth cause and condition that leads to obtaining the wisdom fundamental to the spiritual life when it has not been obtained and to its increase, maturation, and fulfillment by development after it has been obtained.
“He eats blameless food,but doesn’t eat what is blameworthy.When he gains food and clothing,he avoids storing it up.
“He engages in sexual misconduct.
“He engages in sexual misconduct.
“He engages in sexual misconduct; he has sexual relations with women who are protected by their mother, father, mother and father, brother, sister, or relatives; who are protected by their Dhamma; who have a husband; whose violation entails a penalty; or even with one already engaged.
“He gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are dwellings in happiness in this very life.
“He gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are dwellings in happiness in this very life.
“He gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
“He gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas … in this very life.
“He has a hundred thousand units of minted gold, not to mention silver.”
“He has a mind of ill will and intentions of hate thus: ‘May these beings be slain, slaughtered, cut off, destroyed, or annihilated!’
“He has a mind of ill will and intentions of hate thus: ‘May these beings be slain, slaughtered, cut off, destroyed, or annihilated!’
“He has a mind of ill will and intentions of hate thus: ‘May these beings be slain, slaughtered, cut off, destroyed, or annihilated!’
“He has aroused energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities and acquiring wholesome qualities; he is strong, firm in exertion, not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
“He has aroused energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities and acquiring wholesome qualities; he is strong, firm in exertion, not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
“He has aroused energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities and acquiring wholesome qualities; he is strong, firm in exertion, not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
“He has aroused energy … not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
“He has aroused energy; he is strong, firm in exertion, and has not cast off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
“He has described the black class as butchers of sheep, pigs, poultry, and deer; hunters and fishermen; thieves, executioners, and prison wardens; or those who follow any other such cruel occupation.
“He has described the blue class as bhikkhus who live on thorns or any others who profess the doctrine of kamma, the doctrine of the efficacy of deeds.
“He has described the red class as the Nigaṇṭhas wearing a single garment.
“He has described the supreme white class as Nanda Vaccha, Kisa Saṅkicca, and Makkhali Gosāla.
“He has described the white class as the male and female Ājīvakas.
“He has described the yellow class as the white-robed lay disciples of the naked ascetics.
“He has good friends, good companions, good comrades.
“He has good friends, good companions, good comrades.
“He has good friends, good companions, good comrades.
“He has learned much … and penetrated well by view.
“He has learned much … and penetrated well by view.
“He has learned much … and penetrated well by view.
“He has learned much … … and penetrated well by view.
“He has learned much, remembers what he has learned, and accumulates what he has learned.
“He has learned much, remembers what he has learned, and accumulates what he has learned.
“He has learned much, remembers what he has learned, and accumulates what he has learned.
“He has learned much, remembers what he has learned, and accumulates what he has learned.
“He has never before committed a grave offense against a woman wearing the ochre robe who has gone forth under the Blessed One.
“He has seniority of twenty years or more.
“He has transcended all fettersand emerged from the jungle to the clearing;delighting in renunciation of sensual pleasures,he is like pure gold freed from its ore.
“He has vanquished discontent and delight; he overcame discontent whenever it arose.
“He has vanquished fear and terror; he overcame fear and terror whenever they arose.
“He holds right view and has a correct perspective thus: ‘There is what is given, sacrificed, and offered; there is fruit and result of good and bad actions; there is this world and the other world; there is mother and father; there are beings spontaneously reborn; there are in the world ascetics and brahmins of right conduct and right practice who, having realized this world and the other world for themselves by direct knowledge, make them known to others.’
“He holds right view and has a correct perspective thus: ‘There is what is given, sacrificed, and offered; there is fruit and result of good and bad actions; there is this world and the other world; there is mother and father; there are beings spontaneously reborn; there are in the world ascetics and brahmins of right conduct and right practice who, having realized this world and the other world for themselves by direct knowledge, make them known to others.’
“He holds right view and has a correct perspective thus: ‘There is what is given, sacrificed, and offered; there is fruit and result of good and bad actions; there is this world and the other world; there is mother and father; there are beings spontaneously reborn; there are in the world ascetics and brahmins of right conduct and right practice who, having realized this world and the other world for themselves by direct knowledge, make them known to others.’
“He holds right view and has a correct perspective.
“He holds wrong view and has an incorrect perspective thus: ‘There is nothing given, nothing sacrificed, nothing offered; there is no fruit or result of good and bad actions; there is no this world, no other world; there is no mother, no father; there are no beings spontaneously reborn; there are in the world no ascetics and brahmins of right conduct and right practice who, having realized this world and the other world for themselves by direct knowledge, make them known to others.’
“He holds wrong view and has an incorrect perspective thus: ‘There is nothing given, nothing sacrificed, nothing offered; there is no fruit or result of good and bad actions; there is no this world, no other world; there is no mother, no father; there are no beings spontaneously reborn; there are in the world no ascetics and brahmins of right conduct and right practice who, having realized this world and the other world for themselves by direct knowledge, make them known to others.’
“He holds wrong view and has an incorrect perspective thus: ‘There is nothing given, nothing sacrificed, nothing offered; there is no fruit or result of good and bad actions; there is no this world, no other world; there is no mother, no father; there are no beings spontaneously reborn; there are in the world no ascetics and brahmins of right conduct and right practice who, having realized this world and the other world for themselves by direct knowledge, make them known to others.’
“He indulges in idle chatter.
“He indulges in idle chatter.
“He indulges in idle chatter.
“He is a forest dweller, one who resorts to remote lodgings.
“He is a good speaker with a good delivery; he is gifted with speech that is polished, clear, articulate, expressive of the meaning.
“He is a good speaker with a good delivery; he is gifted with speech that is polished, clear, articulate, expressive of the meaning.
“He is an eater of greens or millet or forest rice or hide-parings or moss or rice bran or rice scum or sesame flour or grass or cow dung.
“He is an eater of greens or millet or forest rice or hide-parings or moss or rice bran or rice scum or sesame flour or grass or cow dung.
“He is capable of instructing, encouraging, inspiring, and gladdening the Saṅgha of bhikkhunīs with a Dhamma talk.
“He is content with robes to protect his body and almsfood to maintain his stomach, and wherever he goes he sets out taking only these with him.
“He is content with robes to protect his body and almsfood to maintain his stomach, and wherever he goes he sets out taking only these with him.
“He is easy to correct and possesses qualities that make him easy to correct; he is patient and receives instruction respectfully.
“He is full of longing.
“He is himself accomplished in concentration and speaks to the bhikkhus on accomplishment in concentration.
“He is himself accomplished in liberation and speaks to the bhikkhus on accomplishment in liberation.
“He is himself accomplished in the knowledge and vision of liberation and speaks to the bhikkhus on accomplishment in the knowledge and vision of liberation.
“He is himself accomplished in virtuous behavior and speaks to the bhikkhus on accomplishment in virtuous behavior.
“He is himself accomplished in wisdom and speaks to the bhikkhus on accomplishment in wisdom.
“He is himself content and speaks to the bhikkhus on contentment.
“He is himself energetic and speaks to the bhikkhus on arousing energy.
“He is himself given to solitude and speaks to the bhikkhus on solitude.
“He is himself not bound up with others and speaks to the bhikkhus on not being bound up with others.
“He is honest and open, one who reveals himself as he really is to the Teacher and his wise fellow monks.
“He is honest and open, one who reveals himself as he really is to the Teacher and his wise fellow monks.
“He is indeed well slain, Bhante, when the Tathāgata thinks he should not be spoken to and instructed, and his wise fellow monks, too, think he should not be spoken to and instructed.
“He is of good will and his intentions are free of hate thus: ‘May these beings live happily, free from enmity, affliction, and anxiety!’
“He is of good will and his intentions are free of hate thus: ‘May these beings live happily, free from enmity, affliction, and anxiety!’
“He is of good will and his intentions are free of hate thus: ‘May these beings live happily, free from enmity, affliction, and anxiety!’
“He is one of right view, possessing a right perspective.
“He is one who gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life.
“He is one who pulls out hair and beard, pursuing the practice of pulling out hair and beard.
“He is one who pulls out hair and beard, pursuing the practice of pulling out hair and beard.
“He is pleasing and agreeable to most of the bhikkhunīs.
“He is seldom ill or afflicted, possessing an even digestion that is neither too cool nor too hot but moderate and suitable for striving.
“He is seldom ill or afflicted, possessing an even digestion that is neither too cool nor too hot but moderate and suitable for striving.
“He is skillful and diligent … in order to carry out and arrange them properly.
“He is staying at Beluvagāmaka near Vesālī, householder.”
“He is the nāga who outshines all,like the Himalayas amid the other mountains.Among all things named nāga,he, unsurpassed, is the one truly named.
“He is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
“He is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
“He is wise; he possesses the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
“He is wise; he possesses the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
“He is without longing.
“He keeps to one house, to one morsel of food; he keeps to two houses, to two morsels … he keeps to seven houses, to seven morsels.
“He loves the Dhamma … in regard to the Dhamma and discipline.
“He meditates in dependence on earth, in dependence on water, in dependence on fire, in dependence on air, in dependence on the base of the infinity of space, in dependence on the base of the infinity of consciousness, in dependence on the base of nothingness, in dependence on the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, in dependence on this world, in dependence on the other world, in dependence on what is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, and examined by the mind.
“He possesses these seven good qualities.
“He recollects his manifold past abodes … with their aspects and details.
“He recollects his manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births … … thus he recollects his manifold past abodes with their aspects and details.
“He recollects his manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many eons of world-dissolution, many eons of world-evolution, many eons of world-dissolution and world-evolution thus: ‘There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn elsewhere, and there too I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn here.’
Thus he recollects his manifold past abodes with their aspects and details.
“He recollects his manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many eons of world-dissolution, many eons of world-evolution, many eons of world-dissolution and world-evolution thus: ‘There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn elsewhere, and there too I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn here.’
Thus he recollects his manifold past abodes with their aspects and details.
“He resorts to a secluded lodging: the forest, the foot of a tree, a mountain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a jungle highland, the open air, a heap of straw.
“He resorts to a secluded lodging: the forest, the foot of a tree, a mountain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a jungle thicket, an open space, a heap of straw.
“He sees beings passing away and being reborn … and he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma.
“He speaks divisively.
“He speaks divisively.
“He speaks divisively.
“He speaks falsehood.
“He speaks harshly.
“He speaks harshly.
“He speaks harshly.
“He takes what is not given.
“He takes what is not given.
“He takes what is not given; he steals the wealth and property of others in the village or forest.
“He taught me morethan my thoughts contained:the Buddha, delighting in non-proliferation,instructed me in non-proliferation.
“He then understands thus: ‘There is this; there is the inferior; there is the superior; there is a further escape from whatever is involved with perception.’
When he knows and sees thus, his mind is liberated from the taint of sensuality, from the taint of existence, and from the taint of ignorance.
“He trains thus: ‘Contemplating impermanence, I will breathe in’; he trains thus: ‘Contemplating impermanence, I will breathe out.’
He trains thus: ‘Contemplating fading away, I will breathe in’; he trains thus: ‘Contemplating fading away, I will breathe out.’
He trains thus: ‘Contemplating cessation, I will breathe in’; he trains thus: ‘Contemplating cessation, I will breathe out.’
He trains thus: ‘Contemplating relinquishment, I will breathe in’; he trains thus: ‘Contemplating relinquishment, I will breathe out.’
“He trains thus: ‘Experiencing rapture, I will breathe in’; he trains thus: ‘Experiencing rapture, I will breathe out.’
He trains thus: ‘Experiencing happiness, I will breathe in’; he trains thus: ‘Experiencing happiness, I will breathe out.’
He trains thus: ‘Experiencing the mental activity, I will breathe in’; he trains thus: ‘Experiencing the mental activity, I will breathe out.’
He trains thus: ‘Tranquilizing the mental activity, I will breathe in’; he trains thus: ‘Tranquilizing the mental activity, I will breathe out.’
“He trains thus: ‘Experiencing the mind, I will breathe in’; he trains thus: ‘Experiencing the mind, I will breathe out.’
He trains thus: ‘Gladdening the mind, I will breathe in’; he trains thus: ‘Gladdening the mind, I will breathe out.’
He trains thus: ‘Concentrating the mind, I will breathe in’; he trains thus: ‘Concentrating the mind, I will breathe out.’
He trains thus: ‘Liberating the mind, I will breathe in’; he trains thus: ‘Liberating the mind, I will breathe out.’
“He trains, bhikkhu, therefore he is called a trainee.
“He understands the minds of other beings and persons, having encompassed them with his own mind.
“He understands the minds of other beings and persons, having encompassed them with his own mind.
“He understands thus: ‘Formerly, there was greed; that was unwholesome.
“He was a disciple, Ānanda.
“He was a disciple, Ānanda.
“He wears hemp robes, robes of hemp-mixed cloth, robes made from shrouds, rag-robes, tree bark, antelope hides, strips of antelope hide, robes of kusa grass, bark fabric, or wood-shavings fabric; a mantle made of head hair or of animal wool, a covering made of owls’ wings.
“He wears hemp robes, robes of hemp-mixed cloth, shroud robes, rag-robes; robes made from tree bark, antelope hides, strips of antelope hide; robes of kusa grass, bark fabric, or wood-shavings fabric; a mantle made of head hair or of animal wool; a covering made of owls’ wings.
“He who praises one deserving blameor blames one deserving praisecasts with his mouth an unlucky throwby which he finds no happiness.
“He whose virtue has no vacillation,who is alert and meditative,whose mind has been mastered,one-pointed, well concentrated;
“He wields the various kinds of psychic potency: having been one, he becomes many; having been many, he becomes one; he appears and vanishes; he goes unhindered through a wall, through a rampart, through a mountain as though through space; he dives in and out of the earth as though it were water; he walks on water without sinking as though it were earth; seated cross-legged, he travels in space like a bird; with his hand he touches and strokes the moon and sun so powerful and mighty; he exercises mastery with the body as far as the brahmā world.
“He would sleep well, Bhante.
“Here now, Māluṅkyāputta, what should we say to the young bhikkhus when an old man like you, decrepit and advanced in years, asks for a brief exhortation from the Tathāgata?”
“Here, a bhikkhu delights in work, takes delight in work, is devoted to delight in work … … he delights in proliferation, takes delight in proliferation, is devoted to delight in proliferation.
“Here, a bhikkhu delights in work, takes delight in work, is devoted to delight in work; he delights in talk, takes delight in talk, is devoted to delight in talk; he delights in sleep, takes delight in sleep, is devoted to delight in sleep; he delights in company, takes delight in company, is devoted to delight in company; he delights in bonding, takes delight in bonding, is devoted to delight in bonding; he delights in proliferation, takes delight in proliferation, is devoted to delight in proliferation.
“Here, a bhikkhu develops insight preceded by serenity.
“Here, a bhikkhu does not delight in work, does not take delight in work, is not devoted to delight in work … … does not delight in proliferation, does not take delight in proliferation, is not devoted to delight in proliferation.
“Here, a bhikkhu does not delight in work, does not take delight in work, is not devoted to delight in work; he does not delight in talk, does not take delight in talk, is not devoted to delight in talk; he does not delight in sleep, does not take delight in sleep, is not devoted to delight in sleep; he does not delight in company, does not take delight in company, is not devoted to delight in company; he does not delight in bonding, does not take delight in bonding, is not devoted to delight in bonding; he does not delight in proliferation, does not take delight in proliferation, is not devoted to delight in proliferation.
“Here, a bhikkhu dwells in dependence on a certain village or town.
“Here, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in a certain peaceful liberation of mind.
“Here, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in a certain peaceful liberation of mind.
“Here, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in a certain peaceful liberation of mind.
“Here, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in a certain peaceful liberation of mind.
“Here, a bhikkhu has a keen desire to undertake the training and does not lose his fondness for undertaking the training in the future.
“Here, a bhikkhu has abandoned five factors; possesses six factors; has a single guard and four supports; has dispelled personal truths, totally renounced seeking, purified his intentions, tranquilized bodily activity, and become well liberated in mind and well liberated by wisdom.
“Here, a bhikkhu has abandoned five factors; possesses six factors; has a single guard and four supports; has dispelled personal truths, totally renounced seeking, purified his intentions, tranquilized bodily activity, and become well liberated in mind and well liberated by wisdom.
“Here, a bhikkhu has some work to do.
“Here, a bhikkhu has to do some work.
“Here, a bhikkhu is a maker of disciplinary issues and he does not speak in praise of the settlement of disciplinary issues.
“Here, a bhikkhu is angry and hostile.
“Here, a bhikkhu is content with any kind of robe, and he speaks in praise of contentment with any kind of robe, and he does not engage in a wrong search, in what is improper, for the sake of a robe.
“Here, a bhikkhu is devoid of lust for sensual pleasures, devoid of desire, affection, thirst, passion, and craving for them.
“Here, a bhikkhu is endowed with faith, virtuous, learned, secluded, energetic, mindful, and wise.
“Here, a bhikkhu is endowed with faith.
“Here, a bhikkhu is endowed with faith.
“Here, a bhikkhu is himself of few desires and speaks to the bhikkhus on fewness of desires.
“Here, a bhikkhu is not devoid of lust for sensual pleasures, not devoid of desire, affection, thirst, passion, and craving for them.
“Here, a bhikkhu is not devoid of lust for sensual pleasures, not devoid of desire, affection, thirst, passion, and craving for them.
“Here, a bhikkhu is not devoid of lust for sensual pleasures, not devoid of desire, affection, thirst, passion, and craving for them.
“Here, a bhikkhu is not one of quick apprehension concerning wholesome teachings, and he is not capable of retaining in mind the teachings he has learned.
“Here, a bhikkhu is not one of quick apprehension concerning wholesome teachings, but he is capable of retaining in mind the teachings he has learned.
“Here, a bhikkhu is not one of quick apprehension concerning wholesome teachings.
“Here, a bhikkhu is not one of quick apprehension concerning wholesome teachings.
“Here, a bhikkhu is not one of quick apprehension concerning wholesome teachings; he is not capable of retaining in mind the teachings he has learned; he does not investigate the meaning of the teachings he has retained in mind; and he does not understand the meaning and the Dhamma and practice in accordance with the Dhamma.
“Here, a bhikkhu is not perplexed about the Teacher, does not doubt him, is convinced about him and places confidence in him.
“Here, a bhikkhu is old, overcome by old age.
“Here, a bhikkhu is one of quick apprehension concerning wholesome teachings; he is capable of retaining in mind the teachings he has learned.
“Here, a bhikkhu is one of quick apprehension concerning wholesome teachings; he is capable of retaining in mind the teachings he has learned;  he investigates the meaning of the teachings he has retained in mind; he has understood the meaning and the Dhamma and practices in accordance with the Dhamma.
“Here, a bhikkhu is one of quick apprehension concerning wholesome teachings; he is capable of retaining in mind the teachings he has learned; he investigates the meaning of the teachings he has retained in mind; he has understood the meaning and the Dhamma and practices in accordance with the Dhamma; he is a good speaker with a good delivery, gifted with speech that is polished, clear, articulate, expressive of the meaning; he is one who instructs, encourages, inspires, and gladdens his fellow monks.
“Here, a bhikkhu is perplexed about the Teacher, doubts him, is not convinced about him and does not place confidence in him.
“Here, a bhikkhu is perplexed about the Teacher, doubts him, is not convinced about him and does not place confidence in him.
“Here, a bhikkhu is perplexed about the Teacher, doubts him, is not convinced about him, and does not place confidence in him.
“Here, a bhikkhu is practicing thus: ‘It might not be, and it might not be mine.
“Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
“Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
“Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
“Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
“Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
“Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
“Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he has abandoned immorality and remains secluded from it.
“Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous….
“Here, a bhikkhu is virtuous….
“Here, a bhikkhu is young, a black-haired young man endowed with the blessing of youth, in the prime of life.
“Here, a bhikkhu learns the Dhamma—the discourses, mixed prose and verse, expositions, verses, inspired utterances, quotations, birth stories, amazing accounts, and questions-and-answers—but he does not pass the day in learning the Dhamma.
“Here, a bhikkhu learns the Dhamma—the discourses, mixed prose and verse, expositions, verses, inspired utterances, quotations, birth stories, amazing accounts, and questions-and-answers—but he goes further and understands its meaning with wisdom.
“Here, a bhikkhu lives in dependence on the Teacher or on a certain fellow monk in the position of a teacher, toward whom he has set up a keen sense of moral shame and moral dread, affection and reverence.
“Here, a bhikkhu maintains bodily acts of loving-kindness toward his fellow monks both openly and privately.
“Here, a bhikkhu maintains bodily acts of loving-kindness toward his fellow monks both openly and privately.
“Here, a bhikkhu masters the Dhamma: discourses, mixed prose and verse, expositions, verses, inspired utterances, quotations, birth stories, amazing accounts, and questions-andanswers.
“Here, a bhikkhu might say thus: ‘I have developed and cultivated the liberation of the mind by loving-kindness, made it my vehicle and basis, carried it out, consolidated it, and properly undertaken it, yet ill will still obsesses my mind.’
He should be told: ‘Not so!
“Here, a bhikkhu recollects his manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births … Thus he recollects his manifold past abodes with their aspects and details.
“Here, a bhikkhu reflects thus: ‘I am now young, a black-haired young man endowed with the blessing of youth, in the prime of life.
“Here, a bhikkhu understands as it really is: ‘This is mental sluggishness in me.’
Or when the mind is constricted internally, he understands as it really is: ‘My mind is constricted internally.’
Or when his mind is distracted externally, he understands as it really is: ‘My mind is distracted externally.’
He knows feelings as they arise, as they remain present, as they disappear; he knows perceptions as they arise, as they remain present, as they disappear; he knows thoughts as they arise, as they remain present, as they disappear.
“Here, a bhikkhu who is a trainee does not have many tasks and duties; though he is competent in the various chores that must be done, he does not neglect seclusion but devotes himself to internal serenity of mind.
“Here, a bhikkhu who is a trainee has many tasks and duties and is competent in various chores that must be done, so he neglects seclusion and does not devote himself to internal serenity of mind.
“Here, a bhikkhu wields the various kinds of psychic potency: having been one, he becomes many; having been many, he becomes one; he appears and vanishes; he goes unhindered through a wall, through a rampart, through a mountain as though through space; he dives in and out of the earth as though it were water; he walks on water without sinking as though it were earth; seated cross-legged, he travels in space like a bird; with his hand he touches and strokes the moon and sun so powerful and mighty; he exercises mastery with the body as far as the brahmā world.
“Here, a forest bhikkhu reflects thus: ‘I am now dwelling all alone in the forest.
“Here, a king’s excellent thoroughbred horse is well born on both sides, maternal and paternal; he is born in whatever area other excellent thoroughbred horses are born.
“Here, a noble disciple dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter.
“Here, a noble disciple has gone for refuge to the Buddha.
“Here, a noble disciple possesses unwavering confidence in the Buddha thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
This is the first stream of merit….
“Here, a noble disciple, having abandoned the destruction of life, abstains from the destruction of life.
“Here, a Tathāgata has arisen in the world, an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, an Enlightened One, a Blessed One, and the Dhamma leading to peace, nibbāna, and enlightenment is taught as proclaimed by a Fortunate One.
“Here, a virtuous person accomplished in virtuous behavior accumulates much wealth because of heedfulness.
“Here, a wheel-turning monarch, a righteous king who rules by the Dhamma, relying just on the Dhamma, honoring, respecting, and venerating the Dhamma, taking the Dhamma as his standard, banner, and authority, provides righteous protection, shelter, and guard for the people in his court.
“Here, Abhaya, a bhikkhu is virtuous … … Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
“Here, an evil bhikkhu is immoral, of bad character, impure, of suspect behavior, secretive in his actions, not an ascetic though claiming to be one, not a celibate though claiming to be one, inwardly rotten, corrupt, depraved.
“Here, an immoral person deficient in virtuous behavior loses much wealth because of heedlessness.
“Here, Anuruddha, in the morning a woman dwells at home with a mind obsessed by the stain of miserliness.
“Here, Anuruddha, to whichever husband her parents give her—doing so out of a desire for her good, seeking her welfare, taking compassion on her, acting out of compassion for her—a woman rises before him and retires after him, undertaking whatever needs to be done, agreeable in her conduct and pleasing in her speech.
“Here, Bhante, a bhikkhu recollects his manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births … … Thus he recollects his manifold past abodes with their aspects and details.
“Here, Bhante, a bhikkhu with taints destroyed has clearly seen all conditioned phenomena as they really are with correct wisdom as impermanent.
“Here, Bhante, a bhikkhu with taints destroyed has clearly seen all conditioned phenomena as they really are with correct wisdom as impermanent.
“Here, Bhante, after our meal, on returning from our alms round, we assembled in the assembly hall and were sitting together engaging in various kinds of pointless talk, that is: talk about kings, thieves, and ministers of state … talk about becoming this or that.”
“Here, Bhante, after our meal, on returning from our alms round, we assembled in the assembly hall and were sitting together when we took to arguing and quarreling and fell into a dispute, stabbing each other with piercing words.”
“Here, Bhante, having risen as the night was receding, I chanted the Pārāyana….
“Here, Bhante, I think thus: ‘May I live just a night and a day so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
“Here, Bhante, I think thus: ‘May I live just a night and a day so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
“Here, Bhante, I think: ‘May I live just a day so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
“Here, Bhante, I think: ‘May I live just a day so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
“Here, Bhante, I think: ‘May I live just half a day so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
“Here, Bhante, I think: ‘May I live just the length of time it takes to breathe out after breathing in, or to breathe in after breathing out, so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
“Here, Bhante, I think: ‘May I live just the length of time it takes to chew and swallow a single mouthful of food so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
“Here, Bhante, I think: ‘May I live just the length of time it takes to chew and swallow four or five mouthfuls of food so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
“Here, Bhante, I think: ‘May I live just the length of time it takes to eat a single alms meal so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
“Here, Bhante, I think: ‘May I live just the time it takes to breathe out after breathing in, or to breathe in after breathing out, so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
“Here, Bhante, I think: ‘May I live just the time it takes to chew and swallow a single mouthful of food so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
“Here, Bhante, I think: ‘May I live just the time it takes to chew and swallow four or five mouthfuls of food so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
“Here, Bhante, I think: ‘May I live just the time it takes to eat a single alms meal so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
“Here, Bhante, I think: ‘May I live just the time it takes to eat half an alms meal so that I may attend to the Blessed One’s teaching.
“Here, Bhante, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
“Here, Bhante, the brahmins of the west enjoin a disciple thus: ‘Come, good man, having gotten up early, you should stroke the ground from your bed.
“Here, Bhante, there might be two disciples of the Blessed One equal in faith, virtuous behavior, and wisdom, but one is generous while the other is not.
“Here, Bhante, when I was alone in seclusion, the following course of thought arose in my mind … … Thus these qualities will be purified in me and will be more widely known as purified.”
“Here, Bhante, when we had assembled and were sitting together, this conversation arose … … ‘The manifestation of these five gems is rare in the world.’”
“Here, bhikkhu, a bhikkhu has heard: ‘This is suffering,’ and he sees the meaning of this, having pierced through it with wisdom.
“Here, bhikkhu, a bhikkhu learns the Dhamma: the discourses, mixed prose and verse, expositions, verses, inspired utterances, quotations, birth stories, amazing accounts, and questions-and-answers.
“Here, bhikkhu, a bhikkhu learns the Dhamma—the discourses, mixed prose and verse, expositions, verses, inspired utterances, quotations, birth stories, amazing accounts, and questions-and-answers—but he does not go further and understand its meaning with wisdom.
“Here, bhikkhu, a bhikkhu possesses the right view of one beyond training.
“Here, bhikkhu, a wheel-turning monarch, a righteous king who rules by the Dhamma, relying just on the Dhamma, honoring, respecting, and venerating the Dhamma, taking the Dhamma as his standard, banner, and authority, provides righteous protection, shelter, and guard for the people in his court.
“Here, bhikkhu, a wise person of great wisdom does not intend for his own affliction, or for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both.
“Here, bhikkhu, when a bhikkhu’s mind is obsessed and oppressed by sensual lust, and he does not understand as it really is the escape from arisen sensual lust, on that occasion he should approach an esteemed bhikkhu and say to him: ‘Friend, my mind is obsessed and oppressed by sensual lust, and I do not understand as it really is the escape from arisen sensual lust.
“Here, bhikkhus, a bad person discloses the faults of others even when not asked about them, how much more then when asked.
“Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu dwells in dependence on a certain village or town.
“Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu fulfills virtuous behavior, but cultivates concentration and wisdom only to a moderate extent.
“Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu fulfills virtuous behavior, but cultivates concentration and wisdom only to a moderate extent.
“Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu fulfills virtuous behavior, concentration, and wisdom.
“Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu is percipient thus: ‘This is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, the stilling of all activities, the relinquishing of all acquisitions, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, nibbāna.’
It is in this way, bhikkhus, that a bhikkhu could obtain such a state of concentration that he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth … … he would not be percipient of anything seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, and examined by the mind, but he would still be percipient.”
“Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu is percipient thus: ‘This is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, the stilling of all activities, the relinquishing of all acquisitions, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, nibbāna.’
It is in this way, bhikkhus, that a bhikkhu could obtain such a state of concentration that he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth; of water in relation to water; of fire in relation to fire; of air in relation to air; of the base of the infinity of space in relation to the base of the infinity of space; of the base of the infinity of consciousness in relation to the base of the infinity of consciousness; of the base of nothingness in relation to the base of nothingness; of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception in relation to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception; of this world in relation to this world; of the other world in relation to the other world; of anything seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, and examined by the mind, but he would still be percipient.”
“Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu might say: ‘In the presence of the Blessed One I heard this; in his presence I learned this: “This is the Dhamma; this is the discipline; this is the Teacher’s teaching!”’ That bhikkhu’s statement should neither be approved nor rejected.
“Here, bhikkhus, a good person does not disclose the faults of others even when asked about them, how much less then when not asked.
“Here, bhikkhus, a noble disciple recollects the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
When a noble disciple recollects the Tathāgata, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight.
“Here, bhikkhus, a noble disciple reflects thus: ‘As long as they live the arahants abandon and abstain from the destruction of life; with the rod and weapon laid aside, conscientious and kindly, they dwell compassionate toward all living beings.
“Here, bhikkhus, a noble disciple reflects thus: ‘As long as they live the arahants abandon and abstain from the destruction of life; with the rod and weapon laid aside, conscientious and kindly, they dwell compassionate toward all living beings.
“Here, bhikkhus, a noble disciple reflects thus: ‘As long as they live the arahants abandon and abstain from the destruction of life; with the rod and weapon laid aside, conscientious and kindly, they dwell compassionate toward all living beings.
“Here, bhikkhus, an enemy wishes for an enemy: ‘May he be ugly!’ For what reason?
“Here, bhikkhus, by dwelling together with another person, one comes to know him thus: ‘For a long time this venerable one’s conduct has been broken, flawed, blemished, and blotched, and he does not consistently observe and follow virtuous behavior.
“Here, bhikkhus, having encompassed a mentally corrupted person’s mind with my own mind, I understand that if this person were to die at this time, he would be deposited in hell as if brought there.
“Here, bhikkhus, having encompassed a mentally placid person’s mind with my own mind, I understand that if this person were to die at this time, he would be deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Here, bhikkhus, in the king’s frontier fortress much grass, firewood, and water are stored up for the delight, relief, and ease of its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders.
“Here, bhikkhus, in the king’s frontier fortress the pillar has a deep base and is securely planted, immobile, unshakable.
“Here, bhikkhus, one kind of excellent thoroughbred horse is stirred and acquires a sense of urgency as soon as it sees the shadow of the goad, thinking: ‘What task will my trainer set for me today?
“Here, bhikkhus, one kind of excellent thoroughbred person hears: ‘In such and such a village or town some woman or man has fallen ill or died.’
He is stirred by this and acquires a sense of urgency.
“Here, bhikkhus, secluded from sensual pleasures … some person enters and dwells in the first jhāna….
“Here, bhikkhus, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, some person enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
“Here, bhikkhus, so long as the bhikkhus do not see his offense, a certain person has the same manner of going forward and returning, of looking ahead and looking aside, of bending and stretching his limbs, and of wearing his robes and carrying his outer robe and bowl as the good bhikkhus.
“Here, bhikkhus, some Dhamma speaker speaks little and pointless, and his assembly is not skilled in distinguishing what is meaningful from what is pointless.
“Here, bhikkhus, some person does not value virtuous behavior or take virtuous behavior as an authority, does not value concentration or take concentration as an authority, and does not value wisdom or take wisdom as an authority.
“Here, bhikkhus, some person dwells contemplating impermanence in all conditioned phenomena, perceiving impermanence, experiencing impermanence, constantly, continuously, and uninterruptedly focusing on it with the mind, fathoming it with wisdom.
“Here, bhikkhus, some person dwells contemplating impermanence in the eye, perceiving impermanence, experiencing impermanence, constantly, continuously, and uninterruptedly focusing on it with the mind, fathoming it with wisdom.
“Here, bhikkhus, some person dwells contemplating non-self in all phenomena, perceiving non-self, experiencing non-self, constantly, continuously, and uninterruptedly focusing on it with the mind, fathoming it with wisdom.
“Here, bhikkhus, some person dwells contemplating suffering in all conditioned phenomena, perceiving suffering, experiencing suffering, constantly, continuously, and uninterruptedly focusing on it with the mind, fathoming it with wisdom.
“Here, bhikkhus, some person dwells contemplating suffering in the eye … … dwells contemplating non-self in the eye … … dwells contemplating destruction in the eye … … dwells contemplating vanishing in the eye … … dwells contemplating fading away in the eye … … dwells contemplating cessation in the eye … … dwells contemplating relinquishment in the eye “Here, bhikkhus, some person dwells contemplating the happiness in nibbāna, perceiving such happiness, experiencing such happiness, constantly, continuously, and uninterruptedly focusing on it with the mind, fathoming it with wisdom.
“Here, bhikkhus, some person dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter.
“Here, bhikkhus, some person dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter.
“Here, bhikkhus, some person generates afflictive bodily activities, afflictive verbal activities, and afflictive mental activities.
“Here, bhikkhus, some person has created trifling bad kamma yet it leads him to hell, while some other person here has created exactly the same trifling kamma yet it is to be experienced in this very life, without even a slight being seen, much less abundant.
“Here, bhikkhus, someone engages in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
“Here, bhikkhus, someone has practiced the basis of meritorious activity consisting in giving to a limited extent; he has practiced the basis of meritorious activity consisting in virtuous behavior to a limited extent; but he has not undertaken the basis of meritorious activity consisting in meditative development.
“Here, bhikkhus, someone is afflicted with the loss of relatives, wealth, or health, but he does not reflect thus: ‘Human life in the world is of such a nature that the eight worldly conditions revolve around the world, and the world revolves around these eight worldly conditions, namely, gain and loss, disrepute and fame, blame and praise, and pleasure and pain.’
Thus when afflicted with loss of relatives, wealth, or health, he sorrows, languishes, and laments; he weeps beating his breast and becomes confused.
“Here, bhikkhus, someone is imprisoned for half a kahāpaṇa, a kahāpaṇa, or a hundred kahāpaṇas, while someone else is not imprisoned for the same amount of money.
“Here, bhikkhus, the Tathāgata arises in the world, an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.
“Here, bhikkhus, the Tathāgata understands as it really is the possible as possible and the impossible as impossible.
“Here, bhikkhus, the Teacher or a fellow monk in the position of a teacher teaches the Dhamma to a bhikkhu.
“Here, bhikkhus, when conversing with someone, one comes to know: ‘Judging from the way this venerable one initiates, formulates, and poses a question, he is unwise, not wise.
“Here, bhikkhus, when day has receded and night has approached, a bhikkhu reflects thus: ‘I could die on account of many causes.
“Here, bhikkhus, when day has receded and night has approached, a bhikkhu reflects thus: ‘I could die on account of many causes.
“Here, bhikkhus, when dealing with a person, one comes to know him thus: ‘This venerable one deals with one person in one way, in another way if he deals with two, in still another way if he deals with three, and in still another way if he deals with many.
“Here, bhikkhus, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, ‘space is infinite,’ some person enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space.
“Here, Brahmin Dhammika, an ascetic does not insult one who insults him, does not scold one who scolds him, and does not argue with one who argues with him.
“Here, brahmin, secluded from sensual pleasures …  … This is the third true knowledge attained by him.
“Here, brahmin, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
“Here, brahmin, some ascetic or brahmin, claiming to be perfectly celibate, does not actually engage in intercourse with women.
“Here, brahmin, someone destroys life, takes what is not given, engages in sexual misconduct, speaks falsehood, speaks divisively, speaks harshly, indulges in idle chatter; he is full of longing, has a mind of ill will, and holds wrong view.
“Here, brahmin, someone destroys life, takes what is not given, engages in sexual misconduct, speaks falsehood, speaks divisively, speaks harshly, indulges in idle chatter; he is full of longing, has a mind of ill will, and holds wrong view.
“Here, brahmin, someone has done deeds of bodily misconduct, not deeds of bodily good conduct; he has done deeds of verbal misconduct, not deeds of verbal good conduct; he has done deeds of mental misconduct, not deeds of mental good conduct.
“Here, brahmin, the noble disciple reflects thus: ‘The result of the destruction of life is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons the destruction of life; he descends from the destruction of life.
“Here, brahmin, the noble disciple reflects thus: ‘The result of wrong view is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong view; he descends from wrong view.
“Here, brahmin, when I am dwelling in dependence on a village or town, in the morning I dress, take my bowl and robe, and enter that village or town for alms.
“Here, brahmin, when I am dwelling in dependence on a village or town, in the morning I dress, take my bowl and robe, and enter that village or town for alms.
“Here, brahmin, when I am dwelling in dependence on a village or town, in the morning I dress, take my bowl and robe, and enter that village or town for alms.
“Here, brahmins, secluded from sensual pleasures … a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna ….
“Here, ever mindful a bhikkhu goes forward, ever mindful he returns, ever mindful he stands, ever mindful he sits, ever mindful he lies down to sleep, ever mindful he undertakes work.
“Here, friend Sāriputta, a bhikkhu is skilled in meaning, skilled in the Dhamma, skilled in language, skilled in phrasing, and skilled in sequence.
“Here, friend Sāriputta, a bhikkhu learns the Dhamma: the discourses, mixed prose and verse, expositions, verses, inspired utterances, quotations, birth stories, amazing accounts, and questions-and-answers.
“Here, friend Sāriputta, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, I survey a thousandfold world system.
“Here, friend Ānanda, a bhikkhu is percipient thus: ‘This is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, the stilling of all activities, the relinquishing of all acquisitions, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, nibbāna.’
It is in this way, friend Ānanda, that a bhikkhu could obtain such a state of concentration that he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth … he would not be percipient of anything seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, examined by the mind, but he would still be percipient.”
“Here, friend Ānanda, beings do not understand as it really is: ‘These perceptions pertain to deterioration; these perceptions pertain to stabilization; these perceptions pertain to distinction; these perceptions pertain to penetration.’
This is why some beings here do not attain nibbāna in this very life.
“Here, friend Ānanda, beings understand as it really is: ‘These perceptions pertain to deterioration; these perceptions pertain to stabilization; these perceptions pertain to distinction; these perceptions pertain to penetration.’
This is why some beings here attain nibbāna in this very life.”
“Here, friend, secluded from sensual pleasures … a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna … and he understands it with wisdom.
“Here, friend, secluded from sensual pleasures … a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna ….
“Here, friend, secluded from sensual pleasures … a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna ….
“Here, friend, secluded from sensual pleasures … a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna ….
“Here, friend, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, ‘space is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space.
“Here, friends, a bhikkhu accomplished in virtuous behavior, concentration, and wisdom might enter and emerge from the cessation of perception and feeling.
“Here, friends, a bhikkhu declares final knowledge thus: ‘I understand: “Destroyed is birth, the spiritual life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming back to any state of being.”’ The Tathāgata or his disciple who is a jhāna-attainer—skilled in attainment, skilled in others’ minds, skilled in the ways of others’ minds—questions him, interrogates him, and cross-examines him.
“Here, friends, a bhikkhu declares final knowledge thus: ‘I understand: “Destroyed is birth, the spiritual life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming back to any state of being.”’ The Tathāgata or his disciple who is a jhāna-attainer—skilled in attainment, skilled in others’ minds, skilled in the ways of others’ minds—questions him, interrogates him, and cross-examines him.
“Here, friends, a bhikkhu is a boaster, one who brags about achievements: ‘I attain and emerge from the first jhāna.
“Here, friends, a bhikkhu teaches the bhikkhus the Dhamma that is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing; he reveals the spiritual life that is perfectly complete and pure.
“Here, friends, a noble disciple recollects the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant … the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
When a noble disciple recollects the Tathāgata, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight.
“Here, friends, bhikkhus who are Dhamma specialists disparage those bhikkhus who are meditators, saying: ‘They meditate and cogitate,: “We are meditators, we are meditators!” Why do they meditate?
“Here, friends, I see some person being reproved at a proper time, not disturbed at an improper time; being reproved truthfully, not disturbed falsely; being reproved gently, not disturbed harshly; being reproved in a beneficial way, not disturbed in a harmful way; being reproved by one with a mind of loving-kindness, not disturbed by one who harbors hatred.
“Here, friends, I see some person being reproved at an improper time, not disturbed at a proper time; being reproved about what is false, not disturbed about what is true; being reproved harshly, not disturbed gently; being reproved in a harmful way, not disturbed in a beneficial way; being reproved by one who harbors hatred, not disturbed by one with a mind of loving-kindness.
“Here, friends, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
“Here, friends, some person appears to be extremely mild, humble, and calm so long as he is staying near the Teacher or a fellow monk in the position of a teacher.
“Here, having abandoned false speech, someone abstains from false speech.
“Here, having abandoned the destruction of life, someone abstains from the destruction of life; with the rod and weapon laid aside, conscientious and kindly, he dwells compassionate toward all living beings.
“Here, householder, a noble disciple serves the Saṅgha of bhikkhus with robes; he serves the Saṅgha of bhikkhus with almsfood; he serves the Saṅgha of bhikkhus with lodgings; he serves the Saṅgha of bhikkhus with medicines and provisions for the sick.
“Here, householder, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
“Here, householder, someone who enjoys sensual pleasures seeks wealth unrighteously, by violence.
“Here, householder, with wealth acquired by energetic striving … righteously gained, the noble disciple makes himself happy and pleased and properly maintains himself in happiness; he makes his parents happy and pleased and properly maintains them in happiness; he makes his wife and children, his slaves, workers, and servants happy and pleased and properly maintains them in happiness; he makes his friends and companions happy and pleased and properly maintains them in happiness.
“Here, householder, with wealth acquired by energetic striving, amassed by the strength of his arms, earned by the sweat of his brow, righteous wealth righteously gained, the noble disciple makes himself happy and pleased and properly maintains himself in happiness; he makes his parents happy and pleased and properly maintains them in happiness; he makes his wife and children, his slaves, workers, and servants happy and pleased and properly maintains them in happiness.
“Here, Kimbila, after a Tathāgata has attained final nibbāna, the bhikkhus, bhikkhunīs, male lay followers, and female lay followers dwell with reverence and deference toward the Teacher.
“Here, Kimbila, after a Tathāgata has attained final nibbāna, the bhikkhus, bhikkhunīs, male lay followers, and female lay followers dwell with reverence and deference toward the Teacher.
“Here, Kimbila, after a Tathāgata has attained final nibbāna, the bhikkhus, bhikkhunīs, male lay followers, and female lay followers dwell without reverence and deference toward the Teacher.
“Here, Kimbila, after a Tathāgata has attained final nibbāna, the bhikkhus, bhikkhunīs, male lay followers, and female lay followers dwell without reverence and deference toward the Teacher.
“Here, Mahānāma, a noble disciple recollects the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
When a noble disciple recollects the Tathāgata, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight, based on the Tathāgata.
“Here, Mahānāma, some teacher prescribes the full understanding of sensual pleasures, but not of forms or feelings.
“Here, Mahānāma, with wealth acquired by energetic striving, amassed by the strength of his arms, earned by the sweat of his brow, righteous wealth righteously gained, a clansman honors, respects, esteems, and venerates his parents.
“Here, Mahānāma, you should recollect the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
When a noble disciple recollects the Tathāgata, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight, based on the Tathāgata.
“Here, Mahānāma, you should recollect the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is … the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
When a noble disciple recollects the Tathāgata, on that occasion his mind is not obsessed by lust, hatred, or delusion; on that occasion his mind is simply straight, based on the Tathāgata.
“Here, Mallikā, some woman is prone to anger and easily exasperated.
“Here, Master Gotama, a brahmin is well born on both his maternal and paternal sides, of pure descent, unassailable and impeccable with respect to birth as far back as the seventh paternal generation.
“Here, Master Gotama, a brahmin is well born on both sides … … and in the marks of a great man.
“Here, Master Gotama, on the uposatha day, the brahmins wash their heads and put on a pair of new linen clothes.
“Here, Master Gotama, on the uposatha day, the brahmins wash their heads and put on a pair of new linen clothes.
“Here, Master Gotama, we had assembled and were sitting together when this conversation arose: ‘Such are the brahmin truths, such are the brahmin truths.’”
“Here, Meghiya, a bhikkhu has good friends, good companions, good comrades.
“Here, Moggallāna, a bhikkhu has heard: ‘Nothing is worth holding to.’
When a bhikkhu has heard: ‘Nothing is worth holding to,’ he directly knows all things.
“Here, Moggallāna, through non-attention to all marks, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the markless mental concentration.
“Here, Nandiya, you should recollect the Tathāgata thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
Thus you should establish mindfulness internally based on the Tathāgata.
“Here, Nāgita, I see a bhikkhu dwelling on the outskirts of a village sitting in a state of concentration.
“Here, one person does not violate and does not become remorseful, and does not understand as it really is the liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where these arisen bad unwholesome states of his cease without remainder.
“Here, one person does not violate and does not become remorseful, and understands as it really is the liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where these arisen bad unwholesome states of his cease without remainder.
“Here, one person does not violate and yet becomes remorseful, and does not understand as it really is the liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where these arisen bad unwholesome states of his cease without remainder.
“Here, one person violates and does not become remorseful, and does not understand as it really is the liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where these arisen bad unwholesome states of his cease without remainder.
“Here, one person violates and then becomes remorseful, and does not understand as it really is the liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where these arisen bad unwholesome states of his cease without remainder.
“Here, respected Moggallāna, when a bhikkhu is liberated in both respects, those devas know him thus: ‘This venerable one is liberated in both respects.
“Here, Sandha, for an excellent thoroughbred person, the perception of earth has disappeared in relation to earth, the perception of water has disappeared in relation to water, the perception of fire has disappeared in relation to fire, the perception of air has disappeared in relation to air, the perception of the base of the infinity of space has disappeared in relation to the base of the infinity of space, the perception of the base of the infinity of consciousness has disappeared in relation to the base of the infinity of consciousness, the perception of the base of nothingness has disappeared in relation to the base of nothingness, the perception of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception has disappeared in relation to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, the perception of this world has disappeared in relation to this world, the perception of the other world has disappeared in relation to the other world; perception has disappeared in relation to whatever is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, and examined by the mind.
“Here, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
“Here, some bhikkhu dwells in dependence upon a certain village or town.
“Here, some bhikkhu, when he sees the cloud of dust, sinks, founders, does not brace himself, and cannot maintain the spiritual life.
“Here, some person attains nibbāna through exertion in this very life.
“Here, some person engages in impure bodily, verbal, and mental action.
“Here, some teacher whose behavior is unpurified claims: ‘I am one whose behavior is purified.
“Here, some warrior takes up a sword and shield, arms himself with a bow and quiver, and enters the fray of battle.
“Here, some warrior, when he sees the cloud of dust, sinks, founders, does not brace himself, and cannot enter the battle.
“Here, someone destroys life.
“Here, someone destroys life.
“Here, someone destroys life; he is murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to living beings.
“Here, someone destroys life; he is murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to living beings.
“Here, someone destroys life; he is murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to living beings.
“Here, someone gives a gift to an ascetic or a brahmin: food and drink; clothing and vehicles; garlands, scents, and unguents; bedding, dwellings, and lighting.
“Here, someone is devoid of lust, desire, affection, thirst, passion, and craving for sensual pleasures.
“Here, someone is full of longing.
“Here, someone is full of longing.
“Here, someone is not devoid of lust, desire, affection, thirst, passion, and craving for sensual pleasures.
“Here, someone is without longing.
“Here, someone is without longing.
“Here, someone refutes and disproves a doctrine contrary to the Dhamma with a doctrine contrary to the Dhamma.
“Here, someone speaks falsehood.
“Here, someone speaks falsehood.
“Here, someone, having abandoned false speech, abstains from false speech.
“Here, someone, having abandoned the destruction of life, abstains from the destruction of life.
“Here, someone, having abandoned the destruction of life, abstains from the destruction of life.
“Here, someone, having abandoned the destruction of life, abstains from the destruction of life.
“Here, someone, having abandoned the destruction of life, abstains from the destruction of life; with the rod and weapon laid aside, conscientious and kindly, he dwells compassionate toward all living beings.
“Here, Subhūti, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
“Here, Sāriputta is one who listens and who makes others listen … he does not foment quarrels.
“Here, Sāriputta understood as it really is: ‘This is mental sluggishness in me.’
Or when the mind was constricted internally, he understood as it really is: ‘My mind is constricted internally.’
Or when his mind was distracted externally, he understood as it really is: ‘My mind is distracted externally.’
For him, feelings were known as they arose, as they remained present, as they disappeared; perceptions were known as they arose, as they remained present, as they disappeared; thoughts were known as they arose, as they remained present, as they disappeared.
“Here, Sāriputta, a bhikkhu himself reveres the Teacher … … he speaks praise of those bhikkhus who have good friends.
“Here, Sāriputta, a number of same-minded deities approached me, paid homage to me, stood to one side, and said: ‘Bhante, at Migāramātā’s Mansion in the Eastern Park, Venerable Sāriputta is teaching the bhikkhus about the person fettered internally and the person fettered externally.
“Here, Sāriputta, some person fulfills virtuous behavior and concentration but cultivates wisdom only to a moderate extent.
“Here, Sāriputta, some person has not abandoned the lower fetters.
“Here, Sāriputta, someone approaches an ascetic or a brahmin and invites him to ask for what he needs, but does not give him what was requested.
“Here, Sāriputta, someone gives a gift with expectations, with a bound mind, looking for rewards; he gives a gift,: ‘Having passed away, I will make use of this.’
He gives that gift to an ascetic or a brahmin: food and drink; clothing and vehicles; garlands, scents, and unguents; bedding, dwellings, and lighting.
“Here, the bhikkhus do not learn the Dhamma: discourses, mixed prose and verse, expositions, verses, inspired utterances, quotations, birth stories, amazing accounts, and questions-and-answers.
“Here, the bhikkhus learn discourses that have been badly acquired, with badly set down words and phrases.
“Here, the bhikkhus learn discourses that have been badly acquired, with badly set down words and phrases.
“Here, the bhikkhus learn discourses that have been well acquired, with well set down words and phrases.
“Here, the bhikkhus learn discourses that have been well acquired, with well set-down words and phrases.
“Here, the bhikkhus learn the Dhamma: discourses … and questions-and-answers.
“Here, the field does not have mounds and ditches; it does not contain stones and gravel; it is not salty; it is deeply furrowed; it has inlets; it has outlets; it has irrigation channels; and it has boundaries.
“Here, the field has mounds and ditches; it contains stones and gravel; it is salty; it is not deeply furrowed; it does not have inlets; it does not have outlets; it does not have irrigation channels; and it does not have boundaries.
“Here, the king is sitting with his queen.
“Here, the lodging is neither too far nor too close, and it possesses a means for going and returning.
“Here, the noble disciple possesses unwavering confidence in the Buddha thus: ‘The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
This is the first pleasant visible dwelling that pertains to the higher mind, which he has achieved for the purification of the impure mind, for the cleansing of the unclean mind.
“Here, the Tathāgata understands as it really is the possible as possible and the impossible as impossible.
“Here, Upāli, bhikkhus explain non-Dhamma as Dhamma … … … and what has been prescribed by the Tathāgata as not having been prescribed by him.
“Here, Upāli, bhikkhus explain non-Dhamma as Dhamma, and Dhamma as non-Dhamma.
“Here, Upāli, bhikkhus explain non-Dhamma as non-Dhamma, and Dhamma as Dhamma.
“Here, Upāli, the Tathāgata arises in the world, an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.
“Here, Vappa, if one is restrained by body, speech, and mind, then, with the fading away of ignorance and the arising of true knowledge, do you see anything on account of which taints productive of painful feeling might flow in upon such a person in future lives?”
“Here, wanderers, a brahmin says thus: ‘All living beings are to be spared.’
Speaking thus, a brahmin speaks truth, not falsehood.
“Here, when a bhikkhu is attending to sensual pleasures, his mind does not launch out upon them, and become placid, settled, and focused on them.
“Here, when a bhikkhu is dwelling in solitude, living independently, a desire arises in him for gain.
“Here, when a wild colt is told: ‘Go forward!’ and is being spurred and incited by its trainer, it backs up and spins the chariot around behind it.
“Here, when the bhikkhus are reproving a bhikkhu for an offense, he exonerates himself by reason of lack of memory, saying: ‘I don’t remember.’
I say this person is similar to the wild colt that, when told: ‘Go forward!’ and when spurred and incited by its trainer, backs up and spins the chariot around behind it.
“Here, Ānanda, a bhikkhu is percipient thus: ‘This is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, the stilling of all activities, the relinquishing of all acquisitions, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, nibbāna.’
It is in this way, Ānanda, that a bhikkhu could obtain such a state of concentration that he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth; of water in relation to water; of fire in relation to fire; of air in relation to air; of the base of the infinity of space in relation to the base of the infinity of space; of the base of the infinity of consciousness in relation to the base of the infinity of consciousness; of the base of nothingness in relation to the base of nothingness; of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception in relation to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception; of this world in relation to this world; of the other world in relation to the other world, but he would still be percipient.”
“Here, Ānanda, a bhikkhu is percipient thus: ‘This is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, the stilling of all activities, the relinquishing of all acquisitions, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, nibbāna.’
It is in this way, Ānanda, that a bhikkhu could obtain such a state of concentration that he would not be percipient of earth in relation to earth; of water in relation to water; of fire in relation to fire; of air in relation to air; of the base of the infinity of space in relation to the base of the infinity of space; of the base of the infinity of consciousness in relation to the base of the infinity of consciousness; of the base of nothingness in relation to the base of nothingness; of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception in relation to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception; of this world in relation to this world; of the other world in relation to the other world; of anything seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, and examined by the mind, but he would still be percipient.”
“Here, Ānanda, a bhikkhu is virtuous….
“Here, Ānanda, a bhikkhu thinks thus: ‘This is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, the stilling of all activities, the relinquishing of all acquisitions, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, nibbāna.’
In this way, Ānanda, a bhikkhu could obtain such a state of concentration that he would have no I-making, mine-making, and underlying tendency to conceit in regard to this conscious body; he would have no I-making, mine-making, and underlying tendency to conceit in regard to all external objects; and he would enter and dwell in that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, through which there is no more I-making, mine-making, and underlying tendency to conceit for one who enters and dwells in it.
“Here, Ānanda, a bhikkhu would attend thus: ‘This is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, the stilling of all activities, the relinquishing of all acquisitions, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, nibbāna.’
It is in this way, Ānanda, that a bhikkhu could obtain such a state of concentration that he would not attend to the eye and forms, the ear and sounds, the nose and odors, the tongue and tastes, the body and tactile objects; that he would not attend to earth, water, fire, or air; he would not attend to the base of the infinity of space, the base of the infinity of consciousness, the base of nothingness, or the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception; he would not attend to this world; he would not attend to the other world; he would not attend to anything seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, and examined by the mind, but he would still be attentive.”
“Here, Ānanda, a bhikkhu’s mind is liberated from the five lower fetters but not yet liberated in the unsurpassed extinction of the acquisitions.
“Here, Ānanda, a bhikkhu’s mind is not yet liberated from the five lower fetters, but at the time of his death he gets to see the Tathāgata.
“Here, Ānanda, bhikkhus explain non-Dhamma as Dhamma … … and what has been prescribed by the Tathāgata as not having been prescribed by him.
“Here, Ānanda, bhikkhus explain non-Dhamma as non-Dhamma … … and what has been prescribed by the Tathāgata as having been prescribed by him.
“Here, Ānanda, having encompassed his mind with my own mind, I understand some person thus: ‘Wholesome qualities and unwholesome qualities are found in this person.’
On a later occasion, having encompassed his mind with my own mind, I understand him thus: ‘This person’s wholesome qualities have disappeared, unwholesome qualities are manifest, but he has a wholesome root that has not been eradicated.
“Here, Ānanda, having encompassed his mind with my own mind, I understand some person thus: ‘Wholesome qualities and unwholesome qualities are found in this person.’
On a later occasion, having encompassed his mind with my own mind, I understand him thus: ‘This person’s wholesome qualities have disappeared, unwholesome qualities are manifest, but he has a wholesome root that has not been eradicated.
“Here, Ānanda, in whatever village or town a man or a woman has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha; he or she is virtuous and of good character, abstaining from the destruction of life, taking what is not given, sexual misconduct, false speech, and liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness; and he or she dwells at home with a heart devoid of the stain of miserliness, freely generous, openhanded, delighting in relinquishment, devoted to charity, delighting in giving and sharing—in such a case, ascetics and brahmins in quarters speak praise, saying: ‘In such and such a village or town a man or a woman has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha … delighting in giving and sharing.’
“Here, Ānanda, the Tathāgata suffuses with his radiance a thousand-to-the-third-power great world system.
“Here, Ānanda, there is one person who is immoral and does not understand as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where that immorality of his ceases without remainder.
“Here, Ānanda, there is one person who is mild, a pleasant companion, with whom his fellow monks gladly dwell.
“Here, – a bhikkhu is one who listens and makes others listen; – he is one who learns well and makes others learn; – he is one who understands and communicates well; he is skilled in what is relevant and what irrelevant; and he does not foment quarrels.
“His fellow monks esteem him thus: ‘This venerable one lives in dependence on the Teacher or on a certain fellow monk in the position of a teacher, toward whom he has set up a keen sense of moral shame and moral dread, affection and reverence.
“His name is Saddha, Bhante.
“Homage to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One!
“Householder, a noble disciple who gives food gives the recipients four things.
“Householder, a noble disciple who possesses four qualities is practicing the way proper to the layperson, a way that brings the attainment of fame and leads to heaven.
“Householder, a noble disciple who possesses these four qualities is practicing the way proper to the layperson, a way that brings the attainment of fame and leads to heaven.”
“Householder, having abandoned five perils and enmities, one is called virtuous and is reborn in heaven.
“Householder, one who destroys life thereby engenders peril and enmity pertaining to the present life and the future life, and also experiences mental pain and dejection.
“Householder, one who takes what is not given … … engages in sexual misconduct … … speaks falsely … … indulges in liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness, thereby engenders peril and enmity pertaining to the present life and the future life, and also experiences mental pain and dejection.
“Householder, the Blessed One declared that you possess eight astounding and amazing qualities.
“Householder, the Blessed One declared that you possess eight astounding and amazing qualities.
“Householder, the noble disciple who desires beauty … … who desires happiness … … who desires fame ought not to pray for fame or delight in it or yearn for it.
“Householder, the noble disciple who desires long life ought not to pray for long life or delight in it or yearn for it.
“Householder, the noble disciple who desires the heavens ought not to pray for the heavens or delight in them or yearn for them.
“Householder, there are these five things that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and rarely gained in the world.
“Householder, there are these five utilizations of wealth.
“Householder, there are these four kinds of happiness that may be achieved by a layperson who enjoys sensual pleasures, depending on time and occasion.
“Householder, there are these four things that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and rarely gained in the world.
“Householder, there are these ten kinds of persons who enjoy sensual pleasures found existing in the world.
“Householder, whatever has come into being and is conditioned, a product of volition, dependently originated, is impermanent.
“Householder, when a noble disciple has eliminated five perils and enmities and possesses the four factors of stream-entry, he might, if he so wished, declare of himself: ‘I am one finished with hell, the animal realm, and the sphere of afflicted spirits; finished with the plane of misery, the bad destination, the lower world; I am a stream-enterer, no longer subject to the lower world, fixed in destiny, heading for enlightenment.’ 
“Householder, when a noble disciple has eliminated five perils and enmities, possesses the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and thoroughly penetrated with wisdom the noble method, he might, if he so wished, declare of himself: ‘I am one finished with hell, the animal realm, and the sphere of afflicted spirits; finished with the plane of misery, the bad destination, the lower world; I am a stream-enterer, no longer subject to the lower world, fixed in destiny, heading for enlightenment.’
“Householder, when a noble disciple has eliminated these five perils and enmities and possesses these four factors of stream-entry, he might, if he so wished, declare of himself: ‘I am one finished with hell, the animal realm, and the sphere of afflicted spirits; finished with the plane of misery, the bad destination, the lower world; I am a stream-enterer, no longer subject to the lower world, fixed in destiny, heading for enlightenment.’”
“Householder, when a noble disciple has eliminated these five perils and enmities, and he possesses these four factors of stream-entry, and he has clearly seen and thoroughly penetrated with wisdom this noble method, he might, if he so wished, declare of himself: ‘I am one finished with hell, the animal realm, and the sphere of afflicted spirits; finished with the plane of misery, the bad destination, the lower world; I am a stream-enterer, no longer subject to the lower world, fixed in destiny, heading for enlightenment.’” 
“Householder, when the mind has failed, bodily, verbal, and mental actions fail.
“Householder, when the mind has not failed, bodily, verbal, and mental actions do not fail.
“Householder, when the mind is unprotected, bodily, verbal, and mental actions are unprotected.
“Householder, why are people in your residence making such an uproar and a racket?
“Householder, without having abandoned five perils and enmities, one is called immoral and is reborn in hell.
“Householders, if both husband and wife wish to see one another not only in this present life but also in future lives, they should have the same faith, the same virtuous behavior, the same generosity, and the same wisdom.
“Householders, there are these four ways of living together.
“Householders, you have presented robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
“How could that disciplinary issue be settled, Bhante?
“How else, bhikkhus, could Nanda lead the complete and pure spiritual life unless he guarded the doors of the sense faculties, observed moderation in eating, was intent on wakefulness, and possessed mindfulness and clear comprehension?”
“How is it, Master Gotama, is the world eternal?
“How is it, sir, do you hold the view: ‘The world is eternal; this alone is true, anything else is wrong’?”
“How, Bhante, could the person without faith who is miserly, mean, and abusive be reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world, with the breakup of the body, after death?
“How, Bhante, could the person without faith, who is miserly, mean, and abusive, approach any assembly—whether of khattiyas, brahmins, householders, or ascetics—confidently and composed?
“How, Bhante, is the meaning of this statement that the Blessed One spoke in brief to be seen in detail?”
“How, Bhante, would the person without faith who is miserly, mean, and abusive acquire a good reputation?
“How, friend, could I not thank the Venerable Ānanda for his well-stated words?
“How, friends, should resentment be removed toward the person whose bodily and verbal behavior are impure and who does not gain an opening of the mind, placidity of mind, from time to time?
“How, friends, should resentment be removed toward the person whose bodily and verbal behavior are pure and who from time to time gains an opening of the mind, placidity of mind?
“How, friends, should resentment be removed toward the person whose bodily behavior and verbal behavior are impure but who from time to time gains an opening of the mind, placidity of mind?
“How, friends, should resentment be removed toward the person whose bodily behavior is impure but whose verbal behavior is pure?
“How, friends, should resentment be removed toward the person whose verbal behavior is impure but whose bodily behavior is pure?
“However, Sakyans, my disciple who dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute for ten years, practicing as I instruct him, might experience exclusively happiness for a hundred years, ten thousand years, a hundred thousand years, and ten million years.
“I am a bhikkhu, friend.”
“I am coming, sir, from the presence of the ascetic Gotama.”
“I am the independent brahmā Tudu.”
“I am your brother, the great king Vessavaṇa, sister.”
“I assert non-doing with regard to bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct; I assert non-doing with regard to the numerous kinds of bad unwholesome qualities.
“I can, Bhante.”
“I could never get enough ofseeing the Blessed One,hearing the good Dhamma,and attending on the Saṅgha.
“I died, Bhante, insatiable and unquenchable in three things.
“I discipline one kind of person gently, another kind sternly, and still another kind both gently and sternly.
“I do not praise all sacrifice, brahmin, nor do I withhold praise from all sacrifice.
“I do not recall even seeing the brahmin student Soṇakāyana, brahmin.
“I do not say, brahmin, that everything seen should be spoken about, nor do I say that nothing seen should be spoken about.
“I do not see any ground on the basis of which an ascetic or brahmin or deva or Māra or Brahmā or anyone in the world might reasonably reprove me, saying: ‘The Dhamma does not lead one who practices it to the complete destruction of suffering, the goal for the sake of which you teach it.’
Since I do not see any such ground, I dwell secure, fearless, and self-confident.
“I do not see any ground on the basis of which an ascetic or brahmin or deva or Māra or Brahmā or anyone in the world might reasonably reprove me, saying: ‘These things that you have said to be obstructive are not able to obstruct one who engages in them.’
Since I do not see any such ground, I dwell secure, fearless, and self-confident.
“I do not see any ground on the basis of which an ascetic or brahmin or deva or Māra or Brahmā or anyone in the world might reasonably reprove me, saying: ‘Though you claim to be one whose taints are destroyed, you have not fully destroyed these taints.’
Since I do not see any such ground, I dwell secure, fearless, and self-confident.
“I do not see any ground on the basis of which an ascetic or brahmin or deva or Māra or Brahmā or anyone in the world might reasonably reprove me, saying: ‘Though you claim to be perfectly enlightened, you are not fully enlightened about these things.’
Since I do not see any such ground, I dwell secure, fearless, and self-confident.
“I do not understand in detail the meaning of Master Gotama’s statement that he has spoken in brief.
“I do not understand in detail the meaning of this statement that Master Gotama has spoken in brief without analyzing the meaning in detail.
“I do see such a possibility, Bhante.
“I do so, Bhante Ānanda, because the Blessed One does not allow the going forth of women from the household life into homelessness.”
“I do so, Bhante, by the four means of sustaining a favorable relationship taught by the Blessed One.
“I don’t hold such a view, friend.”
“I don’t hold such a view, friend.”
“I don’t hold such a view, friend.”
“I don’t know, Bhante, what eight astounding and amazing qualities the Blessed One declared that I possess.
“I don’t know, Bhante, what eight astounding and amazing qualities the Blessed One declared that I possess.
“I enjoin you, bhikkhus, to pervade these four royal families of snakes with a mind of loving-kindness, for your own security, safety, and protection.”
“I had four young wives.
“I had four young wives.
“I had three mansions: one for the winter, one for the summer, and one for the rainy season.
“I have achieved whatever purposea wise person, dwelling at home, might have in desiring wealth;what I have done brings me no regret.”
“I have destroyed those taints by whichI might have been reborn as a devaor as a gandhabba that travels through the sky;by which I might have reached the state of a yakkha,or arrived back at the human state:I have dispelled and cut down these taints.
“I have heard from the Arahantthat even the devas pay homage to him,to the same one whom humans venerate,the one who has gone beyond everything.
“I have heard this, Bhante: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a proponent of non-doing who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of non-doing and thereby guides his disciples.’
Do those who speak thus state what has been said by the Blessed One and not misrepresent him with what is contrary to fact?
“I have heard, Bhante, that they do so.”
“I have heard, Bhante, that they do so.”
“I have heard, Bhante, that they do so.”
“I have heard, Bhante, that they do so.”
“I have heard, Bhante, that they do so.”
“I have heard, Bhante, that they do so.”
“I have heard, Bhante, that they don’t.”
“I have heard, Master Gotama, that the kindling of the sacrificial fire and the raising of the sacrificial post are of great fruit and benefit.”
“I have heard, Master Gotama: ‘The ascetic Gotama does not pay homage to brahmins who are old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, come to the last stage; nor does he stand up for them or offer them a seat.’
This is indeed true, for Master Gotama does not pay homage to brahmins who are old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, come to the last stage; nor does he stand up for them or offer them a seat.
“I have heard, Master Kaccāna: ‘The ascetic Kaccāna does not pay homage to brahmins who are old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, come to the last stage; nor does he stand up for them or offer them a seat.’
This is indeed true, for Master Kaccāna does not pay homage to brahmins who are old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, come to the last stage; nor does he stand up for them or offer them a seat.
“I have spread a mat, Bhante, and set out water for washing the feet.
“I have taught many teachings, bhikkhu: discourses, mixed prose and verse, expositions, verses, inspired utterances, quotations, birth stories, amazing accounts, and questions-andanswers.
“I have well proclaimed to my disciples the practice leading to nibbāna in such a way that, practicing in accordance with it the destruction of the taints, they realize for themselves with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwell in it.
“I heard him, friend Ānanda.
“I hope that this son of a male lay follower endowed with faith, the bhikkhu Saddha, who has gone forth from the household life into homelessness out of faith, exhibits the manifestations of faith.”
“I hope, Bhante, that no white-robed layman was present?”
“I inform you, bhikkhus, I declare to you that for an immoral man of bad character—one of impure and suspect behavior, secretive in his actions, not an ascetic though claiming to be one, not a celibate though claiming to be one, inwardly rotten, corrupt, depraved—it would be far better for a strong man to grab him, turn him upside down, and throw him into a hot copper cauldron—burning, blazing, and glowing—so that while he is boiling there in a swirl of froth, he sometimes rises, sometimes sinks, and sometimes is swept across.
“I inform you, bhikkhus, I declare to you that for an immoral man of bad character—one of impure and suspect behavior, secretive in his actions, not an ascetic though claiming to be one, not a celibate though claiming to be one, inwardly rotten, corrupt, depraved—it would be far better to embrace that great mass of fire, burning, blazing, and glowing, and sit down or lie down next to it.
“I inform you, bhikkhus, I declare to you that for an immoral man … it would be far better if a strong man were to force open his mouth with a hot iron spike—burning, blazing, and glowing—and insert a hot copper ball … which burns one’s lips … and comes out from below, taking along his entrails.
“I inform you, bhikkhus, I declare to you that for an immoral man … it would be far better if a strong man were to grab him by the head or shoulders and force him to sit or lie down on a hot iron bed or chair, burning, blazing, and glowing.
“I inform you, bhikkhus, I declare to you that for an immoral man … it would be far better if a strong man were to strike him in the breast with a sharp spear smeared with oil.
“I inform you, bhikkhus, I declare to you that for an immoral man … it would be far better if a strong man were to wrap a hot iron sheet—burning, blazing, and glowing—around his body.
“I inform you, bhikkhus, I declare to you that for an immoral man … it would be far better if a strong man were to wrap a tough horsehair rope around both his shins and tighten it so that it cuts through his outer skin, inner skin, flesh, sinews, and bone, until it reaches the marrow.
“I neither approve of your, brahmin, nor do I reject it.
“I neither approve of your, brahmin, nor do I reject it.
“I recall that for a long time I experienced the desirable, lovely, agreeable result of merit that had been made over a long time.
“I rose from my seat and left,: ‘I shall find out what the Blessed One has to say about this statement.’”
“I say definitively, Ānanda, that deeds of bodily good conduct, verbal good conduct, and mental good conduct are to be done.”
“I say definitively, Ānanda, that deeds of bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct are not to be done.”
“I say of where perceptions of forms cease and of those who dwell having thoroughly ended perceptions of forms: ‘Surely, those venerable ones are hungerless and quenched, have crossed over and gone beyond in that particular respect.’
If anyone should say: ‘Where do perceptions of forms cease?
“I say of where rapture ceases and of those who dwell having thoroughly ended rapture: ‘Surely, those venerable ones are hungerless and quenched, have crossed over and gone beyond in that particular respect.’
If anyone should say: ‘Where does rapture cease?
“I say of where sensual pleasures cease and of those who dwell having thoroughly ended sensual pleasures: ‘Surely, those venerable ones are hungerless and quenched; they have crossed over and gone beyond in that particular respect.’
If anyone should say: ‘Where do sensual pleasures cease?
“I say of where the perception of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception ceases and of those who dwell having thoroughly ended the perception of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception: ‘Surely, those venerable ones are hungerless and quenched, have crossed over and gone beyond in that particular respect.’
If anyone should say: ‘Where does the perception of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception cease?
“I say of where the perception of the base of nothingness ceases and of those who dwell having thoroughly ended the perception of the base of nothingness: ‘Surely, those venerable ones are hungerless and quenched, have crossed over and gone beyond in that particular respect.’
If anyone should say: ‘Where does the perception of the base of nothingness cease?
“I say of where the perception of the base of the infinity of consciousness ceases and of those who dwell having thoroughly ended the perception of the base of the infinity of consciousness: ‘Surely, those venerable ones are hungerless and quenched, have crossed over and gone beyond in that particular respect.’
If anyone should say: ‘Where does the perception of the base of the infinity of consciousness cease?
“I say of where the perception of the base of the infinity of space ceases and of those who dwell having thoroughly ended the perception of the base of the infinity of space: ‘Surely, those venerable ones are hungerless and quenched, have crossed over and gone beyond in that particular respect.’
If anyone should say: ‘Where does the perception of the base of the infinity of space cease?
“I say of where the pleasure equanimity ceases and of those who dwell having thoroughly ended the pleasure equanimity: ‘Surely, those venerable ones are hungerless and quenched, have crossed over and gone beyond in that particular respect.
“I say of where thought and examination cease and of those who dwell having thoroughly ended thought and examination: ‘Surely, those venerable ones are hungerless and quenched, have crossed over and gone beyond in that particular respect.’
If anyone should say: ‘Where do thought and examination cease?
“I say that the knowledge as it really is of the defilement, the cleansing, and the emergence in regard to the jhānas, emancipations, concentrations, and meditative attainments is for one who is concentrated, not for one who lacks concentration.
“I say that the knowledge as it really is of the passing away and rebirth of beings is for one who is concentrated, not for one who lacks concentration.
“I say that the knowledge as it really is of the recollection of past abodes is for one who is concentrated, not for one who lacks concentration.
“I say that the knowledge as it really is of the result of the undertaking of kammas past, future, and present in terms of possibilities and causes is for one who is concentrated, not for one who lacks concentration.
“I say that the knowledge as it really is of the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, is for one who is concentrated, not for one who lacks concentration.
“I say this means absence of longing.
“I say this means good will.
“I say this means ignorance.
“I say this means ill will.
“I say this means longing.
“I say this means true knowledge.
“I say, bhikkhus, that craving for existence has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
“I say, bhikkhus, that ignorance has a nutriment; it is not without nutriment.
“I say, bhikkhus, that the knowledge as it really is of the possible as possible and the impossible as impossible is for one who is concentrated, not for one who lacks concentration.
“I say, bhikkhus, that there is no one more helpful to another person than these three persons.
“I say, bhikkhus, that true knowledge and liberation have a nutriment; they are not without nutriment.
“I say, bhikkhus, that true knowledge and liberation have a nutriment; they are not without nutriment.
“I say, friend, that by traveling one cannot know, see, or reach that end of the world where one is not born, does not grow old and die, does not pass away and get reborn.
“I say, friend, that by traveling one cannot know, see, or reach that end of the world where one is not born, does not grow old and die, does not pass away and get reborn.”
“I say, Sāḷha, that purification of virtuous behavior is one of the factors of asceticism.
“I see, Nāgita, a bhikkhu dwelling on the outskirts of a village sitting in a state of concentration.
“I see, Nāgita, a bhikkhu dwelling on the outskirts of a village, who gains robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
“I see, Nāgita, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu sitting and dozing in the forest.
“I see, Nāgita, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu sitting dozing in the forest.
“I see, Nāgita, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu sitting in the forest in a state of concentration.
“I see, Nāgita, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu sitting in the forest in a state of concentration.
“I see, Nāgita, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu sitting in the forest in an unconcentrated state.
“I see, Nāgita, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu sitting in the forest in an unconcentrated state.
“I see, Nāgita, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu who gains robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
“I see, Nāgita, bhikkhus laughing and playing by poking one another with the fingers.
“I see, Nāgita, bhikkhus who, having eaten as much as they want until their bellies are full, yield to the pleasure of rest, the pleasure of sloth, the pleasure of sleep.
“I set out seeking the danger in the world.
“I set out seeking the escape from the world.
“I too, brahmin, have heard this.”
“I too, brahmin, have heard this.”
“I was a king bright with splendor,one with abundant wealth and commodities.I was a lord of Jambudīpa,powerful and glorious.Who, even though of a low birth,would not place trust on hearing this?
“I was a wheel-turning monarch,the lord of Jambudīpa,a head-anointed khattiya,the sovereign among human beings.
“I was born into a rich family,with abundant wealth and property, endowed with all sense pleasures,and possessing the seven gems.This is well-taught by the Buddhas,the benefactors of the world:this is the cause of greatness by whichone is called a lord of the earth.
“I will deal with that point, too, Bhante.
“I will extol for you the nāga:indeed, he does no evil.Mildness and harmlessnessare two feet of the nāga.
“I will not be a deva, brahmin.”
“I will not be a gandhabba, brahmin.”
“I will not be a human being, brahmin.”
“I will not be a yakkha, brahmin.”
“I will pardon this venerable one, Bhante, if this venerable one says to me: ‘And let the venerable one pardon me.’”
“I will teach you, bhikkhus, nine things rooted in craving.
“I will teach you, Licchavis, seven principles of non-decline.
“I will teach, bhikkhus, another three qualities that lead to decline.
“Idle chatter is non-Dhamma; abstention from idle chatter is the Dhamma.
“Idle chatter, repeatedly pursued, developed, and cultivated, is conducive to hell, to the animal realm, and to the sphere of afflicted spirits; for one reborn as a human being idle chatter at minimum conduces to others distrusting one’s words.
“If a bhikkhu devoted to the higher mind attends exclusively to the mark of concentration, it is possible that his mind will veer toward laziness.
“If a bhikkhu devoted to the higher mind attends exclusively to the mark of concentration, it is possible that his mind will veer toward laziness.
“If a bhikkhu has gotten rid of longing and ill will while standing … If a bhikkhu has gotten rid of longing and ill will while sitting … … If a bhikkhu has gotten rid of longing and ill will while wakefully lying down; if he has abandoned dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt; if his energy is aroused without slackening; if his mindfulness is established and unmuddled; if his body is tranquil and undisturbed; if his mind is concentrated and one-pointed, then that bhikkhu is said to be ardent and to dread wrongdoing; he is constantly and continuously energetic and resolute while wakefully lying down.”
“If a bhikkhu of middle standing “If a bhikkhu of middle standing “If a bhikkhu should wish: ‘May I be content with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick,’ let him fulfill virtuous behavior … and resort to empty huts.
“If a bhikkhu should wish: ‘May I be pleasing and agreeable to my fellow monks, respected and esteemed by them,’ let him fulfill virtuous behavior, be devoted to internal serenity of mind, not neglect the jhānas, be possessed of insight, and resort to empty huts.
“If a bhikkhu should wish: ‘May I become one who vanquishes discontent and delight, and may discontent and delight not vanquish me.
“If a bhikkhu should wish: ‘May I become one who vanquishes fear and terror, and may fear and terror not vanquish me.
“If a bhikkhu should wish: ‘May I gain at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life,’ let him fulfill virtuous behavior … and resort to empty huts.
“If a bhikkhu should wish: ‘May I gain robes, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick,’ let him fulfill virtuous behavior … and resort to empty huts.
“If a bhikkhu should wish: ‘May I patiently endure cold and heat; hunger and thirst; contact with flies, mosquitoes, wind, the burning sun, and serpents; and rude and offensive ways of speech.
“If a bhikkhu should wish: ‘May I, with the destruction of the taints, realize for myself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwell in it,’ let him fulfill virtuous behavior, be devoted to internal serenity of mind, not neglect the jhānas, be possessed of insight, and resort to empty huts.
“If a bhikkhu should wish: ‘May the services of those whose robes, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick I use be of great fruit and benefit to them,’ let him fulfill virtuous behavior … and resort to empty huts.
“If a bhikkhu should wish: ‘When my deceased relatives and family members, after passing away, remember me with confidence in their minds, may this be of great fruit and benefit to them,’ let him fulfill virtuous behavior … and resort to empty huts.
“If a bhikkhu who accepts invitations to meals is restless … with loose sense faculties, then in this respect he is blameworthy.
“If a bhikkhu who dwells on the outskirts of a village is restless … with loose sense faculties, then in this respect he is blameworthy.
“If a bhikkhu who is an almsfood collector is restless … with loose sense faculties, then in this respect he is blameworthy.
“If a bhikkhu who wears rag-robes is restless … with loose sense faculties, then in this respect he is blameworthy.
“If a bhikkhu who wears robes given by householders is restless … with loose sense faculties, then in this respect he is blameworthy.
“If a person to be tamed by me won’t submit to discipline by any of these methods, then I kill him.”
“If a poor, destitute, indigent person gets into debt, isn’t his indebtedness, too, suffering in the world for one who enjoys sensual pleasures?”
“If a poor, destitute, indigent person who has gotten into debt promises to pay interest, isn’t the interest, too, suffering in the world for one who enjoys sensual pleasures?”
“If a poor, destitute, indigent person who has promised to pay interest cannot pay it when it falls due, they reprove him.
“If a poor, destitute, indigent person who is prosecuted does not pay, they imprison him.
“If a poor, destitute, indigent person who is reproved does not pay, they prosecute him.
“If a sensual thought … arises in a bhikkhu while standing … If a sensual thought … arises in a bhikkhu while sitting … If a sensual thought, a thought of ill will, or a thought of harming arises in a bhikkhu while wakefully lying down, and he does not tolerate it but abandons it, dispels it, terminates it, and obliterates it, then that bhikkhu is said to be ardent and to dread wrongdoing; he is constantly and continuously energetic and resolute while walking.”
“If a sensual thought … arises in a bhikkhu while standing … If a sensual thought … arises in a bhikkhu while sitting … If a sensual thought, a thought of ill will, or a thought of harming arises in a bhikkhu while wakefully lying down, and he tolerates it, does not abandon it, dispel it, terminate it, and obliterate it, then that bhikkhu is said to be devoid of ardor and moral dread; he is constantly and continuously lazy and lacking in energy while wakefully lying down.
“If an assembly of ascetics comes to see a wheel-turning monarch, they are elated when they see him.
“If an assembly of bhikkhunīs comes to see Ānanda, they are elated when they see him.
“If an assembly of bhikkhus comes to see Ānanda, they are elated when they see him.
“If an assembly of brahmins comes to see a wheel-turning monarch, they are elated when they see him.
“If an assembly of female lay followers comes to see Ānanda, they are elated when they see him.
“If an assembly of householders comes to see a wheel-turning monarch, they are elated when they see him.
“If an assembly of khattiyas comes to see a wheel-turning monarch, they are elated when they see him.
“If an assembly of male lay followers comes to see Ānanda, they are elated when they see him.
“If an elder bhikkhu is immoral, of bad character, this, I say, counts as his ugliness….
“If an elder bhikkhu is virtuous, of good character, this, I say, counts as his beauty….
“If any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī has abandoned these five kinds of mental barrenness and well eradicated these five bondages of the mind, then, whether night or day comes, only growth in wholesome qualities and not deterioration is to be expected for that person.
“If any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī has not abandoned these five kinds of mental barrenness and eradicated these five bondages of the mind, then, whether night or day comes, only deterioration and not growth in wholesome qualities is to be expected for that person.
“If anyone should say: ‘I will reject this Dhamma factor of good will and point out a ascetic or brahmin who has a mind of ill will and intentions of hate,’ I would respond to him thus: ‘Let him come, speak, and converse.
“If anyone should say: ‘I will reject this Dhamma factor of right concentration and point out a ascetic or brahmin who is unconcentrated, with a wandering mind,’ I would respond to him thus: ‘Let him come, speak, and converse.
“If anyone should say: ‘I will reject this Dhamma factor of right mindfulness and point out a ascetic or brahmin who is muddled in mind and lacks clear comprehension,’ I would respond to him thus: ‘Let him come, speak, and converse.
“If he does not attain and penetrate this, with the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, he is an attainer of nibbāna in the interval.
“If he does not attain and penetrate this, with the utter destruction of three fetters and with the diminishing of greed, hatred, and delusion, he is a once-returner who, after coming back to this world only one more time, makes an end of suffering.
“If he gives a blow to an elephant, he always gives the blow respectfully, not disrespectfully.
“If he so wished, friends, a bhikkhu possessing psychic potency who has attained mastery of mind might focus on that block of wood as earth.
“If he wishes: ‘May I recollect my manifold past abodes … with their aspects and details,’ he is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
“If he wishes: ‘May I recollect my manifold past abodes … with their aspects and details,’ he is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
“If he wishes: ‘May I recollect my manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many eons of world-dissolution, many eons of world-evolution, many eons of world-dissolution and world-evolution thus: “There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn elsewhere, and there too I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn here”—may I thus recollect my manifold past abodes with their aspects and details,’ he is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
“If he wishes: ‘May I understand the minds of other beings and persons, having encompassed them with my own mind.
“If he wishes: ‘May I understand the minds of other beings and persons, having encompassed them with my own mind.
“If he wishes: ‘May I understand the minds of other beings and persons, having encompassed them with my own mind.
“If he wishes: ‘May I wield the various kinds of psychic potency: having been one, may I become many … … may I exercise mastery with the body as far as the brahmā world,’ he is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
“If he wishes: ‘May I wield the various kinds of psychic potency: having been one, may I become many … … may I exercise mastery with the body as far as the brahmā world,’ he is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
“If he wishes: ‘May I wield the various kinds of psychic potency: having been one, may I become many; having been many, may I become one; may I appear and vanish; may I go unhindered through a wall, through a rampart, through a mountain as though through space; may I dive in and out of the earth as though it were water; may I walk on water without sinking as though it were earth; seated cross-legged, may I travel in space like a bird; with my hand may I touch and stroke the moon and sun so powerful and mighty; may I exercise mastery with the body as far as the brahmā world,’ he is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
“If he wishes: ‘May I wield the various kinds of psychic potency’ … … If he wishes: ‘May I, with the destruction of the taints, in this very life realize for myself with direct knowledge the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, may I dwell in it,’ he is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.”
“If he wishes: ‘May I, with the destruction of the taints, in this very life enter and dwell in the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, having realized it for myself with direct knowledge,’ he is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.”
“If he wishes: ‘May I, with the destruction of the taints, in this very life realize for myself with direct knowledge the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, may I dwell in it,’ he is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.”
“If he wishes: ‘May I, with the destruction of the taints, in this very life realize for myself with direct knowledge the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, may I dwell in it,’ he is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.”
“If he wishes: ‘May I, with the divine ear element, which is purified and surpasses the human, hear both kinds of sounds, the divine and human, those that are far as well as near,’ he is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
“If he wishes: ‘May I, with the divine ear element, which is purified and surpasses the human, hear both kinds of sounds, the divine and human, those that are far as well as near,’ he is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
“If he wishes: ‘May I, with the divine ear element, which is purified and surpasses the human, hear both kinds of sounds, the divine and human, those that are far as well as near,’ he is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
“If he wishes: ‘May I, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, see beings passing away and being reborn … and understand how beings fare in accordance with their kamma,’ he is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
“If he wishes: ‘May I, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, see beings passing away and being reborn … and understand how beings fare in accordance with their kamma,’ he is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
“If he wishes: ‘May I, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, see beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and understand how beings fare in accordance with their kamma thus: “These beings who engaged in misconduct by body, speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong view, and undertook kamma based on wrong view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell; but these beings who engaged in good conduct by body, speech, and mind, who did not revile the noble ones, who held right view, and undertook kamma based on right view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in a good destination, in the heavenly world”—thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, may I see beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and understand how beings fare in accordance with their kamma,’ he is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
“If I know: ‘There is such a quality in me,’ I tell him: ‘It exists.
“If I were to become disgustedwith beings who have such a nature,that would not be proper for mesince I too have the same nature.
“If I were to become disgustedwith beings who have such a nature,that would not be proper for mesince I too have the same nature.
“If I were to pass away before the Blessed One, it wouldn’t be surprising if the Blessed One would declare of me: ‘There is no fetter bound by which the householder Ugga of Hatthigāma might return to this world.’
This is the eighth astounding and amazing quality found in me.
“If I wished: ‘May I wield the various kinds of psychic potency: having been one, may I become many … … may I exercise mastery with the body as far as the brahmā world,’ I was capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis … “If I wished: ‘May I, with the destruction of the taints, in this very life realize for myself with direct knowledge the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, may I dwell in it,’ I was capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.”
“If one knows of a person: ‘When I associate with this person, unwholesome qualities decline in me and wholesome qualities increase; and the requisites of life that should be obtained by one gone forth—robes, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick—are obtained without difficulty; and the goal of the ascetic life, for the sake of which I have gone forth from the household life into homelessness, reaches fulfillment by development for me,’ in that case one should continue to follow that person as long as one lives.
“If one knows of a person: ‘When I associate with this person, unwholesome qualities decline in me and wholesome qualities increase; but the requisites of life that should be obtained by one gone forth—robes, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick—are obtained with difficulty; still, the goal of the ascetic life, for the sake of which I have gone forth from the household life into homelessness, reaches fulfillment by development for me,’ in that case, having reflected, one should continue to follow that person.
“If one knows of a person: ‘When I associate with this person, unwholesome qualities increase in me and wholesome qualities decline; but the requisites of life that should be obtained by one gone forth—robes, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick—are obtained without difficulty; but still, the goal of the ascetic life, for the sake of which I have gone forth from the household life into homelessness, does not reach fulfillment by development for me,’ in that case, having reflected, one should depart from that person after taking leave of him.
“If one seeks happiness, look to the resultof merit, wholesome deeds.For seven years, I developed a loving mind, 
“If one wishes: ‘May I recollect my manifold past abodes, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many eons of world-dissolution, many eons of world-evolution, many eons of world-dissolution and world-evolution thus: “There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn elsewhere, and there too I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my food, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life span; passing away from there, I was reborn here”—may I thus recollect my manifold past abodes with their aspects and details,’ one is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
“If one wishes: ‘May I understand the minds of other beings and persons, having encompassed them with my own mind.
“If one wishes: ‘May I wield the various kinds of psychic potency: having been one, may I become many; having been many, may I become one; may I appear and vanish; may I go unhindered through a wall, through a rampart, through a mountain as though through space; may I dive in and out of the earth as though it were water; may I walk on water without sinking as though it were earth; seated cross-legged, may I travel in space like a bird; with my hand may I touch and stroke the moon and sun so powerful and mighty; may I exercise mastery with the body as far as the brahmā world,’ one is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
“If one wishes: ‘May I, with the destruction of the taints, in this very life realize for myself with direct knowledge the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, may I dwell in it,’ one is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.”
“If one wishes: ‘May I, with the divine ear element, which is purified and surpasses the human, hear both kinds of sounds, the divine and human, those that are far as well as near,’ one is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
“If one wishes: ‘May I, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, see beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and understand how beings fare in accordance with their kamma thus: “These beings who engaged in misconduct by body, speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong view, and undertook kamma based on wrong view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell; but these beings who engaged in good conduct by body, speech, and mind, who did not revile the noble ones, who held right view, and undertook kamma based on right view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world”—thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, may I see beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and understand how beings fare in accordance with their kamma,’ one is capable of realizing it, there being a suitable basis.
“If others approach the Tathāgata and ask him a question related to his knowledge as it really is of the defilement, the cleansing, and the emergence in regard to the jhānas, emancipations, concentrations, and meditative attainments, then the Tathāgata, questioned in this way, answers them exactly as he has understood this knowledge.
“If others approach the Tathāgata and ask him a question related to his knowledge as it really is of the passing away and rebirth of beings, then the Tathāgata, questioned in this way, answers them exactly as he has understood this knowledge.
“If others approach the Tathāgata and ask him a question related to his knowledge as it really is of the recollection of past abodes, then the Tathāgata, questioned in this way, answers them exactly as he has understood this knowledge.
“If others approach the Tathāgata and ask him a question related to his knowledge as it really is of the result of the undertaking of kamma past, future, and present in terms of possibilities and causes, then the Tathāgata, questioned in this way, answers them exactly as he has understood this knowledge.
“If others approach the Tathāgata and ask him a question related to his knowledge as it really is of the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, then the Tathāgata, questioned in this way, answers them exactly as he has understood this knowledge.
“If she possesses eight qualities, Anuruddha, a woman, with the breakup of the body, after death, is reborn in companionship with the agreeable-bodied deities.
“If such an elder bhikkhu speaks in the midst of the Saṅgha, the bhikkhus say to him: ‘What gives you, an incompetent fool, the right to speak?
“If such an elder bhikkhu speaks in the midst of the Saṅgha, the bhikkhus say: ‘Please let the venerable ones be quiet.
“If that venerable one teaches me the Dhamma, I listen to it respectfully, not without respect.
“If this clansman has a small income but lives luxuriously, others would say of him: ‘This clansman eats his wealth just like an eater of figs.’
But if he has a large income but lives sparingly, others would say of him: ‘This clansman may even starve himself.’
But it is called balanced living when a clansman knows his income and expenditures and leads a balanced life, neither too extravagant nor too frugal,: ‘In this way my income will exceed my expenditures rather than the reverse.’
“If this clansman has a small income but lives luxuriously, others would say of him: ‘This clansman eats his wealth just like an eater of figs.’
But if he has a large income but lives sparingly, others would say of him: ‘This clansman may even starve himself.’
But it is called balanced living when a clansman knows his income and expenditures and leads a balanced life, neither too extravagant nor too frugal,: ‘Thus my income will exceed my expenditures rather than the reverse.’
“If you are asked these questions, it is in such a way that you should answer those wanderers of other sects.”
“If you are asked thus, bhikkhus, it is in such a way that you should answer those wanderers of other sects.”
“If you could take the time to answer my question, I would like to ask you about a certain point.”
“If, Bhante, it would be possible for a woman to realize the fruit of stream-entry, the fruit of once-returning, the fruit of non-returning, and the fruit of arahantship, Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī had been very helpful to the Blessed One—having been his maternal aunt, wet-nurse, and foster mother who nurtured him with breast milk when his mother died—it would be good if women could obtain the going forth from the household life into homelessness in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata.”
“If, bhikkhu, supported by faith, a bhikkhu abandons the unwholesome and develops the wholesome, the unwholesome is indeed abandoned by him.
“If, bhikkhus, greed does not overcome that bhikkhu and continue on; if hatred … delusion … anger … hostility … denigration … insolence … miserliness … evil envy … evil desire does not overcome that bhikkhu and continue on, he should be understood thus: ‘This venerable one understands in such a way that he would have no greed; thus greed does not overcome him and continue on.
“If, bhikkhus, greed overcomes that bhikkhu and continues on; if hatred … delusion … anger … hostility … denigration … insolence … miserliness … evil envy … evil desire overcomes that bhikkhu and continues on, he should be understood thus: ‘This venerable one does not understand in such a way that he would have no greed; thus greed overcomes him and continues on.
“If, bhikkhus, in regard to a particular disciplinary issue, the bhikkhu who has committed an offense and the bhikkhu who reproves him do not thoroughly reflect upon themselves, it can be expected that this disciplinary issue will lead to acrimony and animosity for a long time and the bhikkhus will not dwell at ease.
“If, bhikkhus, one could rightly say of anyone: ‘He is a delicate ascetic among ascetics,’ it is precisely of me that one might say this.
“If, bhikkhus, one could rightly say of anyone: ‘He is a delicate ascetic among ascetics,’ it is precisely of me that one might say this.
“If, bhikkhus, one were to say thus: ‘A person experiences kamma in precisely the same way that he created it,’ in such a case there could be no living of the spiritual life and no opportunity would be seen for completely making an end of suffering.
“If, bhikkhus, others approach the Tathāgata and ask him a question related to his knowledge as it really is of the possible as possible and the impossible as impossible, then the Tathāgata, questioned in this way, answers them exactly as he has understood this knowledge.
“If, bhikkhus, there are few people who behave properly toward their mother and father … and do meritorious deeds, the four great kings report this to the Tāvatiṃsa devas when they meet and are sitting together in the Sudhamma council hall: ‘Revered sirs, there are few people who behave properly toward their mother and father … and do meritorious deeds.’
Then, because of this, the Tāvatiṃsa devas become displeased,: ‘Alas, the celestial company will decline and the company of asuras will flourish!’
“If, bhikkhus, you engage in discussion on any of these ten topics, your splendor might surpass even the splendor of the sun and moon, as powerful and mighty as they are, how much more then that of the wanderers of other sects!”
“If, bhikkhus, you too would strive indefatigably,: ‘Willingly, let only my skin, sinews, and bones remain, and let the flesh and blood dry up in my body, but I will not relax my energy so long as I have not attained what can be attained by manly strength, energy, and exertion,’ you too will, in no long time, realize for yourselves with direct knowledge, in this very life, that unsurpassed consummation of the spiritual life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the household life into homelessness, and having entered upon it, you will dwell in it.
“If, brahmin, one could rightly say of anyone: ‘He lives the complete and pure celibate life—unbroken, flawless, unblemished, unblotched,’ it is precisely of me that one might say this.
“If, by such self-examination, a bhikkhu does not see any of these wholesome qualities present in himself, then he should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to obtain those wholesome qualities.
“If, by such self-examination, a bhikkhu knows: ‘I am often given to longing, given to ill will, overcome by dullness and drowsiness, restless, plagued by doubt, angry, defiled in mind, agitated in body, lazy, and unconcentrated,’ he should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to abandon those same bad unwholesome qualities.
“If, by such self-examination, a bhikkhu knows: ‘I gain internal serenity of mind but not the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena,’ he should base himself on internal serenity of mind and make an effort to gain the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena.
“If, friend, one were to become an end-maker by means of knowledge, even one who still has clinging would become an end-maker.
“If, Gotamī, you accept eight principles of respect, that itself will be your full ordination:
“If, Gotamī, you accept these eight principles of respect, that itself will be your full ordination.”
“If, householder, a bhikkhu who is a forest-dweller is restless, puffed up, vain, talkative, rambling in his talk, muddle-minded, lacking clear comprehension, unconcentrated, with a wandering mind, with loose sense faculties, then in this respect he is blameworthy.
“If, householder, one gives alms, coarse or excellent, and one gives disrespectfully, gives inconsiderately, does not give with one’s own hand, gives what would be discarded, gives without a view of future consequences, then wherever the result of that gift is produced for one, one’s mind does not incline toward the enjoyment of superb food, nor toward the enjoyment of superb clothing, nor toward the enjoyment of superb vehicles, nor toward the enjoyment of whatever is superb among the five objects of sensual pleasure.
“If, householder, one gives alms, whether coarse or excellent, and one gives respectfully, gives considerately, gives with one’s own hand, gives what would not be discarded, gives with a view of future consequences, then wherever the result of that gift is produced for one, one’s mind inclines toward the enjoyment of superb food, toward the enjoyment of superb clothing, toward the enjoyment of superb vehicles, toward the enjoyment of whatever is superb among the five objects of sensual pleasure.
“If, Kassapa, a bhikkhu of middle standing … If a junior bhikkhu desires to train and speaks praise of undertaking the training; if he encourages in the training other bhikkhus who do not desire to train; and if he speaks genuine, real, and timely praise of those bhikkhus who desire to train, I speak praise of such a junior bhikkhu.
“If, Kassapa, a bhikkhu of middle standing … If a junior bhikkhu does not desire to train and does not speak praise of undertaking the training; if he does not encourage in the training other bhikkhus who do not desire to train; and if he does not speak genuine, real, and timely praise of those bhikkhus who desire to train, I do not speak praise of such a junior bhikkhu.
“If, Kassapa, an elder bhikkhu desires to train and speaks praise of undertaking the training; if he encourages in the training other bhikkhus who do not desire to train; and if he speaks genuine, real, and timely praise of those bhikkhus who desire to train, I speak praise of such an elder bhikkhu.
“If, Kassapa, an elder bhikkhu does not desire to train and does not speak praise of undertaking the training; if he does not encourage in the training other bhikkhus who do not desire to train; and if he does not speak genuine, real, and timely praise of those bhikkhus who desire to train, I do not speak praise of such an elder bhikkhu.
“If, Mahāli, these ten qualities did not exist in the world, unrighteous conduct, conduct contrary to the Dhamma, and righteous conduct, conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, would not be seen.
“If, Upaka, anyone carping against others does not substantiate it, he is blameworthy and at fault.
“If, wanderers, anyone should say about me: ‘The Dhamma does not lead one who practices it to the complete destruction of suffering, the goal for the sake of which you teach it,’ I might question him closely about this matter, interrogate him, and cross-examine him.
“If, wanderers, anyone should say about me: ‘Though you claim to be one whose taints are destroyed, you have not fully destroyed these taints,’ I might question him closely about this matter, interrogate him, and cross-examine him.
“If, wanderers, anyone should say: ‘I will reject this Dhamma factor of non-longing and point out a ascetic or brahmin who is full of longing, deeply passionate about sensual pleasures,’ I would respond to him thus: ‘Let him come, speak, and converse.
“If, wanderers, anyone thinks these four Dhamma factors should be censured and repudiated, then, in this very life, he incurs four reasonable criticisms and grounds for censure.
“If, wanderers, anyone thinks these four Dhamma factors should be censured and repudiated, then, in this very life, he incurs these four reasonable criticisms and grounds for censure.
“If, when a bhikkhu often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of death, his mind inclines to attachment to life, or if he does not turn away from it, he should understand: ‘I have not developed the perception of death; there is no distinction between my earlier condition and my present one; I have not attained the fruit of development.’
Thus he clearly comprehends this.
“If, when a bhikkhu often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of impermanence, his mind inclines to gain, honor, and praise, or if he does not turn away from them, he should understand: ‘I have not developed the perception of impermanence; there is no distinction between my earlier condition and my present one; I have not attained the fruit of development.’
Thus he clearly comprehends this.
“If, when a bhikkhu often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of non-delight in the entire world, his mind inclines to the world’s beautiful things, or if he does not turn away from them, he should understand: ‘I have not developed the perception of non-delight in the entire world; there is no distinction between my earlier condition and my present one; I have not attained the fruit of development.’
Thus he clearly comprehends this.
“If, when a bhikkhu often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of non-self in what is suffering, his mind is not devoid of I-making, mine-making, and conceit regarding this conscious body and all external objects, if it does not transcend discrimination and become peaceful and well liberated, he should understand: ‘I have not developed the perception of non-self in what is suffering; there is no distinction between my earlier condition and my present one; I have not attained the fruit of development.’
Thus he clearly comprehends this.
“If, when a bhikkhu often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of suffering in the impermanent, a keen perception of danger does not become settled in him toward indolence, laziness, slackness, heedlessness, lack of effort, and unreflectiveness, just as toward a murderer with drawn sword, he should understand: ‘I have not developed the perception of suffering in the impermanent; there is no distinction between my earlier condition and my present one; I have not attained the fruit of development.’
Thus he clearly comprehends this.
“If, when a bhikkhu often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of the repulsiveness of food, his mind inclines to craving for tastes, or if he does not turn away from them, he should understand: ‘I have not developed the perception of the repulsiveness of food; there is no distinction between my earlier condition and my present one; I have not attained the fruit of development.’
Thus he clearly comprehends this.
“If, when a bhikkhu often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of unattractiveness, his mind inclines to sexual intercourse, or if he does not turn away from it, he should understand: ‘I have not developed the perception of unattractiveness; there is no distinction between my earlier condition and my present one; I have not attained the fruit of development.’
Thus he clearly comprehends this.
“If, when one speaks about what one has cognized, unwholesome qualities increase and wholesome qualities decline, I say that one should not speak about what one has cognized.
“If, when one speaks about what one has heard, unwholesome qualities increase and wholesome qualities decline, I say that one should not speak about what one has heard.
“If, when one speaks about what one has sensed, unwholesome qualities increase and wholesome qualities decline, I say that one should not speak about what one has sensed.
“If, with a mind of hatred, one had insulted and reviled these six teachers together with their communities of disciples, one would have generated much demerit.
“If, with a mind of hatred, one had insulted and reviled these six teachers together with their communities of disciples, one would have generated much demerit.
“If, Ānanda, Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī accepts eight principles of respect, let that itself be her full ordination.
“If, Ānanda, Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī accepts these eight principles of respect, let that itself be her full ordination.”
“If, Ānanda, there were no kamma ripening in the form realm, would form-sphere existence be discerned?”
“If, Ānanda, there were no kamma ripening in the form realm, would form-sphere existence be discerned?”
“If, Ānanda, there were no kamma ripening in the formless realm, would formless-sphere existence be discerned?”
“If, Ānanda, there were no kamma ripening in the formless realm, would formless-sphere existence be discerned?” 
“If, Ānanda, there were no kamma ripening in the sensory realm, would sense-sphere existence be discerned?”
“If, Ānanda, there were no kamma ripening in the sensory realm, would sense-sphere existence be discerned?”
“If, Ānanda, women had not obtained the going forth from the household life into homelessness in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, the spiritual life would have been of long duration; the good Dhamma would have stood firm even for a thousand years.
“If, Ānanda, you visit the bhikkhu Girimānanda and speak to him about ten perceptions, it is possible that on hearing about them his affliction will immediately subside.
“If, Ānanda, you visit the bhikkhu Girimānanda and speak to him about these ten perceptions, it is possible that on hearing about them he will immediately recover from his affliction.”
“If, Ānanda, you would listen to the Tathāgata’s knowledges of a person’s faculties, I will analyze them.”
“Ignorance is comprised within these states.
“Ill will is non-Dhamma; good will is the Dhamma.
“Impurity by body, Cunda, is threefold.
“In a way, bhikkhus, you have all spoken well, but listen and attend closely as I tell you what I intended when I said in the Pārāyana, in ‘The Questions of Metteyya’:
“In dependence on the right course, there is success, not failure.
“In earlier days, Master Gotama, a long time ago, the brahmin student Soṇakāyana approached me and said: ‘The ascetic Gotama prescribes the desistance from all kamma.
“In misfortune their fortitude can be known, and this only after a long time, not casually; by one who is attentive, not by one who is inattentive; and by one who is wise, not by one who is unwise.
“In relation to the elements.”
“In that case, bhikkhu, you should train yourself thus: ‘My mind will be firm and well settled internally.
“In that case, friends, you should come on the uposatha day.
“In that case, Sāriputta, he does not give a gift with expectations, with a bound mind, looking for rewards; he does not give a gift,: ‘Having passed away, I will make use of this.’
He does not give a gift,: ‘Giving is good.’
He does not give a gift,: ‘Giving was practiced before by my father and forefathers; I should not abandon this ancient family custom.’
He does not give a gift,: ‘I cook; these people do not cook.
“In that case, Sāriputta, he gives a gift with expectations, with a bound mind, looking for rewards; he gives a gift,: ‘Having passed away, I will make use of this.’
Having given such a gift, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in companionship with the devas the four great kings.
“In that lodging elder bhikkhus are dwelling who are learned, heirs to the heritage, experts on the Dhamma, experts on the discipline, experts on the outlines.
“In the future, there will be bhikkhus who are undeveloped in body, virtuous behavior, mind, and wisdom.
“In the future, there will be bhikkhus who desire fine robes.
“In the midst of the Saṅgha, he does not engage in rambling and pointless talk.
“In the past, Bhante, I was a seer named Rohitassa, son of Bhoja, one possessing psychic potency, able to travel through the sky.
“In the past, bhikkhus, a battle was fought between the devas and the asuras.
“In the past, bhikkhus, there was a teacher named Mūgapakkha … there was a teacher named Aranemi … there was a teacher named Kuddāla … there was a teacher named Hatthipāla … there was a teacher named Jotipāla … there was a teacher named Araka, the founder of a spiritual sect, one without lust for sensual pleasures.
“In the past, bhikkhus, there was a teacher named Sunetta, the founder of a spiritual sect, one without lust for sensual pleasures.
“In the past, Brahmin Dhammika, King Koravya had a royal banyan tree named ‘Well Grounded,’ which had five branches, cast a cool shade, and gave delight.
“In the past, Brahmin Dhammika, there was a teacher named Sunetta, the founder of a spiritual sect, one without lust for sensual pleasures.
“In the past, brahmins coupled only with brahmin women, not with non-brahmin women.
“In the past, brahmins coupled with brahmin women only when they were in season, not out of season.
“In the past, brahmins did not buy and sell brahmin women, and they would initiate cohabitation only through mutual affection, doing so for the sake of family continuity.
“In the past, brahmins did not store up wealth, grain, silver, and gold.
“In the past, brahmins went seeking almsfood in the evening for their evening meal and in the morning for their morning meal.
“In the past, householder, there was a brahmin named Velāma.
“In the past, there was a teacher named Mūgapakkha … … a teacher named Aranemi … … a teacher named Kuddālaka … … a teacher named Hatthipāla … … a teacher named Jotipāla, the founder of a spiritual sect, one without lust for sensual pleasures….
“In the past, Ānanda, in this place there was an affluent, prosperous, well-populated city, one teeming with people.
“In the same way, Ānanda, having encompassed his mind with my own mind … I understand him thus: ‘This person does not have even a mere fraction of a hair’s tip of a bright quality.
“In the same way, Ānanda, having encompassed his mind with my own mind … I understand him thus: ‘This person’s unwholesome qualities have disappeared, wholesome qualities are manifest, but he has an unwholesome root that has not been eradicated.
“In the same way, Ānanda, having encompassed his mind with my own mind … I understand him thus: ‘This person’s unwholesome qualities have disappeared, wholesome qualities are manifest, but he has an unwholesome root that has not been eradicated.
“In the same way, Ānanda, having encompassed his mind with my own mind … I understand him thus: ‘This person’s wholesome qualities have disappeared, unwholesome qualities are manifest, but he has a wholesome root that has not been eradicated.
“In the same way, Ānanda, having encompassed his mind with my own mind … … I understand him thus: ‘This person’s wholesome qualities have disappeared, unwholesome qualities are manifest, but he has a wholesome root that has not been eradicated.
“In the same way, Ānanda, having encompassed the mind of someone with my own mind … I understand him thus: ‘This person does not have even a mere fraction of a hair’s tip of an unwholesome quality.
“In this case, Sumanā, I declare, there would be no difference between the liberation and the liberation.”
“In this Dhamma and discipline, bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of solitude for a bhikkhu.
“In this Dhamma and discipline, Sāriputta, it isn’t possible to describe a bhikkhu as ‘ten-less’ by the mere counting of years.
“In this Dhamma and discipline, Ānanda, it isn’t possible to describe a bhikkhu as ‘ten-less’ by the mere counting of years.
“In this world the trainee and one beyond trainingare worthy of the gifts of those practicing charity;upright in body, speech, and mind,they are the field for those practicing charity;what is given to them brings great fruit.”
“In three respects the people of Jambudīpa surpass the people of Uttarakuru and the Tāvatiṃsa devas.
“In three respects the Tāvatiṃsa devas surpass the people of Uttarakuru and the people of Jambudīpa.
“In what do they culminate?”
“In what way, Bhante, is a lay follower practicing for his own welfare and for the welfare of others?”
“In what way, Bhante, is a lay follower practicing for his own welfare but not for the welfare of others?” 
“In what way, Bhante, is a lay follower virtuous?”
“In what way, Bhante, is one a lay follower?”
“In what way, Bhante, is one a lay follower?”
“In what way, friends, has the Blessed One said that a person is subject to decline?
“Indeed, I did not realize that I was consulting the great teacher, the Venerable Ānanda!
“Insignificant, bhikkhus, is the increase of fame.
“Insignificant, bhikkhus, is the increase of relatives.
“Insignificant, bhikkhus, is the increase of wealth.
“Insignificant, bhikkhus, is the loss of fame.
“Insignificant, bhikkhus, is the loss of relatives.
“Insignificant, bhikkhus, is the loss of wealth.
“Intent on sensual pleasures, the Licchavis were engaged in a conversation about sensual pleasures!
“Intoxicated with youth, a bhikkhu gives up the training and reverts to the lower life; or intoxicated with health, he gives up the training and reverts to the lower life; or intoxicated with life, he gives up the training and reverts to the lower life.
“Is it possible, Bhante, by traveling to know, see, or reach the end of the world, where one is not born, does not grow old and die, does not pass away and get reborn?”
“Is it possible, Bhante, to point out a directly visible fruit of giving?”
“Is it possible, Bhante, to point out a directly visible fruit of giving?”
“Is it true, Bhante, as is said, that you have been teaching the Dhamma to the bhikkhus thus: ‘Friends, it is good for a bhikkhu from time to time to review his own failings … the failings of others … his own achievements … the achievements of others’?”
“Is it true, householder, as it is said, that the ascetic Gotama criticizes all austerities and that he unreservedly condemns and reproves all who live a harsh and austere life?”
“Is there then anyone in the world who has overcome this adherence to lust for sensual pleasures … holding firmly, and this adherence to lust for views … holding firmly?”
“It could be the case, Sāriputta, that a gift given by someone here is not of great fruit and benefit.
“It has four corners and four doorsand is divided into separate compartments;it is surrounded by iron rampartsand shut in with an iron roof.
“It is also impossible and inconceivable that a bad person can know of a good person: ‘This fellow is a good person.’”
“It is also possible that a good person can know of a bad person: ‘This fellow is a bad person.’”
“It is astounding and amazing, Bhante, how well this was stated by the Blessed One: ‘I say, friend, that by traveling one cannot know, see, or reach that end of the world where one is not born, does not grow old and die, does not pass away and get reborn.’
“It is astounding and amazing, Bhante, how well this was stated by the Blessed One: ‘I say, friend, that by traveling one cannot know, see, or reach that end of the world where one is not born, does not grow old and die, does not pass away and get reborn.’”
“It is astounding and amazing, Bhante, that there is no extolling of one’s own Dhamma nor any denigration of the Dhamma of others, but just the teaching of the Dhamma in its own sphere.
“It is astounding and amazing, Master Gotama!
“It is astounding and amazing, Master Gotama!
“It is astounding and amazing, Master Gotama!
“It is astounding and amazing, Master Gotama, how Master Gotama’s faculties are tranquil and the color of his skin is pure and bright.
“It is astounding and amazing, Master Gotama, how well this has been stated by Master Gotama!
“It is astounding and amazing, Master Gotama, how well this has been stated by Master Gotama.
“It is astounding and amazing, Master Gotama, how well this has been stated by Master Gotama: ‘It is impossible and inconceivable that a bad person can know of a bad person: “This fellow is a bad person.”
It is also impossible and inconceivable that a bad person can know of a good person: “This fellow is a good person.”
It is possible that a good person can know of a good person: “This fellow is a good person.”
It is also possible that a good person can know of a bad person: “This fellow is a bad person.”’ And now, Master Gotama, we must be going.
“It is astounding and amazing, Master Gotama, how well this has been stated by Master Gotama: ‘It is, brahmin, impossible and inconceivable that a bad person can know of a bad person … … It is also possible that a good person can know of a bad person: “This fellow is a bad person.”’
“It is by possessing these five factors that a master thief breaks into houses, plunders wealth, commits banditry, and ambushes highways.
“It is by possessing these five qualities that an evil bhikkhu maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition, is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise, and generates much demerit.”
“It is by possessing these three factors that a master thief breaks into houses, plunders wealth, commits banditry, and ambushes highways.
“It is by possessing these three qualities that an evil bhikkhu maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition, is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise, and generates much demerit.”
“It is fitting for you to be perplexed, Kālāmas, fitting for you to be in doubt.
“It is good for a bhikkhu to overcome gain whenever it arises.
“It is heedfulness.
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person accomplished in view could consider any conditioned phenomenon as permanent; there is no such possibility.
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person accomplished in view could consider any conditioned phenomenon as pleasurable; there is no such possibility.
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person accomplished in view could consider anything as a self; there is no such possibility.
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person accomplished in view could deprive his mother of life … that a person accomplished in view could deprive his father of life … that a person accomplished in view could deprive an arahant of life … that a person accomplished in view could, with a mind of hatred, shed the blood of the Tathāgatha … that a person accomplished in view could create a schism in the Saṅgha … that a person accomplished in view could acknowledge someone other as teacher; there is no such possibility.
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person engaging in bodily good conduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell … … that a person engaging in verbal good conduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell … … that a person engaging in mental good conduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell; there is no such possibility.
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person engaging in bodily misconduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world … … that a person engaging in verbal misconduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world … … that a person engaging in mental misconduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world; there is no such possibility.
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a wished for, desired, agreeable result could be produced from bodily misconduct … … that a wished for, desired, agreeable result could be produced from verbal misconduct … … that a wished for, desired, agreeable result could be produced from mental misconduct; there is no such possibility.
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a woman could be an arahant who is a perfectly enlightened Buddha … … that a woman could be a wheel-turning monarch … … that a woman could occupy the position of Sakka … … that a woman could occupy the position of Māra … … that a woman could occupy the position of Brahmā; there is no such possibility.
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that an unwished for, undesired, disagreeable result could be produced from bodily good conduct … … that an unwished for, undesired, disagreeable result could be produced from verbal good conduct … … that an unwished for, undesired, disagreeable result could be produced from mental good conduct; there is no such possibility.
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that two arahants who are perfectly enlightened Buddhas could arise contemporaneously in one world system; there is no such possibility.
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that two wheel-turning monarchs could arise contemporaneously in one world system; there is no such possibility.
“It is impossible, Bhante, that a bhikkhu who has reverence for the Teacher and the Dhamma could lack reverence for the Saṅgha.
“It is impossible, Bhante, that a bhikkhu who has reverence for the Teacher could lack reverence for the Dhamma.
“It is impossible, Bhante, that a bhikkhu who has reverence for the Teacher, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha could lack reverence for the training.
“It is impossible, Bhante, that a bhikkhu who has reverence for the Teacher, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha, and the training could lack reverence for concentration.
“It is impossible, Bhante, that a bhikkhu who has reverence for the Teacher, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha, the training, and concentration could lack reverence for heedfulness.
“It is impossible, Bhante, that a bhikkhu who has reverence for the Teacher, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha, the training, concentration, and heedfulness could lack reverence for hospitality.
“It is impossible, Bhante, that a bhikkhu who lacks reverence for the Teacher and the Dhamma could have reverence for the Saṅgha.
“It is impossible, Bhante, that a bhikkhu who lacks reverence for the Teacher could have reverence for the Dhamma.
“It is impossible, Bhante, that a bhikkhu who lacks reverence for the Teacher, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha could have reverence for the training.
“It is impossible, Bhante, that a bhikkhu who lacks reverence for the Teacher, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha, and the training could have reverence for concentration.
“It is impossible, Bhante, that a bhikkhu who lacks reverence for the Teacher, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha, the training, and concentration could have reverence for heedfulness.
“It is impossible, Bhante, that a bhikkhu who lacks reverence for the Teacher, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha, the training, concentration, and heedfulness could have reverence for hospitality.
“It is impossible, Ānanda, that a bhikkhu without faith will achieve growth, progress, and maturity in this Dhamma and discipline.
“It is in just this way that some hollow men here make requests of me, but when the Dhamma has been explained, they think only of following me around.”
“It is in relation to talk, bhikkhus, that a person may be understood as either fit to talk or unfit to talk.
“It is in relation to talk, bhikkhus, that a person should be understood as either fit to talk or unfit to talk.
“It is in relation to talk, bhikkhus, that a person should be understood as either fit to talk or unfit to talk.
“It is in relation to talk, bhikkhus, that a person should be understood as either fit to talk or unfit to talk.
“It is in relation to talk, bhikkhus, that a person should be understood as either having a supporting condition or not having a supporting condition.
“It is in such a way, Bhante, that I understand in detail the meaning of this statement that the Blessed One has spoken in brief.”
“It is in such a way, I say, that what is given to one who has abandoned five factors and possesses five factors is very fruitful.”
“It is in such a way, Sāriputta, that the meaning of this statement that I spoke in brief should be understood in detail.”
“It is in such a way, Sāriputta, that the meaning of this statement that I spoke in brief should be understood in detail.”
“It is in this way that a bhikkhu possesses five factors.
“It is in this way that a bhikkhu understands persons in terms of pairs.
“It is in this way that a lodging possesses five factors.
“It is in this way that a person is one who does not torment himself or pursue the practice of torturing himself and who does not torment others or pursue the practice of torturing others—one who, since he torments neither himself nor others, in this very life dwells hungerless, quenched and cooled, experiencing bliss, having himself become divine.
“It is in this way that impurity by body is threefold.
“It is in this way that impurity by mind is threefold.
“It is in this way that impurity by speech is fourfold.
“It is in this way that purity by body is threefold.
“It is in this way that purity by mind is threefold.”
“It is in this way that purity by speech is fourfold.
“It is in this way that there is a fourfold corruption and failure of verbal kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result.
“It is in this way that there is a fourfold success of verbal kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result.
“It is in this way that there is a threefold corruption and failure of bodily kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result.
“It is in this way that there is a threefold corruption and failure of mental kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, having a painful outcome and result.
“It is in this way that there is a threefold success of bodily kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result.
“It is in this way that there is a threefold success of mental kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, having a pleasant outcome and result.
“It is in this way, bhikkhu, that a bhikkhu is equipped with supports.”
“It is in this way, bhikkhus, that the uposatha is observed complete in eight factors, so that it is of great fruit and benefit, extraordinarily brilliant and pervasive.
“It is in this way, bhikkhus, that the uposatha is observed complete in eight factors, so that it is of great fruit and benefit, extraordinarily brilliant and pervasive.”
“It is in this way, bhikkhus, that the uposatha is observed complete in nine factors, so that it is of great fruit and benefit, extraordinarily brilliant and pervasive.”
“It is in this way, bhikkhus, that this Dhamma offers a means of avoidance and does not lack a means of avoidance.” 
“It is in this way, brahmin, that one is a master of the threefold knowledge in the Noble One’s discipline.”
“It is in this way, brahmin, that one is a master of the threefold knowledge in the Noble One’s discipline.”
“It is in this way, brahmin, that the paccorohaṇī festival is observed in the Noble One’s discipline.”
“It is in this way, brahmin, that the paccorohaṇī festival is observed in the Noble One’s discipline.”
“It is in this way, Mahānāma, that the Blessed One has spoken about the virtuous behavior of a trainee and the virtuous behavior of one beyond training; about the concentration of a trainee and the concentration of one beyond training; about the wisdom of a trainee and the wisdom of one beyond training.”
“It is in this way, Visākhā, that the noble ones’ uposatha is observed.
“It is in this way, Ānanda, that there is existence.”
“It is in this way, Ānanda, that there is existence.” 
“It is just this noble eightfold path, that is, right view … right concentration.
“It is not  of devas and humans—or any other good destinations—that are seen because of kamma born of greed, hatred, and delusion; rather, it is hell, the animal realm, and the sphere of afflicted spirits—as well as other bad destinations—that are seen because of kamma born of greed, hatred, and delusion.
“It is not by sorrowing and lamentingthat even the least good here can be gained.Knowing that one is sorrowful and sad,one’s enemies are elated.
“It is not greed that originates from non-greed; rather, it is just non-greed that originates from non-greed.
“It is not hell, the animal realm, and the sphere of afflicted spirits—or any other bad destinations—that are seen because of kamma born of non-greed, non-hatred, and non-delusion; rather, it is of devas and humans—as well as other good destinations—that are seen because of kamma born of non-greed, non-hatred, and non-delusion.
“It is not non-greed that originates from greed; rather, it is just greed that originates from greed.
“It is on these ten grounds that the Tathāgata has prescribed the training rules for his disciples and recited the Pātimokkha.”
“It is possible that a good person can know of a good person: ‘This fellow is a good person.’”
“It is possible that a person attained to view is practicing for arahantship, while one liberated by faith and a body witness are once-returners or non-returners.
“It is possible that a person who is a body witness is practicing for arahantship, while one liberated by faith and one attained to view are once-returners or non-returners.
“It is possible, Ānanda, that a bhikkhu endowed with faith will achieve growth, progress, and maturity in this Dhamma and discipline.
“It is possible, Ānanda,” the Blessed One said.
“It is said, Bhante, ‘a learned expert on the Dhamma, a learned expert on the Dhamma.’
In what way is one a learned expert on the Dhamma?”
“It is said, Bhante, ‘a wise person of great wisdom, a wise person of great wisdom.’
In what way is one a wise person of great wisdom?” 
“It is said, Bhante, ‘learned, of penetrative wisdom; learned, of penetrative wisdom.’
In what way is one learned, of penetrative wisdom?”
“It is said, Bhante, ‘one beyond training, one beyond training.’
In what way, Bhante, is a bhikkhu one beyond training?”
“It is said, Bhante, ‘one who dwells in the Dhamma, one who dwells in the Dhamma.’
In what way is a bhikkhu one who dwells in the Dhamma?”
“It is said, Bhante, ‘one who dwells in the Dhamma, one who dwells in the Dhamma.’
In what way is a bhikkhu one who dwells in the Dhamma?”
“It is said, friend, ‘a body witness, a body witness.’
In what way has the Blessed One spoken of a body witness?”
“It is said, friend, ‘cessation, cessation.’…”
“It is said, friend, ‘directly visible nibbāna, directly visible nibbāna.’
In what way has the Blessed One spoken of directly visible nibbāna?”
“It is said, friend, ‘final nibbāna, final nibbāna.’ …”
“It is said, friend, ‘liberated by wisdom, liberated by wisdom.’
In what way has the Blessed One spoken of one liberated by wisdom?”
“It is said, friend, ‘liberated in both respects, liberated in both respects.’
In what way has the Blessed One spoken of one liberated in both respects?”
“It is said, friend, ‘nibbāna in a particular respect, nibbāna in a particular respect.’…”
“It is said, friend, ‘nibbāna in this very life, nibbāna in this very life.’
In what way, friend, has the Blessed One spoken of nibbāna in this very life?”
“It is said, friend, ‘nibbāna, nibbāna.’ …”
“It is said, friend, ‘one who has attained security, one who has attained security.’…”
“It is said, friend, ‘one who has attained the deathless, one who has attained the deathless.’…”
“It is said, friend, ‘one who has attained the fearless, one who has attained the fearless.’…”
“It is said, friend, ‘progressive cessation, progressive cessation.’
In what way, friend, has the Blessed One spoken of progressive cessation?”
“It is said, friend, ‘progressive tranquility, progressive tranquility.’…”
“It is said, friend, ‘security, security.’
In what way, friend, has the Blessed One spoken of security?”
“It is said, friend, ‘the deathless, the deathless.’…”
“It is said, friend, ‘the directly visible Dhamma, the directly visible Dhamma.’
In what way has the Blessed One spoken of the directly visible Dhamma?”
“It is said, friend, ‘the fearless, the fearless.’…”
“It is said, friend, ‘tranquility, tranquility.’…”
“It is the Dhamma, bhikkhu,” the Blessed One said.
“It is the Dhamma, bhikkhu,” the Blessed One said.
“It is the time for this, Blessed One!
“It is the time for this, Blessed One!
“It is the time for this, Blessed One.
“It is the time for this, Blessed One.
“It is true, Kesi, that it isn’t allowable for the Tathāgata to destroy life.
“It is truly your good fortune and gain, householder, that the housewife Nakulamātā has compassion for you, desires your good, and exhorts and instructs you.
“It is volition, bhikkhus, that I call kamma.
“It is well provided with these seven kinds of appurtenances.
“It is when they see this quality within themselves that my disciples resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
“It is when they see this quality, too, within themselves that my disciples resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
“It is when they see this quality, too, within themselves that my disciples resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
“It is when they see this quality, too, within themselves that my disciples resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
“It is when they see this quality, too, within themselves that my disciples resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
“It is when they see this quality, too, within themselves that my disciples resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
“It is when they see this quality, too, within themselves that my disciples resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
“It is when they see this quality, too, within themselves that my disciples resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
“It is when they see this quality, too, within themselves that my disciples resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
“It is with respect to these five things that he should examine himself.
“It is your misfortune and loss, Sakyans!
“It is your misfortune and loss, Sakyans!
“It is, bhikkhu,” the Blessed One said.
“It is, bhikkhus, a misfortune and loss for those of you whom even the deities know are declining in wholesome qualities.
“It is, bhikkhus, because of not understanding and penetrating noble virtuous behavior, noble concentration, noble wisdom, and noble liberation that you and I have roamed and wandered for such a long stretch of time.
“It is, bhikkhus, because of the threefold corruption and failure of bodily kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition … or it is because of the fourfold corruption and failure of verbal kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition … or it is because of the threefold corruption and failure of mental kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
“It is, bhikkhus, because of the threefold corruption and failure of bodily kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell; or it is because of the fourfold corruption and failure of verbal kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell; or it is because of the threefold corruption and failure of mental kamma, arisen from unwholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
“It is, bhikkhus, because of the threefold success of bodily kamma … or it is because of the fourfold success of verbal kamma … or it is because of the threefold success of mental kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
“It is, bhikkhus, because of the threefold success of bodily kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world; or it is because of the fourfold success of verbal kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world; or it is because of the threefold success of mental kamma, arisen from wholesome volition, that with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
“It is, bhikkhus, when mindfulness of death is developed and cultivated in this way that it is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation.”
“It is, bhikkhus, when mindfulness of death is developed and cultivated in this way that it is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation.” 
“It is, brahmin, because of adherence to lust for sensual pleasures, bondage, fixation, obsession, holding firmly, that khattiyas fight with khattiyas, brahmins with brahmins, and householders with householders.”
“It is, brahmin, because of adherence to lust for views, bondage, fixation, obsession, holding firmly, that ascetics fight with ascetics.”
“It is, brahmin, because of conduct contrary to the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct, that some beings here, with the breakup of the body, after death, are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.”
“It is, brahmin, because of conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct, that some beings here, with the breakup of the body, after death, are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.”
“It is, brahmin, because of righteous conduct, conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, that some beings here, with the breakup of the body, after death, are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.”
“It is, brahmin, because of such righteous conduct, conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, that some beings here, with the breakup of the body, after death, are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
“It is, brahmin, because of such unrighteous conduct, conduct contrary to the Dhamma, that some beings here, with the breakup of the body, after death, are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
“It is, brahmin, because of unrighteous conduct, conduct contrary to the Dhamma, that some beings here, with the breakup of the body, after death, are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
“It is, brahmin, because of what has been done and what has not been done that some beings here, with the breakup of the body, after death, are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.”
“It is, brahmin, because of what has been done and what has not been done that some beings here, with the breakup of the body, after death, are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.”
“It is, brahmin, impossible and inconceivable that a bad person can know of a bad person: ‘This fellow is a bad person.’”
“It is, friend, while one is actually percipient that one does not experience that base, not while one is non-percipient.”
“It is, Sīha,” the Blessed One said.
“It is, Upāli, on ten grounds that the Tathāgata has prescribed the training rules for his disciples and recited the Pātimokkha.
“It isn’t easy, Sāriputta, to make a definitive declaration about this matter and say: ‘Of these three kinds of persons, this one is the most excellent and sublime.’
“It isn’t easy, Ānanda, to teach the Dhamma to others.
“It isn’t hard for me to explain my view, Bhante.
“It isn’t the case, friend, that I do not know and see.
“It isn’t unusual for deities to come and report to me: ‘Householder, the Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One.’
I then say to those deities: ‘Whether you say so or not, the Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One.’
Still, I do not recall any mental exultation arising because deities come to me or because I converse with deities.
“It isn’t unusual for deities to come and report to me: ‘‘Householder, the Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One.’
I then say to those deities: ‘Whether you deities say so or not, the Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One.’
Still, I do not recall any mental exultation arising because deities come to me or because I converse with deities.
“It isn’t unusual that when the Saṅgha has been invited by me, deities come and report to me: ‘That bhikkhu, householder, is liberated in both respects.
“It may be that some venerable one here thinks: ‘Could it be that this venerable one is intent upon non-affliction because he has fallen back on the wrong grasp of behavior and observances as the essence?’
But it should not be seen in such a way.
“It may be that some venerable one here thinks: ‘Could it be that this venerable one is intent upon solitude because he is hankering after gain, honor, and praise?’
But it should not be seen in such a way.
“It may be, Bhante, that some venerable one here thinks: ‘Could it be that this venerable one is intent upon renunciation on account of mere faith?’
But it should not be seen in such a way.
“It may be, bhikkhus, that you think: ‘On that occasion the chariotmaker was someone else.’
But you should not think in such a way.
“It may be, householder, that you think thus: ‘After I’m gone, Nakulamātā will take another husband.’
But you should not look at the matter in this way.
“It may be, householder, that you think thus: ‘After I’m gone, Nakulamātā won’t be able to support our children and maintain the household.’
But you should not look at the matter in this way.
“It may be, householder, that you think thus: ‘After I’m gone, Nakulamātā won’t want to see the Blessed One and the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.’
But you should not look at the matter in this way.
“It may be, householder, that you think thus: ‘Nakulamātā does not fulfill virtuous behavior.’
But you should not look at the matter in this way.
“It may be, householder, that you think thus: ‘Nakulamātā does not obtain internal serenity of mind.’
But you should not look at the matter in this way.
“It may be, householder, that you think thus: ‘Nakulamātā has not attained a foothold, a firm stand, assurance in this Dhamma and discipline; she has not crossed over doubt, gotten rid of bewilderment, attained self-confidence, and become independent of others in the Teacher’s teaching.’
But you should not look at the matter in this way.
“It occurred to me, bhikkhus: ‘If I perceive a light and see forms, and also associate with those deities, converse with them, and engage in a discussion with them, in such a case this knowledge and vision of mine would become even more purified.’
So on a later occasion, as I was dwelling heedful, ardent, and resolute, I perceived a light and saw forms, and I also associated with those deities, conversed with them, and engaged in a discussion with them.
“It occurred to me, bhikkhus: ‘If I perceive a light and see forms, and associate with those deities, converse with them, and engage in a discussion with them, and also know about those deities: ‘These deities are from this or that order of devas,’ in such a case this knowledge and vision of mine would become even more purified.’
So on a later occasion, as I was dwelling heedful, ardent, and resolute, I perceived a light and saw forms, and associated with those deities, conversed with them, and engaged in a discussion with them, and I also knew about those deities: ‘These deities are from this or that order of devas.’
Yet I did not know of those deities: ‘After passing away here these deities were reborn there as a result of this kamma.’
“It occurred to me, bhikkhus: ‘If I perceive a light and see forms; and I associate with those deities, converse with them, and engage in a discussion with them; and know about those deities: ‘These deities are from this or that order of devas’; and ‘After passing away here, these deities were reborn there as a result of this kamma’; and ‘As a result of this kamma, these deities subsist on such food and experience such pleasure and pain’; and ‘As a result of this kamma, these deities have a life span of such length’; and also know whether or not I had previously lived together with those deities, in such a case this knowledge and vision of mine would become even more purified.’
“It occurred to me, bhikkhus: ‘If I should perceive a light and also see forms, in such a case this knowledge and vision of mine would become even more purified.’
So on a later occasion, as I was dwelling heedful, ardent, and resolute, I perceived a light and also saw forms.
“It occurred to me: ‘Let me then honor, respect, and dwell in dependence only on this Dhamma to which I have become fully enlightened.’
“It occurs to him: ‘I am endowed with faith; I place faith in the enlightenment of the Tathāgata thus: “The Blessed One is an arahant, perfectly enlightened … teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One,” so why shouldn’t I yearn for the destruction of the taints?
“It occurs to him: ‘I am virtuous … I train in them, so why shouldn’t I yearn for the destruction of the taints?
“It occurs to him: ‘I am well born on both sides … impeccable with respect to birth, so why shouldn’t I yearn for kingship?
“It occurs to him: ‘I am well born … as far back as the seventh paternal generation, so why shouldn’t I yearn to be the viceroy?
“It occurs to him: ‘When kings have arrested a robber, a criminal, they subject him to various punishments because of his bad deeds: they have him flogged with whips … they have his head cut off with a sword.
“It occurs to him: ‘When kings have arrested a thief who has committed a crime, they subject him to various punishments because of such bad deeds: they have him flogged with whips … they have his head cut off with a sword.
“It occurs to him: ‘With the subsiding of thought and examination, I should enter and dwell in the second jhāna ….’
But he cannot enter and dwell in the second jhāna ….
“It occurs to him: ‘With the subsiding of thought and examination, I should enter and dwell in the second jhāna ….’
Not injuring the second jhāna, with the subsiding of thought and examination he enters and dwells in the second jhāna ….
“It occurs, too, to of middle standing … to a junior: ‘An elder —and one of middle standing and a junior —should correct me.
“It occurs, too, to of middle standing … to a junior: ‘An elder —or one of middle standing or a junior —should not correct me.
“It should be called the eldest, Master Gotama.
“It then occurred to me: These venerable ones do not know what an elder is or what the qualities that make one an elder are.
“It was just in this way, friend, that the Blessed One declared it.”
“It was just in this way, sister, that the Blessed One declared it.”
“It was just in this way, sister, that the Blessed One declared it.”
“It was on account of this that it was said: ‘By conversation their wisdom can be known, and this only after a long time, not casually; by one who is attentive, not by one who is inattentive; and by one who is wise, not by one who is unwise.’
“It was on account of this that it was said: ‘By dealing their integrity can be known, and this only after a long time, not casually; by one who is attentive, not by one who is inattentive; and by one who is wise, not by one who is unwise.’
“It was on account of this that it was said: ‘By dwelling together their virtuous behavior can be known, and this only after a long time, not casually; by one who is attentive, not by one who is inattentive; and by one who is wise, not by one who is unwise.’
“It was on account of this that it was said: ‘In misfortune their fortitude can be known, and this only after a long time, not casually; by one who is attentive, not by one who is inattentive; and by one who is wise, not by one who is unwise.’
“It was said: ‘By dwelling together their virtuous behavior can be known, and this only after a long time, not casually; by one who is attentive, not by one who is inattentive; and by one who is wise, not by one who is unwise.’
On account of what was this said?
“It was said: ‘The perception of death, bhikkhus, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation.’
For what reason was this said?
“It was said: ‘The perception of impermanence, bhikkhus, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation.’
For what reason was this said?
“It was said: ‘The perception of non-delight in the entire world, bhikkhus, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation.’
For what reason was this said?
“It was said: ‘The perception of non-self in what is suffering, bhikkhus, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation.’
For what reason was this said?
“It was said: ‘The perception of suffering in the impermanent, bhikkhus, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation.’
For what reason was this said?
“It was said: ‘The perception of the repulsiveness of food, bhikkhus, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation.’
For what reason was this said?
“It was said: ‘The perception of unattractiveness, bhikkhus, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation.’
For what reason was this said?
“It was Venerable Visākha Pañcāliputta, Bhante.”
“It would be far better, Bhante, for one to accept reverential salutations from affluent khattiyas, brahmins, or householders.
“It would be far better, Bhante, for one to accept the homage of affluent khattiyas, brahmins, or householders.
“It would be far better, Bhante, for one to consume almsfood given out of faith by affluent khattiyas, brahmins, or householders.
“It would be far better, Bhante, for one to use a bed and chair given out of faith by affluent khattiyas, brahmins, or householders.
“It would be far better, Bhante, for one to use a dwelling given out of faith by affluent khattiyas, brahmins, or householders.
“It would be far better, Bhante, for one to use a robe given out of faith by affluent khattiyas, brahmins, or householders.
“It would be far better, Bhante, to embrace a girl with soft and tender hands and feet—whether from a khattiya, brahmin, or householder clan—and sit down or lie down next to her.
“It would be good if you would abandon these three qualities and stop attending to them.
“It would be, Ānanda.
“Its floor as well is made of ironand heated till it glows with fire.The range is a full hundred yojanaswhich it ever covers pervasively.
“It’s astounding and amazing, Bhante!
“It’s astounding and amazing, Bhante, how Migāra of Rohaṇa is so rich, with such great wealth and property.”
“It’s astounding and amazing, Bhante, how well this was stated by the Blessed One: ‘But, Udāyī, in the world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, in this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, I call one a nāga who does no evil by body, speech, and mind.’
I rejoice, Bhante, in this good statement of the Blessed One with these verses:
“It’s astounding and amazing, Bhante, how well you stated this: ‘Whatever is well spoken is all the word of the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
“It’s astounding and amazing, friend, how well this has been stated by the Venerable Ānanda!
“It’s astounding and amazing, friend, how well this has been stated by the Venerable Ānanda.
“It’s astounding and amazing, friend, that the meaning and the phrasing of both teacher and disciple coincide and agree with each other and do not diverge in regard to the foremost state.
“It’s astounding and amazing, friends, that the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One, who knows and sees, has discovered the achievement of an opening in the midst of confinement: for the purification of beings, for the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, for the passing away of pain and dejection, for the achievement of the method, for the realization of nibbāna.
“It’s astounding and amazing, friends, that the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One, who knows and sees, has discovered the opening in the midst of confinement for the purification of beings, for the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, for the passing away of pain and dejection, for the achievement of the method, for the realization of nibbāna, that is, the six subjects of recollection.
“It’s astounding and amazing, friends, that the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One, who knows and sees, has discovered the opening in the midst of confinement for the purification of beings, for the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, for the passing away of pain and dejection, for the achievement of the method, for the realization of nibbāna, that is, the six subjects of recollection.”
“It’s astounding and amazing, Master Gotama!
“It’s astounding and amazing, Master Gotama, that there is reason to give gifts and perform the memorial rites for the dead, since for the donor too it is not fruitless.”
“It’s astounding and amazing, Moggallāna, how that hollow man waited until he was grabbed by the arm.”
Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus: “Now, bhikkhus, you yourselves should conduct the uposatha and recite the Pātimokkha.
“It’s astounding and amazing, Nandamātā!”
“It’s astounding and amazing, Nandamātā!”
“It’s astounding and amazing, Nandamātā!”
“It’s astounding and amazing, Nandamātā, that you can converse directly with such a powerful and influential young deva as the great king Vessavaṇa.”
“It’s astounding and amazing, Nandamātā, that you can purify even the arising of a thought.”
“It’s astounding and amazing, Nandamātā, that you can purify even the arising of a thought.”
“It’s astounding and amazing, Nandamātā, that you can purify even the arising of a thought.”
“It’s difficult, friends, for those who don’t know the course of another’s mind to know this.
“I’ve enjoyed wealth,supported my dependents,and overcome adversities.I have given an uplifting offering,and performed the five oblations.
“I’ve enjoyed wealth,supported my dependents,and overcome adversities.I have given an uplifting offeringand performed the five oblations.I have served the virtuous monks,the self-controlled celibate ones.
“Just as a blue, red, or white lotus flower, though born in the water and grown up in the water, rises up above the water and stands unsoiled by the water, even so, Bāhuna, it is because the Tathāgata is released, detached, and emancipated from these ten things that he dwells with a mind free from boundaries.”
“Just as a capable physician might instantly cure one who is afflicted, sick, and gravely ill; so too, sir, whatever one hears of Master Gotama’s Dhamma—discourses, mixed prose and verse, expositions, or amazing accounts—one’s sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish will vanish.
“Just as a man oppressed by hunger and weakness who receives a honey cake will enjoy a sweet, delicious taste wherever he eats of it; so too, sir, whatever one hears of Master Gotama’s Dhamma—discourses, mixed prose and verse, expositions, or amazing accounts—one will obtain satisfaction and placidity of mind.
“Just as a man who comes upon a piece of sandalwood, whether yellow sandalwood or red sandalwood, will enjoy a pure, fragrant scent wherever he smells it, be it at the bottom, the middle, or the top; so too, sir, whatever one hears of Master Gotama’s Dhamma—discourses, mixed prose and verse, expositions, or amazing accounts—one will derive elation and joy.
“Just as a man who has found satisfaction in the best of tastes will no longer desire tastes of an inferior kind; so too, sir, whatever one hears of Master Gotama’s Dhamma—be it discourses, mixed prose and verse, expositions, or amazing accounts—one will no longer yearn for the doctrines of ordinary ascetics and brahmins.
“Just as a reed-cutter, having cut a bunch of reeds, grabs them by the top, shakes the bottom, shakes the two sides, and beats them, so too heedfulness is the one thing that … can accomplish both kinds of good….
“Just as a trap set at the mouth of a river would bring about harm, suffering, calamity, and disaster to many fish, so too, the hollow man Makkhali is, as it were, a ‘trap for people’ who has arisen in the world for the harm, suffering, calamity, and disaster of many beings.”
“Just as all petty princes are the vassals of a wheel-turning monarch, and the wheel-turning monarch is declared foremost among them, so too “Just as all petty princes are the vassals of a wheel-turning monarch, and the wheel-turning monarch is declared to be foremost among them, so too heedfulness is the one thing that … can accomplish both kinds of good….
“Just as all the rafters of a peaked house lean toward the roof peak, slope toward the roof peak, converge upon the roof peak, and the roof peak is declared foremost among them, so too, all wholesome qualities are rooted in heedfulness and converge upon heedfulness and heedfulness is declared foremost among them.
“Just as all the rafters of a peaked house lean toward the roof peak, slope toward the roof peak, converge upon the roof peak, and the roof peak is declared to be foremost among them, so too heedfulness is the one thing that … can accomplish both kinds of good….
“Just as an archer or an archer’s apprentice undergoes training on a straw man or a heap of clay, and then at a later time becomes a long-distance shooter, a sharp-shooter, one who splits a great body, so too, secluded from sensual pleasures … a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna.
“Just as an archer or an archer’s apprentice undergoes training on a straw man or a heap of clay, and then at a later time becomes a long-distance shooter, a sharp-shooter, one who splits a great body, so too, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms … a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space.
“Just as an archer or an archer’s apprentice undergoes training on a straw man or a heap of clay, and then at a later time becomes a long-distance shooter, a sharp-shooter, one who splits a great body, so too, with the complete surmounting of the base of the infinity of consciousness … a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of nothingness.
“Just as at a crossroads on level ground, a great banyan tree becomes the resort for birds all around, so the clansman endowed with faith becomes the resort for many people: for bhikkhus, bhikkhunīs, male lay followers, and female lay followers.”
“Just as dice, when thrown upward, will rest firmly wherever they fall, so too, because of accomplishment in virtuous behavior … accomplishment in mind … accomplishment in view, with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
“Just as dice, when thrown upward, will rest firmly wherever they fall, so too, because of failure in virtuous behavior … failure in mind … failure in view, with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
“Just as many foodstuffs—sesame, green gram, and beans—are stored up in the king’s frontier fortress for the delight, relief, and comfort of its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders, so too, with the fading away as well of rapture, a noble disciple dwells equanimous and, mindful and clearly comprehending, he experiences pleasure with the body; he enters and dwells in the third jhāna of which the noble ones declare: ‘He is equanimous, mindful, one who dwells happily’—for his own delight, relief, and comfort, and for entering upon nibbāna.
“Just as many kinds of troops reside in the king’s frontier fortress, that is, elephant troops … domestic-slave soldiers, for protecting its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders, so too a noble disciple has aroused energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities and acquiring wholesome qualities; he is strong, firm in exertion, not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
“Just as many medicaments—ghee, butter, oil, honey, molasses, and salt—are stored up in the king’s frontier fortress for the delight, relief, and comfort of its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders, so too, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous passing away of joy and dejection, a noble disciple enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna, neither painful nor pleasant, which has purification of mindfulness by equanimity—for his own delight, relief, and comfort, and for entering upon nibbāna.
“Just as many weapons, both missiles and hand weapons, are stored in the king’s frontier fortress for the purpose of protecting its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders, so too a noble disciple has learned much, remembers what he has learned, and accumulates what he has learned.
“Just as much rice and barley are stored up in the king’s frontier fortress for the delight, relief, and comfort of its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders, so too, with the subsiding of thought and examination, a noble disciple enters and dwells in the second jhāna, which has internal placidity and unification of mind and consists of rapture and pleasure born of concentration, without thought and examination—for his own delight, relief, and comfort, and for entering upon nibbāna.
“Just as the footprints of all animals that roam on land fit into the footprint of the elephant, and the elephant’s footprint is declared foremost among them, that is, with respect to size, so too, all wholesome qualities are rooted in heedfulness and converge upon heedfulness and heedfulness is declared foremost among them.
“Just as the gatekeeper in the king’s frontier fortress is wise, competent, and intelligent, one who keeps out strangers and admits acquaintances, for protecting its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders, so too a noble disciple is mindful, possessing supreme mindfulness and alertness, one who remembers and recollects what was done and said long ago.
“Just as the great ocean contains many precious substances, numerous precious substances such as pearls … cats-eye, so too, this Dhamma and discipline contains many precious substances, numerous precious substances: the four establishments of mindfulness, the four right strivings, the four bases for psychic potency, the five spiritual faculties, the five powers, the seven factors of enlightenment, the noble eightfold path.
“Just as the great ocean does not associate with a corpse, but quickly carries it to the coast and washes it ashore, so too, the Saṅgha does not associate with a person who is immoral, of bad character, impure, of suspect behavior, secretive in his actions, not an ascetic though claiming to be one, not a celibate though claiming to be one, inwardly rotten, corrupt, depraved; rather, it quickly assembles and expels him.
“Just as the great ocean has but one taste, the taste of salt, so too, this Dhamma and discipline has but one taste, the taste of liberation.
“Just as the great ocean is stable and does not overflow its boundaries, so too, when I have prescribed a training rule for my disciples, they will not transgress it even for life’s sake.
“Just as the great ocean is the abode of great beings such as timis … … gandhabbas; and as there are in the great ocean beings with bodies one hundred yojanas long … five hundred yojanas long, so too this Dhamma and discipline is the abode of great beings: the stream-enterer, the one practicing for realization of the fruit of stream-entry; the once-returner, the one practicing for realization of the fruit of once-returning; the non-returner, the one practicing for realization of the fruit of non-returning; the arahant, the one practicing for arahantship.
“Just as the great ocean is the abode of great beings … five hundred yojanas long, so too, this Dhamma and discipline is the abode of great beings: the stream-enterer, the one practicing for the realization of the fruit of stream-entry … the arahant, the one practicing for arahantship.
“Just as the moat in the king’s frontier fortress is dug deep and wide for the purpose of protecting its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders, so too a noble disciple has a sense of moral shame; he is ashamed of bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct; he is ashamed of acquiring bad unwholesome qualities.
“Just as the patrol path in the king’s frontier fortress is high and wide for the purpose of protecting its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders, so too a noble disciple dreads wrongdoing; he dreads bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct; he dreads acquiring bad unwholesome qualities.
“Just as the radiance of all the stars does not amount to a sixteenth part of the radiance of the moon, and the radiance of the moon is declared foremost among them, so too “Just as the radiance of all the stars does not amount to a sixteenth part of the radiance of the moon, and the radiance of the moon is declared to be foremost among them, so too heedfulness is the one thing that … can accomplish both kinds of good….
“Just as the rampart in the king’s frontier fortress is high and wide, covered over by a coat of plaster, for protecting its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders, so too a noble disciple is wise; he possesses the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
“Just as the warrior is a long-distance shooter, so too the noble disciple has right concentration.
“Just as the warrior is a sharp-shooter, so too the noble disciple has right view.
“Just as the warrior splits a great body, so too the noble disciple has right liberation.
“Just as there might be a delightful pond with pleasant banks, its water clear, agreeable, cool, and limpid, and a man oppressed and exhausted by the heat, fatigued, parched, and thirsty, might come by, enter the pond, and bathe and drink; thus all his affliction, fatigue, and feverish burning would subside.
“Just as, bhikkhus, from a cow comes milk, from milk comes curd, from curd comes butter, from butter comes ghee, and from ghee comes cream-of-ghee, which is reckoned the foremost of all these, so one who becomes a forest dweller for the sake of fewness of desires … for the sake of simplicity, is the foremost, the best, the preeminent, the supreme, and the finest of these five kinds of forest dwellers.”
“Just as, bhikkhus, from a cow comes milk, from milk comes curd, from curd comes butter, from butter comes ghee, and from ghee comes cream-of-ghee, which is reckoned the foremost of all these, so this one who observes the practice of eating only food in the almsbowl for the sake of fewness of desires … for the sake of simplicity, is the foremost, the best, the preeminent, the supreme, and the finest of these five who observe the practice of eating only food in the almsbowl.”
“Just as, bhikkhus, in this Jambudīpa, delightful parks, groves, landscapes, and lotus ponds are few, while more numerous are the hills and slopes, rivers that are hard to cross, places with stumps and thorns, and rugged mountains, so too those beings are few who are born on dry ground; more numerous are those beings who are born in water.”
“Just as, bhikkhus, much grass, firewood, and water are stored up in the king’s frontier fortress for the delight, relief, and comfort of its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders, so too, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a noble disciple enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination—for his own delight, relief, and comfort, and for entering upon nibbāna.
“Just as, bhikkhus, the great ocean slants, slopes, and inclines gradually, not dropping off abruptly, so too, in this Dhamma and discipline penetration to final knowledge occurs by gradual training, gradual activity, and gradual practice, not abruptly.
“Just as, bhikkhus, the pillar in the king’s frontier fortress has a deep base and is securely planted, immobile and unshakable, for the purpose of protecting its inhabitants and for warding off outsiders, so too the noble disciple is endowed with faith.
“Just as, brahmin, the footprints of all animals that walk fit into the footprint of the elephant, and the elephant’s footprint is declared to be foremost among them with respect to size, so too heedfulness is the one thing that, when developed and cultivated, can accomplish both kinds of good, the good pertaining to the present life and the good pertaining to the future life.
“Just as, in the autumn, when the sky is clear and cloudless, the sun, ascending in the sky, dispels all darkness from space as it shines and beams and radiates, so too “Just as, of all fragrant flowers, jasmine is declared foremost among them, so too “Just as, of all fragrant heartwoods, red sandalwood is declared foremost among them, so too “Just as, of all fragrant roots, black orris is declared foremost among them, so too “Just as, Pahārāda, the great ocean slants, slopes, and inclines gradually, not dropping off abruptly, so too, in this Dhamma and discipline penetration to final knowledge occurs by gradual training, gradual activity, and gradual practice, not abruptly.
“Just as, whatever great rivers there are—that is, the Ganges, the Yamunā, the Aciravatī, the Sarabhū, and the Mahī—all head toward the ocean, slant, slope, and incline toward the ocean, and the ocean is declared foremost among them, so too, all wholesome qualities are rooted in heedfulness and converge upon heedfulness and heedfulness is declared foremost among them.” 
“Just as, whatever streams in the world flow into the great ocean and however much rain falls into it from the sky, neither a decrease nor a filling up can be seen in the great ocean, so too, even if many bhikkhus attain final nibbāna by way of the nibbāna element without residue remaining, neither a decrease nor a filling up can be seen in the nibbāna element.
“Just as, when it is raining and the rain pours down in thick droplets on a mountain top, the water flows down along the slope and fills the clefts, gullies, and creeks; these, becoming full, fill up the pools; these, becoming full, fill up the lakes; these, becoming full, fill up the streams; these, becoming full, fill up the rivers; and these, becoming full, fill up the great ocean; so too, these four times, rightly developed and coordinated, gradually culminate in the destruction of the taints.” 
“Just as, when it is raining and the rain pours down in thick droplets on a mountain top, the water flows down along the slope and fills the clefts, gullies, and creeks; these, becoming full, fill up the pools; these, becoming full, fill up the lakes; these, becoming full, fill up the streams; these, becoming full, fill up the rivers; and these, becoming full, fill up the ocean; so too, when the bhikkhus dwell in concord, harmoniously, without disputes, blending like milk and water, viewing each other with eyes of affection, on that occasion they generate much merit.
“Just as, when it is raining and the rain pours down in thick droplets on a mountain top, the water flows down along the slope … and the rivers, becoming full, fill up the great ocean; thus there is nutriment for the great ocean, and in this way it becomes full.
“Just as, when it is raining and the rain pours down in thick droplets on a mountaintop, the water flows down along the slope and fills the clefts, gullies, and creeks; these, becoming full, fill up the pools; these, becoming full, fill up the lakes; these, becoming full, fill up the streams; these, becoming full, fill up the rivers; and these, becoming full, fill up the great ocean; thus there is nutriment for the great ocean, and in this way it becomes full.
“Just as, when it is raining and the rain pours down in thick droplets on a mountaintop, the water flows down along the slope and fills the clefts, gullies, and creeks; these, becoming full, fill up the pools; these, becoming full, fill up the lakes; these, becoming full, fill up the streams; these, becoming full, fill up the rivers; and these, becoming full, fill up the great ocean; thus there is nutriment for the great ocean, and in this way it becomes full.
“Just as, when it is raining and the rain pours down in thick droplets on a mountaintop, the water flows down along the slope … … and the rivers, becoming full, fill up the great ocean; thus there is nutriment for the great ocean, and in this way it becomes full.
“Just as, when the great rivers … reach the great ocean, they give up their former names and designations and are simply called the great ocean, so too, when members of the four social classes—khattiyas, brahmins, vessas, and suddas—go forth from the household life into homelessness in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, they give up their former names and clans and are simply called ascetics following the Sakyan son.
“Just as, when the stalk of a bunch of mangoes is cut, all the mangoes attached to the stalk follow along with it, so too heedfulness is the one thing that … can accomplish both kinds of good….
“Just as, Ānanda, a man might build a dyke around a large reservoir as a precaution so that the water would not overflow, so too, as a precaution I have prescribed for bhikkhunīs the eight principles of respect as things not to be transgressed as long as life lasts.”
“Just as, Ānanda, prowling burglars easily assail those families that have many women and few men, so in whatever Dhamma and discipline women obtain the going forth from the household life into homelessness, that spiritual life does not last long.
“Just as, Ānanda, when a field of hill rice has ripened, if the bleaching disease attacks it, that field of hill rice does not last long, so in whatever Dhamma and discipline women obtain the going forth from the household life into homelessness, that spiritual life does not last long.
“Just as, Ānanda, when a field of sugar cane has ripened, if the rusting disease attacks it, that field of sugar cane does not last long, so in whatever Dhamma and discipline women obtain the going forth from the household life into homelessness, that spiritual life does not last long.
“Just so the Buddha, well born in the world,dwells in the world,yet is not soiled by the world likethe lotus by water.
“Just this, friend, is the happiness here, that nothing is felt here.
“Kamma should be understood; the source and origin of kamma should be understood; the diversity of kamma should be understood; the result of kamma should be understood; the cessation of kamma should be understood; the way leading to the cessation of kamma should be understood.
“Kesi, you are reputed to be a horse trainer.
“Knowing thus, bhikkhu, seeing thus, the instructed noble disciple does not tremble, does not shake, does not vacillate, and does not become terrified regarding the undeclared points.
“Knowing thus, seeing thus, the instructed noble disciple does not declare: ‘The Tathāgata exists after death’; or: ‘The Tathāgata does not exist after death’; or: ‘The Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death’; or: ‘The Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death.’
Knowing thus, seeing thus, the instructed noble disciple does not make declarations regarding the undeclared points.
“Knowing thus, seeing thus, the instructed noble disciple does not declare: ‘The Tathāgata exists after death’; or: ‘The Tathāgata does not exist after death’; or: ‘The Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death’; or: ‘The Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death.’
Knowing thus, seeing thus, the instructed noble disciple does not make declarations regarding the undeclared points.
“Knowing thus, seeing thus, the instructed noble disciple does not tremble, does not shake, does not vacillate, and does not fall into terror regarding the undeclared points.
“Kālāmas, a greedy person, overcome by greed, with mind obsessed by it, destroys life, takes what is not given, transgresses with another’s wife, and speaks falsehood; and he encourages others to do likewise.
“Kālāmas, a person who is deluded, overcome by delusion, with mind obsessed by it, destroys life … and he encourages others to do likewise.
“Kālāmas, a person who is full of hate, overcome by hatred, with mind obsessed by it, destroys life … and he encourages others to do likewise.
“Kālāmas, a person who is undeluded, not overcome by delusion, his mind not obsessed by it, does not destroy life … nor does he encourage others to do likewise.
“Kālāmas, a person who is without hate, not overcome by hatred, his mind not obsessed by it, does not destroy life … nor does he encourage others to do likewise.
“Kālāmas, a person without greed, not overcome by greed, his mind not obsessed by it, does not destroy life, take what is not given, transgress with another’s wife, or speak falsehood; nor does he encourage others to do likewise.
“Last night, bhikkhus, when the night had advanced, a certain deity of stunning beauty, illuminating the entire Jeta’s Grove, approached me, paid homage to me, stood to one side, and said to me: ‘Bhante, there are these seven qualities that lead to the non-decline of a bhikkhu.
“Last night, bhikkhus, when the night had advanced, a certain deity of stunning beauty, illuminating the entire Jeta’s Grove, approached me, paid homage to me, stood to one side, and said to me: ‘Bhante, there are these seven qualities that lead to the non-decline of a bhikkhu.
“Last night, bhikkhus, when the night had advanced, a certain deity of stunning beauty, illuminating the entire Jeta’s Grove, approached me, paid homage to me, stood to one side, and said to me: ‘Bhante, there are these seven qualities that lead to the non-decline of a bhikkhu.
“Last night, bhikkhus, when the night had advanced, a certain deity of stunning beauty, illuminating the entire Jeta’s Grove, approached me, paid homage to me, stood to one side, and said to me: ‘Bhante, there are these six qualities that lead to the non-decline of a bhikkhu.
“Let alone half a month, Sakyans.
“Let alone one year, Sakyans.
“Let alone ten months, Sakyans.
“Let alone ten nights and days, Sakyans.
“Let alone ten years, Sakyans.
“Let me never come upon fame, Nāgita, and may fame never catch up with me.
“Let me never come upon fame, Nāgita, and may fame never catch up with me.
“Let me never come upon fame, Nāgita, and may fame never catch up with me.
“Let me never come upon fame, Nāgita, and may fame never catch up with me.
“Let me never come upon fame, Nāgita, and may fame never catch up with me.
“Let me never come upon fame, Nāgita, and may fame never catch up with me.
“Let the Blessed One now consent, Bhante, let the Fortunate One consent.
“Let the Blessed One now consent, Bhante, let the Fortunate One consent.
“Let the Blessed One now consent, Bhante, let the Fortunate One consent.
“Liberation is their core.”
“Licchavis, as long as the Vajjis assemble often and hold frequent assemblies, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“Licchavis, as long as these seven principles of non-decline continue among the Vajjis, and the Vajjis are seen in them, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.”
“Licchavis, the manifestation of five gems is rare in the world.
“Longing is non-Dhamma; non-longing is the Dhamma.
“Longing, bhikkhu, is what is meant by ‘pollution.’
Ill will is the ‘stench.’
Bad unwholesome thoughts are the ‘flies.’
It is inevitable that flies will pursue and attack one who has polluted himself and been tainted by a stench.” 
“Luminous, bhikkhus, is this mind, and it is freed from adventitious defilements.
“Luminous, bhikkhus, is this mind, and it is freed from adventitious defilements.”
“Luminous, bhikkhus, is this mind, but it is defiled by adventitious defilements.
“Luminous, bhikkhus, is this mind, but it is defiled by adventitious defilements.”
“Mahāli, greed is a cause and condition for the doing of bad kamma, for the occurrence of bad kamma.
“Mahāli, non-greed is a cause and condition for the doing of good kamma, for the occurrence of good kamma.
“Mahānāma, a noble disciple who has arrived at the fruit and understood the teaching often dwells in just this way.”
“Mahānāma, a noble disciple who has arrived at the fruit and understood the teaching often dwells in this way:
“Mahānāma, a person with faith succeeds, not one without faith.
“Mahānāma, in whatever clansman five qualities are found—whether he is a consecrated khattiya king, a country gentleman, the general of an army, a village headman, a guildmaster, or one of those who exercise private rulership over various clans—only growth is to be expected, not decline.
“Mahānāma, in whatever clansman these five qualities are found—whether he is a consecrated khattiya king, a country gentleman, the general of an army, a village headman, a guildmaster, or one of those who exercise private rulership over various clans—only growth is to be expected, not decline.”
“Make an investigation, Sīha!
“Master Gotama is a proponent of non-doing.”
“Master Gotama is a repeller.”
“Master Gotama is a tormentor.”
“Master Gotama is an abolitionist.”
“Master Gotama is an annihilationist.”
“Master Gotama is not convivial.”
“Master Gotama is retiring.”
“Master Gotama lacks taste.”
“Master Gotama, a master of the threefold knowledge in the Noble One’s discipline is quite different from a master of the threefold knowledge according to the brahmins.
“Master Gotama, can a bad person know of a bad person: ‘This fellow is a bad person’?”
“Master Gotama, I have a fellow ascetic named Paṇḍita.
“Master Gotama, I have heard older brahmins who are aged, burdened with years, teachers of teachers, saying: ‘In the past this world was so thickly populated one would think there was no space between people.
“Master Gotama, I have heard: ‘The ascetic Gotama says: “Alms should be given only to me, not to others; alms should be given only to my disciples, not to the disciples of others.
“Master Gotama, I hold such a thesis and view as this: ‘There is no self-initiative; there is no initiative taken by others.’”
“Master Gotama, I hold the thesis and view that there is no fault when one speaks about the seen, saying: ‘Such was seen by me’; no fault when one speaks about the heard, saying: ‘Such was heard by me’; no fault when one speaks about the sensed, saying: ‘Such was sensed by me’; no fault when one speaks about the cognized, saying: ‘Such was cognized by me.’”
“Master Gotama, I hold the thesis and view that there is no one subject to death who is not frightened and terrified of death.”
“Master Gotama, I wish to go abroad.
“Master Gotama, if one could rightly say of anyone: ‘He is a brahmin well born on both his maternal and paternal sides, of pure descent, unassailable and impeccable with respect to birth as far back as the seventh paternal generation; he is a reciter and preserver of the hymns, a master of the three Vedas with their vocabularies, ritual, phonology, and etymology, and the histories as a fifth; skilled in philology and grammar, he is fully versed in natural philosophy and in the marks of a great man’—it is precisely of me that one might say this.
“Master Gotama, is there one thing which, when developed and cultivated, can accomplish both kinds of good, the good pertaining to the present life and the good pertaining to the future life?”
“Master Gotama, it is said: ‘A directly visible Dhamma, a directly visible Dhamma.’
In what way is the Dhamma directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise?”
“Master Gotama, it is said: ‘A directly visible Dhamma, a directly visible Dhamma.’
In what way is the Dhamma directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise?”
“Master Gotama, it is said: ‘Directly visible nibbāna, directly visible nibbāna.’
In what way is nibbāna directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise?” 
“Master Gotama, it is said: ‘The directly visible Dhamma, the directly visible Dhamma.’
In what way, Master Gotama, is the Dhamma directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise?”
“Master Gotama, King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha pays homage to the Blessed One with his head at your feet.
“Master Gotama, Pūraṇa Kassapa claims to be all-knowing and all-seeing and to have all-embracing knowledge and vision: ‘Whether I am walking, standing, sleeping, or awake, knowledge and vision are constantly and continuously present to me.’
He says thus: ‘With infinite knowledge, I dwell knowing and seeing the world to be infinite.’
But Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta also claims to be all-knowing and all-seeing and to have all-embracing knowledge and vision: ‘Whether I am walking, standing, sleeping, and awake, knowledge and vision are constantly and continuously present to me.’
He says thus: ‘With infinite knowledge, I dwell knowing and seeing the world to be finite.’
When these two claimants to knowledge make claims that are mutually contradictory, who speaks truthfully and who falsely?”
“Master Gotama, we brahmins give gifts and perform the memorial rites for the dead with the thought: ‘Let our gift be of benefit to our departed relatives and family members.
“Master Gotama, we brahmins sacrifice and enjoin others to offer sacrifices.
“Master Gotama, we describe someone who possesses four qualities as a great man with great wisdom.
“Master Gotama, what is the aim of khattiyas?
“Master Gotama, what is the near shore?
“Master Gotama, what is the near shore?
“Master Gotama, whoever has a sacrifice, a memorial meal, an offering dish, or something to be given should give the gift to brahmins who are masters of the threefold knowledge.”
“Master Gotama, why is it that some beings here, with the breakup of the body, after death, are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world?”
“Master Gotama, why is it that some beings here, with the breakup of the body, after death, are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell?”
“Master Gotama, why is it that sometimes even those hymns that have been recited over a long period do not recur to the mind, let alone those that have not been so recited?
“Meditate like a thoroughbred, Sandha, not like a wild colt.
“Meditating in such a way, Sandha, an excellent thoroughbred person does not meditate in dependence on earth, in dependence on water, in dependence on fire, in dependence on air, in dependence on the base of the infinity of space, in dependence on the base of the infinity of consciousness, in dependence on the base of nothingness, in dependence on the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, in dependence on this world, in dependence on the other world; in dependence on what is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, reached, sought after, or examined by the mind and yet he meditates.
“Meghiya, when liberation of mind has not matured, five things lead to its maturation.
“Mindfulness exercises authority over them.”
“Mindfulness is his neck, his head is wisdom,investigation, and reflection on phenomena.Dhamma is the balanced heat of his belly,and seclusion is his tail.
“Moggallāna, I do not praise bonding with everyone whatsoever, nor do I praise bonding with no one at all.
“My assembly, bhikkhus, consists of many hundreds of disciples who, with the destruction of the taints, have realized for themselves with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwell in it.
“My energy, brahmin, was aroused without slackening; my mindfulness was established without confusion; my body was tranquil without disturbance; my mind was concentrated and one-pointed.
“My family gives gifts, Bhante.
“My family is wealthy but the wealth is shared unreservedly with virtuous people of good character.
“My family is wealthy but the wealth is shared unreservedly with virtuous people of good character.
“My name is Ānanda, and my fellow monks know me as Ānanda.”
“Nakulamātā, possessing eight qualities, a woman, with the breakup of the body, after death, is reborn in companionship with the agreeable-bodied deities.
“Nandaka, a bhikkhu may be endowed with faith but he is not virtuous; thus he is incomplete with respect to that factor.
“Nandiya, a noble disciple who possesses these eleven qualities abandons bad unwholesome qualities and does not take them up.
“Nandiya, a person with faith succeeds, not one without faith.
“Next the wardens of hell throw him down and pare him with axes.
“Next the wardens of hell throw him into the great hell.
“Next, householder, someone who enjoys sensual pleasures seeks wealth both righteously and unrighteously, both by violence and without violence.
“Next, householder, someone who enjoys sensual pleasures seeks wealth righteously, without violence.
“Next, householder, the one enjoying sensual pleasure swho seeks wealth righteously, without violence, and does not make himself happy and pleased, and does not share the wealth and do meritorious deeds, may be praised on one ground and criticized on two grounds.
“Next, householder, the one enjoying sensual pleasures who seeks wealth both righteously and unrighteously, both by violence and without violence, and does not make himself happy and pleased, and does not share the wealth and do meritorious deeds, may be praised on one ground and criticized on three grounds.
“Next, take the case of the deed that is agreeable to do which will prove beneficial.
“Next, take the case of the deed that is agreeable to do which will prove harmful.
“Next, take the case of the deed that is disagreeable to do which will prove beneficial.
“No, Bhante, the Blessed One does not criticize all austerities and he does not unreservedly condemn and reprove all who live a harsh and austere life.
“No, Bhante.
“No, Bhante.
“No, Bhante.
“No, Bhante.
“No, Bhante.”
“No, Bhante.”
“No, Bhante.”
“No, Bhante.”
“No, Bhante.”
“No, Bhante.”
“No, Bhante.”
“No, Bhante.”
“No, Bhante.”
“No, Bhante.”
“No, Bhante.”
“No, Bhante.”
“No, Bhante.”
“No, Bhante.”
“No, Bhante.”
“No, Bhante.”
“No, Bhante.”
“No, Bhante.”
“No, Bhante.”
“No, friend.
“Noble lady, this was said by the Blessed One in ‘The Great Questions’: ‘A question about one, a concise statement about one, an explanation of one.
“Noble virtuous behavior has been understood and penetrated.
“Noble virtuous behavior, bhikkhus, has been understood and penetrated.
“Non-longing is a Dhamma factor that is primal, of long standing, traditional, ancient, unadulterated and never before adulterated, which is not being adulterated and will not be adulterated, which is not repudiated by wise ascetics and brahmins.
“Non-longing is a Dhamma factor, primal, of long standing, traditional, ancient, unadulterated and never before adulterated, which is not being adulterated and will not be adulterated, which is not repudiated by wise ascetics and brahmins.
“Not all, respected Moggallāna.
“Not all, respected Moggallāna.
“Not all, respected Moggallāna.
“Not exclusively so, Bhante.”
“Now I recall, bhikkhus, approaching an assembly consisting of many hundreds of khattiyas.
“Now, Bhaddiya, did I say to you: ‘Come, Bhaddiya, be my disciple and I will be your teacher?’”
“Now, bhikkhus, when the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One—before his enlightenment, while just a bodhisatta, not fully enlightened— that this mighty earth was his bedstead and the Himālaya, king of mountains, his pillow; that his left hand rested on the eastern sea, his right hand on the western sea, and his two feet on the southern sea, that he would awaken to the unsurpassed, perfect enlightenment.
“Now, friend Sāriputta, is the spiritual life lived under the Blessed One for this purpose: ‘Let kamma is to be experienced as pleasant become kamma I am to experience as painful?’”
“Now, friend Sāriputta, is the spiritual life lived under the Blessed One for this purpose: ‘Let kamma is to be experienced become kamma I am not to experience’?”
“Now, friend Sāriputta, is the spiritual life lived under the Blessed One for this purpose: ‘Let kamma is to be experienced copiously become kamma I am to experience just slightly’?”
“Now, friend Sāriputta, is the spiritual life lived under the Blessed One for this purpose: ‘Let kamma is to be experienced in this life become kamma I am to experience in a future life’?”
“Now, friend Sāriputta, is the spiritual life lived under the Blessed One for this purpose: ‘Let my kamma is to be experienced when it has matured become kamma I am to experience while it has not matured’?”
“Now, householder, at that alms offering there was no one worthy of offerings, no one who purified the offering.
“Nāgita, what is eaten, drunk, consumed, and tasted winds up as feces and urine: this is its outcome.
“Of the five lower fetters taught by the Blessed One, I don’t see any that I haven’t abandoned.
“Of these four modes of practice, friend Moggallāna, it was through the mode that is pleasant with quick direct knowledge that my mind was liberated from the taints by non-clinging.”
“Of these four modes of practice, friend Sāriputta, it was through the mode that is painful with quick direct knowledge that my mind was liberated from the taints by nonclinging.”
“Of these two strivings, bhikkhus, the foremost is the striving for the relinquishment of all acquisitions.
“On a right occasion, brahmin, it can be of benefit, not on a wrong occasion.”
“On one occasion, Bhante Uttara, the Blessed One was dwelling at Rājagaha, on Mount Vulture Peak, not long after Devadatta had left.
“On one occasion, friend Ānanda, I was dwelling right here in Sāvatthī in the Blind Men’s Grove.
“On one occasion, Master Gotama, the members of the brahmin Todeyya’s assembly were carping against others,: ‘This King Eḷeyya is a fool, for he has complete confidence in the ascetic Rāmaputta and shows him supreme honor by paying homage to him, rising up for him, reverentially saluting him, and observing proper etiquette toward him.
“On that occasion it occurs to the forest-dwelling bull elephant: ‘I am presently dwelling hemmed in by other elephants: males, females, young ones, and babies.
“On that occasion, bhikkhus, the earth-dwelling devas raise a cry: ‘This Venerable So-and-So, the pupil of that Venerable One, went forth from the household life into homelessness from such and such a village or town, and now, with the destruction of the taints, he has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it.’
Having heard the cry of the earth-dwelling devas, the devas the four great kings raise a cry….
“On the basis of name-and-form, Bhante.”
“On what basis, Samiddhi, do intentions and thoughts arise in a person?”
“Once, bhikkhus, in the past King Yama thought: ‘Those in the world who do evil deeds are punished with such diverse tortures.
“Once, friend, I was dwelling at Sāketa in the deer park at Añjana Grove.
“One always benevolent and sympathetic,who guards her husband as a mother her son,who protects the wealth he earns:a wife like this is called a wife and a mother.
“One consistently acts and behaves in accord with virtuous behavior.
“One consummate in virtue and observances,who is resolute and composed,whose mind has been mastered,one-pointed and well concentrated;
“One deluded, overcome by delusion, with mind obsessed by it, engages in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
“One deluded, overcome by delusion, with mind obsessed by it, intends for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, and for the affliction of both, and he experiences mental suffering and dejection.
“One dwelling in that lodging can easily obtain robes, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
“One excited by lust, friend, overcome by lust, with mind obsessed by it, intends for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, and for the affliction of both, and he experiences mental suffering and dejection.
“One excited by lust, overcome by lust, with mind obsessed by it, engages in misconduct by body, speech, and mind.
“One full of hate, overcome by hatred “One full of hate, overcome by hatred “One full of hate, overcome by hatred “One full of hate, overcome by hatred, with mind obsessed by it, intends for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, and for the affliction of both, and he experiences mental suffering and dejection.
“One generates divine merit, Ānanda.”
“One generates evil lasting for an eon, Ānanda.”
“One is detached from bad unwholesome states that are defiling, conducive to renewed existence, troublesome, ripening in suffering, leading to future birth, old age, and death; therefore one is said to be ‘secure from bondage.’
These are the four severances of bonds.”
“One is fettered by bad unwholesome states that are defiling, conducive to renewed existence, troublesome, ripening in suffering, leading to future birth, old age, and death; therefore one is said to be ‘not secure from bondage.’
These are the four bonds.
“One is focused only on ‘beautiful.’
This is the third emancipation.
“One is tormented in hell for an eon, Ānanda.” 
“One lives the spiritual life under the Blessed One, friend, for the purpose of knowing, seeing, attaining, realizing, and penetrating what one has not known, seen, attained, realized, and penetrated.”
“One not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, blue ones, blue in color, with a blue hue, with a blue tint.
“One not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, blue ones, blue in color, with a blue hue, with a blue tint.
“One not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, limited, beautiful or ugly.
“One not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, limited, beautiful or ugly.
“One not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, measureless, beautiful or ugly.
“One not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, measureless, beautiful or ugly.
“One not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, red ones, red in color, with a red hue, with a red tint.
“One not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, red ones, with a red hue, with a red tint.
“One not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, white ones, white in color, with a white hue, with a white tint.
“One not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, white ones, white in color, with a white hue, with a white tint.
“One not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, yellow ones, with a yellow hue, with a yellow tint.
“One not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, yellow ones, yellow in color, with a yellow hue, with a yellow tint.
“One not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally.
“One perception arose and another perception ceased in me: ‘The cessation of existence is nibbāna; the cessation of existence is nibbāna.’
Just as, when a fire of twigs is burning, one flame arises and another flame ceases, so one perception arose and another perception ceased in me: ‘The cessation of existence is nibbāna; the cessation of existence is nibbāna.’
On that occasion, friend, I was percipient: ‘The cessation of existence is nibbāna.’”
“One percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, limited, beautiful or ugly.
“One percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, limited, beautiful or ugly.
“One percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, measureless, beautiful or ugly.
“One percipient of forms internally sees forms externally, measureless, beautiful or ugly.
“One possessing form sees forms.
“One possessing these ten qualities is deposited in heaven as if brought there.”
“One possessing these ten qualities is deposited in hell as if brought there.
“One rejoices in heaven for an eon, Ānanda.” 
“One sleeps well; one awakens happily; one does not have bad dreams; one is pleasing to human beings; one is pleasing to spirits; deities protect one; fire, poison, and weapons do not injure one; and if one does not penetrate further, one moves on to the brahmā world.
“One sleeps well; one awakens happily; one does not have bad dreams; one is pleasing to human beings; one is pleasing to spirits; deities protect one; fire, poison, and weapons do not injure one; one’s mind quickly becomes concentrated; one’s facial complexion is serene; one dies unconfused; and if one does not penetrate further, one fares on to the brahmā world.
“One thinks: ‘May wealth come to me righteously!’ This is the first thing in the world that is wished for … and rarely gained in the world.
“One who destroys life has abstention from the destruction of life as the means to avoid it.
“One who has gone forth should often reflect: ‘Do I reproach myself in regard to virtuous behavior?’
“One who has gone forth should often reflect: ‘Do I take delight in empty huts?’
“One who has gone forth should often reflect: ‘Do my wise fellow monks, having investigated, reproach me in regard to virtuous behavior?’
“One who has gone forth should often reflect: ‘Have I attained any superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones, so that in my last days, when I am questioned by my fellow monks, I will not be embarrassed?’
“One who has gone forth should often reflect: ‘How am I spending my nights and days?’
“One who has gone forth should often reflect: ‘I am the owner of my kamma, the heir of my kamma; I have kamma as my origin, kamma as my relative, kamma as my resort; I will be the heir of whatever kamma, good or bad, that I do.’
“One who has gone forth should often reflect: ‘I have entered upon a classless condition.’
“One who has gone forth should often reflect: ‘I must be parted and separated from everyone and everything dear and agreeable to me.’
“One who has gone forth should often reflect: ‘My deportment should be different.’
“One who has gone forth should often reflect: ‘My living is dependent upon others.’ 
“One who is deluded, overcome by delusion, with mind obsessed by it, intends for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, and for the affliction of both, and he experiences mental suffering and dejection.
“One who is deluded, overcome by delusion, with mind obsessed by it, intends for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he experiences mental suffering and dejection.
“One who is deluded, overcome by delusion, with mind obsessed by it, intends for his own affliction, for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both, and he experiences mental suffering and dejection.
“One who knows his past abodes,who sees heaven and the plane of misery,and has reached the destruction of birthis a sage consummate in direct knowledge.
“one who knows his past abodes,who sees heaven and the plane of misery,and has reached the destruction of birthis a sage consummate in direct knowledge.
“One who possesses these four qualities can be understood as a good person.
“One who possesses these four qualities can be understood to be a bad person.
“One who possesses three qualities should be known as a wise person.
“One who possesses three qualities should be known as a wise person.
“One who possesses three qualities should be known as a wise person.
“One who possesses three qualities should be known as a wise person.
“One who possesses three qualities should be known as a wise person.
“One who rejoices when she sees her husbandas if seeing a friend after a long absence;well raised, virtuous, devoted to her husband:a wife like this is called a wife and a friend.
“One who remains patient and calm,when threatened with violence by the rod,who tolerates her husband with a mind free of hate,patient, submissive to her husband’s will:a wife like this is called a wife and a slave.
“One who takes what is not given … One who engages in sexual misconduct … One who speaks falsely … One who indulges in liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness, with indulgence in liquor, wine, and intoxicants as condition, creates peril and enmity pertaining to the present life and peril and enmity pertaining to future lives, and he also experiences mental pain and dejection.
“One who takes what is not given … who engages in sexual misconduct … who speaks falsely … who indulges in liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness, with indulgence in liquor, wine, and intoxicants as condition, creates peril and enmity pertaining to the present life and peril and enmity pertaining to future lives and he also experiences mental pain and dejection.
“Or suppose, Ānanda, it is close to midnight, the time for a meal.
“Or suppose, Ānanda, it is close to noon, the time for a meal.
“Or suppose, Ānanda, it is evening and the sun is setting.
“Or suppose, Ānanda, it is the time when the night is fading and the sun is rising.
“Other departed relatives or family members who have been reborn in that place partake of the gift.”
“Over this long stretch of time, brahmin, it is impossible and inconceivable for that place to be devoid of one’s departed relatives and family members.
“Pahārāda, do the asuras take delight in the great ocean?”
“Pahārāda, the bhikkhus do take delight in this Dhamma and discipline.”
“Patience and mildness, brahmin, is the aim of ascetics; their quest is for wisdom; virtuous behavior is their support; they are intent on nothingness; and their final goal is nibbāna.”
“People are immersed in ignorance, become like an egg, completely enveloped.
“People delight in attachment, take delight in attachment, rejoice in attachment.
“People delight in conceit, take delight in conceit, rejoice in conceit.
“People delight in excitement, take delight in excitement, rejoice in excitement.
“Perceptions should be understood; the source and origin of perceptions should be understood; the diversity of perceptions should be understood; the result of perceptions should be understood; the cessation of perceptions should be understood; the way leading to the cessation of perceptions should be understood.
“Possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is able both himself and others.
“Possessing five qualities, Bhante, an elder bhikkhu is pleasing and agreeable to his fellow monks and is respected and esteemed by them.
“Possessing forty qualities, one is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Possessing four qualities a bhikkhu is fit to resort to remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves.
“Possessing four qualities, a bhikkhu is able himself but not others.
“Possessing four qualities, a bhikkhu is able others but not himself.
“Possessing four qualities, Visākhā, a woman is heading for victory in the other world and her life in the other world succeeds.
“Possessing six qualities, a bhikkhu is capable of achieving a wholesome quality that he has not yet achieved and of strengthening a wholesome quality that has already been achieved.
“Possessing six qualities, a bhikkhu is incapable of achieving a wholesome quality that he has not yet achieved or of strengthening a wholesome quality that has already been achieved.
“Possessing ten qualities, one is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Possessing these eight qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.”
“Possessing these eight qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, “Bhikkhus, possessing eight qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Possessing these eight qualities, Anuruddha, a woman, with the breakup of the body, after death, is reborn in companionship with the agreeable-bodied deities.”
“Possessing these eleven qualities, a bhikkhu is capable of growth, progress, and fulfillment in this Dhamma and discipline.”
“Possessing these eleven qualities, a bhikkhu is incapable of growth, progress, and fulfillment in this Dhamma and discipline.
“Possessing these five factors, a king’s bull elephant is not worthy of a king, not an accessory of a king, and not reckoned as a factor of kingship.
“Possessing these five factors, a king’s bull elephant is worthy of a king, an accessory of a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship.
“Possessing these five factors, a king’s bull elephant is worthy of a king, an accessory of a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship.
“Possessing these five qualities, a bhikkhu is not worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“Possessing these five qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.”
“Possessing these five qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.”
“Possessing these five qualities, a bhikkhu yearns for the destruction of the taints.”
“Possessing these five qualities, a bhikkhu yearns for the destruction of the taints.”
“Possessing these five qualities, an elder bhikkhu is acting for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and humans.
“Possessing these five qualities, an elder bhikkhu is acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and humans.”
“Possessing these five qualities, bhikkhus, an elder bhikkhu is pleasing and agreeable to his fellow monks and is respected and esteemed by them.”
“Possessing these four factors, a king’s bull elephant is worthy of a king, an accessory of a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship.
“Possessing these four qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts … an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.”
“Possessing these four qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.”
“Possessing these four qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.” 
“Possessing these four qualities, a woman is heading for victory in the present world and her life in this world succeeds.
“Possessing these four qualities, Visākhā, a woman is heading for victory in the other world and her life in the other world succeeds.”
“Possessing these seven qualities, a bhikkhu is an expert in the discipline.”
“Possessing these seven qualities, a bhikkhu is an expert in the discipline.”
“Possessing these seven qualities, a bhikkhu is an expert in the discipline.”
“Possessing these seven qualities, a bhikkhu is an expert in the discipline.” 
“Possessing these seven qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.”
“Possessing these six qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.”
“Possessing these six qualities, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.” 
“Possessing these ten qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.”
“Possessing these three factors, a shopkeeper soon attains vast and abundant wealth.
“Possessing these three qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.”
“Possessing these three qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.”
“Possessing these three qualities, a bhikkhu is … an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.”
“Possessing these three qualities, a bhikkhu is … an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.”
“Possessing these three qualities, a bhikkhu soon attains vast and abundant wholesome qualities.”
“Possessing these two qualities, a bhikkhu is able others but not himself.”
“Possessing thirty qualities, one is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Possessing this aggregate of noble virtuous behavior, and this noble restraint of the faculties, and this noble mindfulness and clear comprehension, he resorts to a secluded lodging: the forest, the root of a tree, a mountain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a jungle thicket, an open space, a heap of straw.
“Possessing this aggregate of noble virtuous behavior, and this noble restraint of the faculties, and this noble mindfulness and clear comprehension, he resorts to a secluded lodging: the forest, the root of a tree, a mountain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a jungle thicket, an open space, a heap of straw.
“Possessing three qualities … Blameless bodily action, blameless verbal action, and blameless mental action….”
“Possessing three qualities, a bhikkhu is able himself but not others.
“Possessing three qualities, a bhikkhu is able others but not himself.
“Possessing three qualities, one is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Possessing three qualities, one is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Possessing three qualities, one is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Possessing three qualities, one is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Possessing three qualities, the wise, competent, good person preserves himself unmaimed and uninjured; he is blameless and beyond reproach by the wise; and he generates much merit.
“Possessing twenty qualities, one is deposited in heaven as if brought there.
“Possessing two qualities, a bhikkhu is able himself but not others.
“Possessing two qualities, a bhikkhu is able others but not himself.
“Potaliya, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“purified equanimity and mindfulnesspreceded by reflection on the Dhamma:this, I say, is emancipation by final knowledge,the breaking up of ignorance.”
“Purity by body, Cunda, is threefold.
“Pūraṇa Kassapa, Bhante, has described these six classes.”
“Remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves are hard to endure, Upāli.
“Right here, brahmin, in this Saṅgha of bhikkhus.”
“Robbery, brahmin, is the aim of thieves; their quest is for thickets; craftiness is their support; they are intent on dark places; and their final goal is to remain unseen.”
“Robes, I say, are twofold: to be used and those not to be used.
“Rāhula, the internal air element and the external air element are just the air element.
“Rāhula, the internal earth element and the external earth element are just the earth element.
“Rāhula, the internal fire element and the external fire element are just the fire element.
“Rāhula, the internal water element and the external water element are just the water element.
“Sakyans, do you observe the uposatha complete in eight factors?”
“Sariputta, even when you are speaking to them in such a way, some foolish men here do not respectfully accept what you say.”
“Seeing these four advantages, Ānanda, an evil bhikkhu delights in a schism in the Saṅgha.
“Seeing these four advantages, Ānanda, an evil bhikkhu delights in a schism in the Saṅgha.”
“Sensual pleasures should be understood; the source and origin of sensual pleasures should be understood; the diversity of sensual pleasures should be understood; the result of sensual pleasures should be understood; the cessation of sensual pleasures should be understood; the way leading to the cessation of sensual pleasures should be understood.
“Seven times I was Great Brahmā,the wielder of mastery;thirty-six times I was ruler of the devas,exercising rulership over the devas.
“Sexual misconduct is non-Dhamma; abstention from sexual misconduct is the Dhamma.
“Sexual misconduct, repeatedly pursued, developed, and cultivated, is conducive to hell, to the animal realm, and to the sphere of afflicted spirits; for one reborn as a human being sexual misconduct at minimum conduces to enmity and rivalry.
“She finds out what her husband’s domestic helpers —whether slaves, messengers, or workers—have done and left undone; she finds out the condition of those who are ill; and she distributes to each an appropriate portion of food.
“She guards and protects whatever income her husband brings home—whether money, grain, silver, or gold—and she is not a spendthrift, thief, wastrel, or squanderer of his earnings.
“She honors, respects, esteems, and venerates those whom her husband respects—his mother and father, ascetics and brahmins—and when they arrive she offers them a seat and water.
“She is a female lay follower who has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha.
“She is generous, one who dwells at home with a heart devoid of the stain of miserliness, freely generous, openhanded, delighting in relinquishment, devoted to charity, delighting in giving and sharing.
“She is skillful and diligent in attending to her husband’s domestic chores, whether knitting or weaving; she possesses sound judgment about them in order to carry out and arrange them properly.
“She is virtuous, abstaining from the destruction of life, taking what is not given, sexual misconduct, false speech, and liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
“She who holds her husband in high regardas younger sister her elder brother,conscientious, following her husband’s will:a wife like this is called a wife and a sister.
“Since he engages in impure bodily, verbal, and mental action, he acquires a bad reputation.
“Since he engages in impure bodily, verbal, and mental action, his well-behaved fellow monks avoid him from afar.
“Since he here abstained from the destruction of life … and held right view, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in companionship with human beings.
“Since he here abstained from the destruction of life … and held right view, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in companionship with the devas.
“Since he here destroyed life … and held wrong view, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in companionship with elephants.
“Since he here destroyed life … … and held wrong view, with the breakup of the body, after death, he is reborn in companionship with horses … cattle … dogs.
“Since you are a proponent of deeds, Sīha, why go see the ascetic Gotama, a proponent of non-doing?
“Since you speak of striving, Meghiya, what can I say to you?
“Since, Bhante, the Blessed One has declared definitively that deeds of bodily good conduct, verbal good conduct, and mental good conduct are to be done, what benefit is to be expected in acting thus?”
“Since, Bhante, the Blessed One has declared definitively that deeds of bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct are not to be done, what danger is to be expected in acting thus?”
“Since, brahmin, when there is a mental fault within you, you know: ‘There is a mental fault within me,’ and when there is no mental fault within you, you know: ‘There is no mental fault within me,’ in this way the Dhamma is directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.”
“Since, brahmin, when there is lust within you, you know: ‘There is lust within me,’ and when there is no lust within you, you know: ‘There is no lust within me,’ in this way the Dhamma is directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.
“Since, householder, you are a layman enjoying sensual pleasures, living at home in a house full of children, using sandalwood from Kāsi, wearing garlands, scents, and unguents, and receiving gold and silver, it is difficult for you to know: ‘These are arahants or on the path to arahantship.’
“Since, Sīvaka, when there is a state connected with delusion within you, you know: ‘There is a state connected with delusion within me,’ and when there is no state connected with delusion within you, you know: ‘There is no state connected with delusion within me,’ in this way the Dhamma is directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.”
“Since, Sīvaka, when there is greed within you, you know: ‘There is greed within me,’ and when there is no greed within you, you know: ‘There is no greed within me,’ in this way the Dhamma is directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.
“Sister, this body has originated from nutriment; in dependence on nutriment, nutriment is to be abandoned.
“Slight is the unlucky throw at dicethat results in the loss of one’s wealth, of all, oneself included;much worse is this unlucky throwof harboring hate against the holy ones.
“So it is, Bhaddiya, so it is!
“So it is, bhikkhu!
“So it is, bhikkhu!
“So it is, Blessed One!
“So it is, brahmin!
“So it is, Sumanā!
“So it is, Sīha, so it is!
“So it is, Sīha, so it is!
“So it is, Vāseṭṭha, so it is!
“So it is, Ānanda!
“So long, bhikkhus, as beings have not directly known as they really are the gratification in the world as gratification, the danger as danger, and the escape from it as escape, they have not escaped from this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, from this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans; they have not become detached from it, released from it, nor do they dwell with a mind rid of barriers.
“So long, bhikkhus, as I did not directly know as they really are the gratification in the world as gratification, the danger as danger, and the escape from it as escape, I did not claim to have awakened to the unsurpassed perfect enlightenment in this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, in this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans.
“So long, bhikkhus, as I did not directly know as they really are the gratification in the world as gratification, the danger as danger, and the escape from it as the escape, I did not claim to have awakened to the unsurpassed perfect enlightenment in this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, in this generation with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans.
“So long, bhikkhus, as my knowledge and vision about the devas with its eight facets was not well purified, I did not claim to have awakened to the unsurpassed perfect enlightenment in this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, in this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans.
“So long, brahmin, as I saw that I had not abandoned one or another of these seven bonds of sexuality, I did not claim to have awakened to the unsurpassed perfect enlightenment in the world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, in this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans.
“So long, Ānanda, as I did not attain and emerge from these nine attainments of progressive dwellings in direct order and reverse order, I did not claim to have awakened to the unsurpassed perfect enlightenment in this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, in this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans.
“So on a later occasion, as I was dwelling heedful, ardent, and resolute: I perceived a light and saw forms; and I associated with those deities, conversed with them, and engaged in a discussion with them; and I also knew about those deities: ‘These deities are from this or that order of devas’; and ‘After passing away here, these deities were reborn there as a result of this kamma’; and ‘As a result of this kamma, these deities subsist on such food and experience such pleasure and pain’; and ‘As a result of this kamma, these deities have a life span of such length’; and I also knew whether or not I had previously lived together with those deities.
“So then, girls, you should train yourselves thus: ‘To whichever husband our parents give us—doing so out of a desire for our good, seeking our welfare, taking compassion on us, acting out of compassion for us—we will rise before him and retire after him, undertaking whatever needs to be done, agreeable in our conduct and pleasing in our speech.’
Thus should you train yourselves.
“So too, a bhikkhu might be following right behind the Saṅgha of bhikkhus,: ‘I’m a bhikkhu too, I’m a bhikkhu too.’
But his desire to undertake the training in the higher virtuous behavior is not like that of the other bhikkhus; his desire to undertake the training in the higher mind is not like that of the other bhikkhus; his desire to undertake the training in the higher wisdom is not like that of the other bhikkhus.
“So too, bhikkhu, the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One, the righteous king of the Dhamma, relying just on the Dhamma, honoring, respecting, and venerating the Dhamma, taking the Dhamma as his standard, banner, and authority, provides righteous protection, shelter, and guard for the bhikkhus, saying: ‘Such bodily action should be cultivated; such bodily action should not be cultivated.
“So too, bhikkhu, the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One, the righteous king of the Dhamma, relying just on the Dhamma, honoring, respecting, and venerating the Dhamma, taking the Dhamma as his standard, banner, and authority, provides righteous protection, shelter, and guard in regard to bodily action, saying: ‘Such bodily action should be cultivated; such bodily action should not be cultivated.’
“So too, bhikkhus, a gift given to ascetics and brahmins who possess eight factors is not of great fruit and benefit, and it is not very brilliant or pervasive.
“So too, bhikkhus, a gift given to ascetics and brahmins who possess eight factors is of great fruit and benefit, and it is extraordinarily brilliant and pervasive.
“So too, bhikkhus, if a junior bhikkhu is immoral, of bad character, this, I say, counts as his ugliness.
“So too, bhikkhus, in whatever quarter he might dwell, a bhikkhu who possesses five qualities dwells liberated in mind.
“So too, bhikkhus, possessing eight qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts … an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“So too, bhikkhus, possessing eleven qualities, a bhikkhu is capable of dwelling contemplating impermanence in the eye … … is capable of dwelling contemplating relinquishment in examination of phenomena …”
“So too, bhikkhus, possessing eleven qualities, a bhikkhu is capable of growth, progress, and fulfillment in this Dhamma and discipline.
“So too, bhikkhus, possessing eleven qualities, a bhikkhu is incapable of dwelling contemplating impermanence in the eye … incapable of dwelling contemplating suffering in the eye … incapable of dwelling contemplating non-self in the eye … incapable of dwelling contemplating destruction in the eye … incapable of dwelling contemplating vanishing in the eye … incapable of dwelling contemplating fading away in the eye … incapable of dwelling contemplating cessation in the eye … incapable of dwelling contemplating relinquishment in the eye …”
“So too, bhikkhus, possessing eleven qualities, a bhikkhu is incapable of growth, progress, and fulfillment in this Dhamma and discipline.
“So too, bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is a consumer of food, an occupant of space, a crusher of chairs, a ticket-taker, and yet still is reckoned as a bhikkhu.
“So too, bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is not worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“So too, bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“So too, bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“So too, bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu yearns for the destruction of the taints.
“So too, bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu yearns for the destruction of the taints.
“So too, bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, an evil bhikkhu maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition, is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise, and generates much demerit.
“So too, bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, Sāriputta continues, solely through the Dhamma, to turn the unsurpassed wheel of the Dhamma set in motion by the Tathāgata, a wheel that cannot be turned back by any ascetic, brahmin, deva, Māra, or Brahmā, or by anyone in the world.
“So too, bhikkhus, possessing five qualities, the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One sets in motion the unsurpassed wheel of the Dhamma solely through the Dhamma, a wheel that cannot be turned back by any ascetic, brahmin, deva, Māra, or Brahmā, or by anyone in the world.
“So too, bhikkhus, possessing four qualities a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“So too, bhikkhus, possessing four qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“So too, bhikkhus, possessing four qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“So too, bhikkhus, possessing three qualities, a bhikkhu soon attains vast and abundant wholesome qualities.
“So too, bhikkhus, possessing three qualities, an evil bhikkhu maintains himself in a maimed and injured condition, is blameworthy and subject to reproach by the wise, and generates much demerit.
“So too, bhikkhus, self-examination is very helpful for a bhikkhu in wholesome qualities: ‘Do I gain internal serenity of mind or not?
“So too, bhikkhus, so long as the bhikkhus do not see his offense, a certain person here has the same manner of going forward and returning, of looking ahead and looking aside, of bending and stretching his limbs, of wearing his robes and carrying his outer robe and bowl, as the good bhikkhus.
“So too, bhikkhus, some person has created trifling bad kamma yet it leads him to hell, while some other person here has created exactly the same trifling kamma yet it is to be experienced in this very life, without even a slight being seen, much less abundant.
“So too, bhikkhus, some person has created trifling bad kamma yet it leads him to hell, while some other person here has created exactly the same trifling kamma yet it is to be experienced in this very life, without even a slight being seen, much less abundant.
“So too, bhikkhus, some person here has created trifling bad kamma yet it leads him to hell, while some other person here has created exactly the same trifling kamma yet it is to be experienced in this very life, without even a slight being seen, much less abundant.
“So too, bhikkhus, such a person has abandoned the bad unwholesome qualities born of greed … born of hatred … born of delusion, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them so that they are no more subject to future arising.
“So too, bhikkhus, there are four defilements of ascetics and brahmins because of which some ascetics and brahmins do not shine, blaze, and radiate.
“So too, bhikkhus, there are these five defilements of the mind, defiled by which the mind is not malleable, wieldy, and luminous, but brittle and not properly concentrated for the destruction of the taints.
“So too, bhikkhus, there are these four astounding and amazing things about Ānanda.
“So too, bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of excellent thoroughbred persons found existing in the world.
“So too, bhikkhus, there are these three kinds of persons similar to patients found existing in the world.
“So too, bhikkhus, there are these three preliminary tasks of a bhikkhu.
“So too, bhikkhus, there are these three that a bhikkhu should remember all his life.
“So too, bhikkhus, there are these three urgent tasks of a bhikkhu.
“So too, bhikkhus, there are three kinds of persons found existing among the bhikkhus.
“So too, bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu dwells hemmed in by bhikkhus, bhikkhunīs, male and female lay followers, kings and royal ministers, sectarian teachers and the disciples of sectarian teachers, on that occasion it occurs to him: ‘I am presently dwelling hemmed in by bhikkhus, bhikkhunīs, male and female lay followers, kings and royal ministers, sectarian teachers and the disciples of sectarian teachers.
“So too, bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is devoted to the higher mind, there are in him gross defilements: bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct.
“So too, bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is virtuous … one of right view … one who has abandoned the taints and remains secluded from them, he is then called a bhikkhu who is foremost, attained the core, pure, and established in the core.”
“So too, bhikkhus, when a noble disciple intends to go forth from the household life into homelessness, on that occasion he is one whose foliage has turned yellow, like the Tāvatiṃsa devas’ pāricchattaka coral tree.
“So too, bhikkhus, when a noble disciple possesses seven good qualities, and when he gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life, he is then called a noble disciple who cannot be assailed by Māra, who cannot be assailed by the Evil One.
“So too, bhikkhus, when noble five-factored right concentration has been developed and cultivated in this way, then, there being a suitable basis, he is capable of realizing any state realizable by direct knowledge toward which he might incline his mind.
“So too, bhikkhus, when noble five-factored right concentration has been developed and cultivated in this way, then, there being a suitable basis, he is capable of realizing any state realizable by direct knowledge toward which he might incline his mind.
“So too, bhikkhus, when one does not have faith in wholesome qualities, when one does not have a sense of moral shame in wholesome qualities, when one does not have moral dread in wholesome qualities, when one does not have energy in wholesome qualities, when one does not have wisdom in wholesome qualities, in the Noble One’s discipline one is called a poor, destitute, indigent person.
“So too, bhikkhus, when the Tathāgata arises in the world, an arahant, perfectly enlightened, accomplished in true knowledge and conduct, fortunate, knower of the world, unsurpassed trainer of persons to be tamed, teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One, he teaches the Dhamma thus: ‘ Such is personal existence, such the origin of personal existence, such the cessation of personal existence, such the way to the cessation of personal existence.’
“So too, bhikkhus, when, secluded from sensual pleasures … a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna … on that occasion it occurs to the bhikkhu: ‘Now I am secure from danger and Māra cannot do anything to me.’
It also occurs to Māra the Evil One: ‘Now the bhikkhu is secure against danger and I cannot do anything to him.’
“So too, brahmin, in a population immersed in ignorance, become like an egg, completely enveloped, I have pierced the eggshell of ignorance.
“So too, friends, a bhikkhu is a boaster, one who brags about achievements: ‘I attain and emerge from the first jhāna.’ …  … ‘This venerable one is unwise.
“So too, friends, making a declaration of knowledge and development, a bhikkhu says: ‘I know this Dhamma, I see this Dhamma.
“So too, friends, making a declaration of knowledge and development, a bhikkhu says: ‘I know this Dhamma, I see this Dhamma.
“So too, householder, when the mind is protected, bodily, verbal, and mental actions are protected….
“So too, householder, when the mind is unprotected, bodily, verbal, and mental actions are unprotected….
“So too, if a junior bhikkhu is virtuous, of good character, this, I say, counts as his beauty.
“So too, possessing five qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“So too, possessing six qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“So too, possessing six qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“So too, possessing six qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“So too, possessing three factors, a bhikkhu is capable of achieving a wholesome state not yet attained and of increasing a wholesome state already attained.
“So too, possessing three factors, a bhikkhu is incapable of achieving a wholesome state not yet attained or of increasing a wholesome state already attained.
“So too, possessing three qualities, a bhikkhu is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“So too, ruler of the devas, whatever is well spoken is all the word of the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
“So too, secluded from sensual pleasures … some person enters and dwells in the first jhāna.
“So too, so long as a bhikkhu is still not accomplished in faith in wholesome qualities, in a sense of shame in wholesome qualities, in moral dread in wholesome qualities, in energy in wholesome qualities, and in wisdom in wholesome qualities, I must still look after him.
“So too, so long as the bhikkhus do not see his offense, a certain person here has the same manner of going forward … and carrying his outer robe and bowl as the good bhikkhus.
“So too, so long as the bhikkhus do not see his offense, a certain person here has the same manner of going forward … and carrying his outer robe and bowl as the others, the good bhikkhus.
“So too, some bhikkhu here is foolish, incompetent, inexperienced, and unskilled, when, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he enters and dwells in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
“So too, some bhikkhu here is wise, competent, experienced, and skilled when, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he enters and dwells in the first jhāna ….
“So too, some person here is extremely mild….
“So too, Soṇa, if energy is aroused too forcefully this leads to restlessness, and if energy is too lax this leads to laziness.
“So too, Sāḷha, those ascetics and brahmins who advocate austerity and disgust, who regard austerity and disgust as the essence, and who adhere to austerity and disgust are incapable of crossing the flood.
“So too, Sāḷha, those ascetics and brahmins who do not advocate austerity and disgust, who do not regard austerity and disgust as the essence, and who do not adhere to austerity and disgust are capable of crossing the flood.
“So too, there are these five kinds of persons similar to warriors found among the bhikkhus.
“So too, there are these five kinds of persons similar to warriors found among the bhikkhus.
“So too, through non-attention to all marks, some person here enters and dwells in the markless mental concentration.
“So too, Vappa, a bhikkhu thus perfectly liberated in mind achieves six constant dwellings.
“So too, when a bhikkhu is devoted to the higher mind, from time to time he should give attention to three marks.
“So too, when a bhikkhu is intent on development, even though he does not form the wish: ‘May my mind be liberated from the taints by non-clinging!’ yet his mind is liberated from the taints by non-clinging.
“So too, when a bhikkhu is not intent on development, even though he forms the wish: ‘May my mind be liberated from the taints by non-clinging!’ yet his mind is not liberated from the taints by non-clinging.
“So too, when a bhikkhu or bhikkhunī has set up such a keen perception of peril in regard to the pācittiya offenses, it can be expected that one who has never yet committed a pācittiya offense will not commit one, and one who has committed such an offense will make amends for it in accordance with the Dhamma.
“So too, when a bhikkhu or bhikkhunī has set up such a keen perception of peril in regard to the pārājika offenses, it can be expected that one who has never yet committed a pārājika offense will not commit one; and one who has committed such an offense will make amends for it in accordance with the Dhamma.
“So too, when a bhikkhu or bhikkhunī has set up such a keen perception of peril in regard to the pāṭidesanīya offenses, it can be expected that one who has never yet committed a pāṭidesanīya offense will not commit one, and one who has committed such an offense will make amends for it in accordance with the Dhamma.
“So too, when a bhikkhu or bhikkhunī has set up such a keen perception of peril in regard to the saṅghādisesa offenses, it can be expected that one who has never yet committed a saṅghādisesa offense will not commit one, and one who has committed such an offense will make amends for it in accordance with the Dhamma.
“So too, when evil bhikkhus are strong, well-behaved bhikkhus are weak.
“So too, when some bhikkhu here has gone forth from the household life into homelessness, whether by night or during the day, at first he sets up a keen sense of moral shame and moral dread toward the bhikkhus, the bhikkhunīs, the male lay followers, the female lay followers, and even toward the monastery workers and novices.
“So too, when the head of a family is endowed with faith, the people in the family who depend on him grow in three ways.
“So too, when the head of the family is endowed with faith, the people in the family who depend on him grow in five ways.
“So too, when well-behaved bhikkhus are strong, evil bhikkhus are weak.
“So too, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain … some person here enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna….
“So too, with the fading away as well of rapture, some person … enters and dwells in the third jhāna….
“So too, with the subsiding of thought and examination, some person enters and dwells in the second jhāna….
“So, bhikkhus, for one who enjoys sensual pleasures, poverty is suffering in the world; getting into debt is suffering in the world; having to pay interest is suffering in the world; being reproved is suffering in the world; prosecution is suffering in the world; and imprisonment is suffering in the world.
“So, having seen what can be seen, the Tathāgata does not misconceive the seen, does not misconceive the unseen, does not misconceive what can be seen, does not misconceive one who sees.
“So, householder, you say you don’t know the ascetic Gotama’s view in its entirety and you also don’t know the bhikkhus’ view in its entirety.
“So, householder, you say you don’t know the ascetic Gotama’s view in its entirety.
“Some ascetics and brahmins, sister, for whom the attainment of the earth kasiṇa is supreme, generated it as their goal.
“Some ascetics and brahmins, sister, for whom the attainment of the water kasiṇa … the fire kasiṇa … the air kasiṇa … the blue kasiṇa … the yellow kasiṇa … the red kasiṇa … the white kasiṇa … the space kasiṇa … the consciousness kasiṇa is supreme, generated it as their goal.
“Some other deities approached me and said: ‘In the past, Bhante, when we were human beings, monks approached our homes.
“Some other deities approached me and said: ‘In the past, Bhante, when we were human beings, monks approached our homes.
“Some other deities approached me and said: ‘In the past, Bhante, when we were human beings, monks approached our homes.
“Some time later he dwells alone, withdrawn from the herd.
“Someone else approaches an ascetic or a brahmin and invites him to ask for what he needs.
“Someone else approaches an ascetic or a brahmin and invites him to ask for what he needs.
“Someone else approaches an ascetic or a brahmin and invites him to ask for what he needs.
“Someone else destroys life … and holds wrong view.
“Someone else destroys life … and holds wrong view.
“Someone else generates unafflictive bodily activities, unafflictive verbal activities, and unafflictive mental activities.
“Someone else gives a gift to an ascetic or a brahmin: food and drink … and lighting.
“Someone else gives a gift to an ascetic or a brahmin: food and drink … and lighting.
“Someone else has practiced the basis of meritorious activity consisting in giving to a middling extent; he has practiced the basis of meritorious activity consisting in virtuous behavior to a middling extent; but he has not undertaken the basis of meritorious activity consisting in meditative development.
“Someone else has practiced the basis of meritorious activity consisting in giving to a superior extent; he has practiced the basis of meritorious activity consisting in virtuous behavior to a superior extent; but he has not undertaken the basis of meritorious activity consisting in meditative development.
“Someone else has practiced the basis of meritorious activity consisting in giving to a superior extent; he has practiced the basis of meritorious activity consisting in virtuous behavior to a superior extent; but he has not undertaken the basis of meritorious activity consisting in meditative development.
“Someone else has practiced the basis of meritorious activity consisting in giving to a superior extent; he has practiced the basis of meritorious activity consisting in virtuous behavior to a superior extent; but he has not undertaken the basis of meritorious activity consisting in meditative development.
“Someone else has practiced the basis of meritorious activity consisting in giving to a superior extent; he has practiced the basis of meritorious activity consisting in virtuous behavior to a superior extent; but he has not undertaken the basis of meritorious activity consisting in meditative development.
“Someone else has practiced the basis of meritorious activity consisting in giving to a superior extent; he has practiced the basis of meritorious activity consisting in virtuous behavior to a superior extent; but he has not undertaken the basis of meritorious activity consisting in meditative development.
“Someone else has practiced the basis of meritorious activity consisting in giving to a superior extent; he has practiced the basis of meritorious activity consisting in virtuous behavior to a superior extent; but he has not undertaken the basis of meritorious activity consisting in meditative development.
“Someone else who enjoys sensual pleasures seeks wealth both righteously and unrighteously, both by violence and without violence.
“Someone else who enjoys sensual pleasures seeks wealth righteously, without violence.
“Someone else who enjoys sensual pleasures seeks wealth unrighteously, by violence.
“Someone refutes and disproves a doctrine that accords with the Dhamma by means of a doctrine contrary to the Dhamma.
“Someone refutes and disproves a doctrine that accords with the Dhamma with a doctrine that accords with the Dhamma.
“Someone refutes and disproves both a doctrine that accords with the Dhamma and a doctrine contrary to the Dhamma by means of a doctrine contrary to the Dhamma.
“Someone takes what is not given … … engages in sexual misconduct … … speaks falsehood … … speaks divisively … … speaks harshly … … indulges in idle chatter … … is full of longing … … has a mind of ill will and intentions of hate … … holds wrong view and has an incorrect perspective thus: ‘There is nothing given … there are in the world no ascetics and brahmins of right conduct and right practice who, having realized this world and the other world for themselves by direct knowledge, make them known to others.’
He creeps along by body, speech, and mind.
“Sometime later, when that boy grows up and his faculties mature, he would play the games that are typical for boys—games with toy plows, stick games, somersaults, games with pinwheels, games with measures made of leaves, games with toy chariots, games with toy bows.
“Sometime later, Ānanda, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, I entered and dwelled in the cessation of perception and feeling, and having seen with wisdom, my taints were utterly destroyed.
“Sometime later, Ānanda, by completely surmounting the base of nothingness, I entered and dwelled in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
“Sometime later, Ānanda, by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness, ‘there is nothing,’ I entered and dwelled in the base of nothingness.
“Sometime later, Ānanda, by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of space, ‘consciousness is infinite,’ I entered and dwelled in the base of the infinity of consciousness.
“Sometime later, Ānanda, secluded from sensual pleasures … I entered and dwelled in the first jhāna.
“Sometime later, Ānanda, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain … I entered and dwelled in the fourth jhāna ….
“Sometime later, Ānanda, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, ‘space is infinite,’ I entered and dwelled in the base of the infinity of space.
“Sometime later, Ānanda, with the fading away as well of rapture … I entered and dwelled in the third jhāna ….
“Sometime later, Ānanda, with the subsiding of thought and examination … I entered and dwelled in the second jhāna ….
“Sometimes we do, Bhante, and sometimes we don’t.”
“Soṇa, when you were alone in seclusion, didn’t the following course of thought arise in your mind: ‘I am one of the Blessed One’s most energetic disciples, yet my mind has not been liberated from the taints by non-clinging.
“Still another abstains from the destruction of life … and holds right view.
“Still another abstains from the destruction of life … and holds right view.
“Still another abstains from the destruction of life, from taking what is not given, from sexual misconduct, from false speech, from divisive speech, from harsh speech, from idle chatter; he is without longing, of good will, and holds right view.
“Still another abstains from the destruction of life, from taking what is not given, from sexual misconduct, from false speech, from divisive speech, from harsh speech, from idle chatter; he is without longing, of good will, and holds right view.
“Still another destroys life … and holds wrong view.
“Still another Dhamma speaker speaks much but pointless, and his assembly is not skilled in distinguishing what is meaningful from what is pointless.
“Still another generates bodily activities that are both afflictive and unafflictive, verbal activities that are both afflictive and unafflictive, and mental activities that are both afflictive and unafflictive.
“Still another person values virtuous behavior and takes virtuous behavior as an authority, values concentration and takes concentration as an authority, but does not value wisdom or take wisdom as an authority.
“Still another woman is not prone to anger or often exasperated.
“Such a person has abandoned the bad unwholesome qualities born of greed … born of hatred … born of delusion, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them so that they are no more subject to future arising.
“Such a person, bhikkhus, is called one who speaks at an improper time, who speaks falsely, who speaks what is unbeneficial, who speaks non-Dhamma, who speaks non-discipline.
“Such a person, bhikkhus, is called one who speaks at the proper time, who speaks in accordance with fact, who speaks what is beneficial, who speaks Dhamma, who speaks discipline.
“Such a person, overcome by bad unwholesome qualities born of greed … born of hatred … born of delusion, with his mind obsessed by them, dwells in suffering in this very life, with distress, anguish, and fever, and with the breakup of the body, after death, a bad destination can be expected for him.
“Such are the bond of sensuality and the bond of existence.
“Such are the bond of sensuality, the bond of existence, and the bond of views.
“Such are the severance of the bond of sensuality and the severance of the bond of existence.
“Such are the severance of the bond of sensuality, the severance of the bond of existence, and the severance of the bond of views.
“Such being the case, Master Gotama, we do not even measure up to the caṇḍāla of a brahmin.
“Such is the bond of sensuality.
“Such is the severance of the bond of sensuality.
“Suffering should be understood; the source and origin of suffering should be understood; the diversity of suffering should be understood; the result of suffering should be understood; the cessation of suffering should be understood; the way leading to the cessation of suffering should be understood.
“Sujātā, a man might have seven kinds of wives.
“Suppavāsā, a female noble disciple who gives food gives the recipients four things.
“Suppose a crop-eating bull was bound by a rope or shut up in a pen.
“Suppose a house with a peaked roof is badly thatched: then the roof peak, the rafters, and the walls are unprotected; the roof peak, the rafters, and the walls become tainted; the roof peak, the rafters, and the walls become rotten.
“Suppose a house with a peaked roof is badly thatched: then the roof peak, the rafters, and the walls fail.
“Suppose a house with a peaked roof is well thatched: then the roof peak, the rafters, and the walls are protected; the roof peak, the rafters, and the walls do not become tainted; the roof peak, the rafters, and the walls do not become rotten.
“Suppose a house with a peaked roof is well thatched: then the roof peak, the rafters, and the walls do not fail.
“Suppose a man needs a gutter for a well.
“Suppose a man would drop a lump of salt into a small bowl of water.
“Suppose a poor, destitute, and needy person claims to be rich, affluent, and wealthy.
“Suppose a rich, affluent, and wealthy person claims to be rich, affluent, and wealthy.
“Suppose a tree was choked and enveloped by three māluvā creepers.
“Suppose a tree was choked and enveloped by three māluvā creepers.
“Suppose a water jug full of water has been set out on a stand, the jug being full of water right up to the brim so that crows could drink from it.
“Suppose a wild colt would wish: ‘Oh, if only people would assign me a thoroughbred’s place, feed me a thoroughbred’s food, and give me a thoroughbred’s grooming!’ yet people do not assign him a thoroughbred’s place, feed him a thoroughbred’s food, and give him a thoroughbred’s grooming.
“Suppose a young infant boy, ignorant, lying on his back, were to put a stick or pebble in his mouth because of his nurse’s heedlessness.
“Suppose an excellent thoroughbred horse would not wish: ‘Oh, if only people would assign me a thoroughbred’s place, feed me a thoroughbred’s food, and give me a thoroughbred’s grooming!’ yet people assign him a thoroughbred’s place, feed him a thoroughbred’s food, and give him a thoroughbred’s grooming.
“Suppose on even ground at a crossroads a chariot was standing harnessed to thoroughbreds, with a goad ready at hand, so that a skillful trainer, the charioteer, could mount it, and taking the reins in his left hand and the goad in his right, might drive out and return wherever and whenever he likes.
“Suppose on level ground there was a four-sided pond, contained by an embankment, full of water right up to the brim so that crows could drink from it.
“Suppose that a king or royal minister had been traveling along a highway with a four-factored army and set up camp for the night in a forest thicket.
“Suppose that in a mountain glen there was a lake sheltered from the wind and devoid of waves.
“Suppose that not far from a village or town there was a large pond.
“Suppose that on the crossroads the rain, falling in thick droplets, would make the dust disappear and cause mud to appear.
“Suppose that the food left over from the previous evening would not appeal to a man who had finished a delicious meal.
“Suppose that when a field of barley is growing, some blighted barley would appear that would be just chaff and trash among the barley.
“Suppose that when a large heap of grain is being winnowed, the grains that are firm and pithy form a pile on one side, and the wind blows the spoiled grains and chaff to another side.
“Suppose there is a tree deficient in branches and foliage.
“Suppose there is a tree deficient in branches and foliage.
“Suppose there is a tree deficient in branches and foliage.
“Suppose there is a tree deficient in branches and foliage.
“Suppose there is a tree deficient in branches and foliage.
“Suppose there is a tree deficient in branches and foliage.
“Suppose there is a tree possessing branches and foliage.
“Suppose there is a tree possessing branches and foliage.
“Suppose there is a tree possessing branches and foliage.
“Suppose there is a tree possessing branches and foliage.
“Suppose there is a tree possessing branches and foliage.
“Suppose there is a tree possessing branches and foliage.
“Suppose there was a cesspit deeper than a man’s height full of feces right up to the top, and a man was sunk in it so that his head was submerged.
“Suppose there was a hen with eight, ten, or twelve eggs that she had not properly covered, incubated, and nurtured.
“Suppose there was a hen with eight, ten, or twelve eggs that she had properly covered, incubated, and nurtured.
“Suppose there was a Kosalan cartload of twenty measures of sesamum seed.
“Suppose, Bhante, there were a stone mountain, without clefts or fissures, one solid mass.
“Suppose, bhikkhus, a cremation brand was blazing at both ends and smeared with dung in the middle: it could not be used as timber either in the village or in the forest.
“Suppose, bhikkhus, a goldsmith or his apprentice would prepare a furnace, heat up the crucible, take some gold with tongs, and put it into the crucible.
“Suppose, bhikkhus, a man were to wrap himself in a black cloth, loosen his hair, and tell a large crowd of people: ‘Worthy sirs, I have committed an evil deed, reprehensible, censurable.
“Suppose, bhikkhus, a man were to wrap himself in a black cloth, loosen his hair, put a club on his shoulder, and tell a large crowd of people: ‘Worthy sirs, I have committed an evil deed, reprehensible, punishable by clubbing.
“Suppose, bhikkhus, a man were to wrap himself in a black cloth, loosen his hair, put a sack of ashes on his shoulder, and tell a large crowd of people: ‘Worthy sirs, I have committed an evil deed, reprehensible, punishable by a sack of ashes.
“Suppose, bhikkhus, a seed of neem, bitter cucumber, or bitter gourd were planted in moist soil.
“Suppose, bhikkhus, a seed of neem, bitter cucumber, or bitter gourd were planted in moist soil.
“Suppose, bhikkhus, a seed of sugar cane, hill rice, or grape were planted in moist soil.
“Suppose, bhikkhus, a seed of sugar cane, hill rice, or grape were planted in moist soil.
“Suppose, bhikkhus, seeds that are intact, unspoiled, not damaged by wind and the sun’s heat, fecund, well preserved, were deposited in well-prepared ground in a good field and receive proper rainfall: in this way, those seeds would grow, increase, and mature.
“Suppose, bhikkhus, there are seeds that are intact, unspoiled, not damaged by wind and the sun’s heat, fecund, well preserved.
“Suppose, bhikkhus, there is a farmer whose field of hill rice has ripened.
“Suppose, bhikkhus, there was a seafaring ship bound together by lashings that had been worn away in the water for six months.
“Suppose, bhikkhus, there were a mountain-dwelling cow that was foolish, incompetent, inexperienced, and unskilled in walking on rough mountains.
“Suppose, bhikkhus, there were a mountain-dwelling cow that was wise, competent, experienced, and skilled in walking on rough mountains.
“Suppose, bhikkhus, they were to arrest a thief, a criminal, and show him to the king, saying: ‘Your majesty, this is a thief, a criminal.
“Suppose, brahmin, there was a hen with eight, ten, or twelve eggs that she had properly covered, incubated, and nurtured.
“Suppose, brahmins, there were four men standing in the four quarters possessing supreme movement and speed and a supreme stride.
“Suppose, friend, there was a stone pillar eight meters long.
“Suppose, friends, that one man would say to his companion: ‘Whenever you need money for anything, my friend, just ask me and I’ll give it to you.’
When the companion has need of money, he says to his friend: ‘I need money, friend.
“Suppose, Sāḷha, a man desiring to cross a river were to take a sharp axe and enter a grove.
“Suppose, Sāḷha, a man desiring to cross a river were to take a sharp axe and enter a grove.
“Suppose, Upāli, a young infant boy, lying on his back, would play with his own urine and feces.
“Suppose, Upāli, there was a large lake, and a bull elephant seven or eight cubits in size would come along.
“Suppose, Vappa, a shadow is seen on account of a stump.
“Suppose, Ānanda, there was a poor, destitute, indigent person.
“Surely not, Bhante.”
“Surely not, Bhante.”
“Surely not, Bhante.”
“Surely not, Bhante.”
“Surely not, Bhante.”
“Surely not, Bhante.”
“Surely, Bhante, it is as I had wished.”
“Surely, Bhante, it is the extraction of the dart of sorrow!
“Surely, bhikkhu, you have committed a transgression in that you so foolishly, stupidly, and unskillfully slandered the Venerable Sāriputta on grounds that are untrue, baseless, and false.
“Surely, bhikkhus, that bhikkhu did not pervade the four royal families of snakes with a mind of loving-kindness.
“Surely, brahmin, your words are prying and intrusive.
“Surely, brahmin, your words are prying and intrusive.
“Surely, friend Kaccāna, knowing, the Blessed One knows; seeing, he sees; he has become vision … the Tathāgata.
“Surely, friend Ānanda, knowing, the Blessed One knows; seeing, he sees; he has become vision … the Tathāgata.
“Surely, Kassapa, you have committed a transgression in that, when I was instructing, encouraging, inspiring, and gladdening the bhikkhus with a talk on the Dhamma connected with the training rules, you so foolishly, stupidly, and unskillfully became impatient and bitter, thinking: ‘This ascetic is too stringent.’
But since you see your transgression as a transgression and make amends for it in accordance with the Dhamma, we accept it.
“Surely, sister, you have committed a transgression in that you so foolishly, stupidly, and unskillfully behaved as you did.
“Sāriputta, I can teach the Dhamma briefly; I can teach the Dhamma in detail; I can teach the Dhamma both briefly and in detail.
“Sāriputta, if a bhikkhu possesses these seven bases for ‘ten-less,’ then, if he lives the complete and pure spiritual life for twelve years, he is fit to be called ‘ten-less.’
If, too, he lives the complete and pure spiritual life for twenty-four years, he is fit to be called ‘ten-less.’
If, too, he lives the complete and pure spiritual life for thirty-six years, he is fit to be called ‘ten-less.’
If, too, he lives the complete and pure spiritual life for forty-eight years, he is fit to be called ‘ten-less.’”
“Sāriputta, leave alone those people who are devoid of faith and have gone forth from the household life into homelessness, not out of faith but intent on earning a living; who are crafty … unwise, stupid.
“Sāriputta, when a bhikkhu’s taints have been destroyed, how many powers does he possess by reason of which he can claim the destruction of the taints: ‘My taints have been destroyed’?”
“Sāriputta, when a bhikkhu’s taints have been destroyed, how many powers does he possess by reason of which he can claim: ‘My taints have been destroyed’?”
“Sīha, your family has long been a fountain of support for the Nigaṇṭhas; hence you should consider continuing to give alms to them when they approach you.”
“Take note of this statement, Moggallāna!
“Taking what is not given is non-Dhamma; abstention from taking what is not given is the Dhamma.
“Taking what is not given is non-Dhamma; abstention from taking what is not given is the Dhamma….
“Taking what is not given, repeatedly pursued, developed, and cultivated, is conducive to hell, to the animal realm, and to the sphere of afflicted spirits; for one reborn as a human being taking what is not given at minimum conduces to loss of wealth.
“Tamed, he is the best of tamers;peaceful, he is the seer among peace-bringers;freed, he is the chief of liberators;crossed over, he is the best of guides across.”
“Tell me, Soṇa, in the past, when you lived at home, weren’t you skilled at the lute?”
“Tell us, householder, what is the ascetic Gotama’s view?”
“That’s good, Bhante.”
“The abandoning of bothsensual perceptions and dejection;the dispelling of dullness,the warding off of remorse;
“The asuras see eight astounding and amazing qualities in the great ocean because of which they take delight in it.
“The asuras, bhikkhus, see these eight astounding and amazing qualities in the great ocean because of which they take delight in it.
“The bhikkhus see eight astounding and amazing qualities in this Dhamma and discipline because of which they take delight in it.
“The Blessed One, friend, has spoken of these five objects of sensual pleasure as confinement.
“The Blessed Ones, Arahants, Perfectly Enlightened Ones of the future will also teach a doctrine of kamma, a doctrine of deeds, a doctrine of energy.
“The conversation was this, Master Gotama: ‘Formerly there were fewer bhikkhus, but more who displayed superhuman wonders of psychic potency.
“The defiled mind, Visākhā, is cleansed by exertion.
“The defiled mind, Visākhā, is cleansed by exertion.
“The defiled mind, Visākhā, is cleansed by exertion.
“The defiled mind, Visākhā, is cleansed by exertion.
“The deities and the spirits, too, speak praise, saying: ‘In such and such a village or town a man or a woman has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha … is virtuous and of good character … delighting in giving and sharing.’
“The destruction of life is non-Dhamma; abstention from the destruction of life is the Dhamma.
“The destruction of life, friends, is non-Dhamma; abstention from the destruction of life is the Dhamma.
“The devas of Brahmā’s company have such knowledge, respected Moggallāna.”
“The devas the four great kings have such knowledge, respected Moggallāna.”
“The devas who control what is created by others also have such knowledge, respected Moggallāna.”
“The Dhamma of those who teach the abandoning of lust, hatred, and delusion is well expounded.
“The enlightenment factor of mindfulness, the enlightenment factor of discrimination of phenomena, the enlightenment factor of energy, the enlightenment factor of rapture, the enlightenment factor of tranquility, the enlightenment factor of concentration, and the enlightenment factor of equanimity.
“The first assurance he has won is this: ‘If there is another world, and if there is the fruit and result of good and bad deeds, it is possible that with the breakup of the body, after death, I will be reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.’
“The first assurance he has won … … The fourth assurance he has won is this: ‘Suppose evil does not befall the evil-doer.
“The foremost of those with bodies is Rāhu, lord of the asuras.
“The fourth assurance he has won is this: ‘Suppose evil does not come to one who does evil.
“The generous one, having become a deva, would surpass the other in five ways: in celestial life span, celestial beauty, celestial happiness, celestial glory, and celestial authority.
“The generous one, having gone forth, would surpass the other in five ways.
“The giver of the agreeable gains the agreeable,when he gives willingly to the upright onesclothing, bedding, food, and drink,and various kinds of requisites.
“The giver of the agreeable gains the agreeable;the giver of the foremost again gains the foremost;the giver of the excellent gains the excellent;the giver of the best reaches the best state.
“The goldsmith or his apprentice now pours the gold into a melting pot, and fans it, melts it, and smelts it.
“The great ocean, Bhante, slants, slopes, and inclines gradually, not dropping off abruptly.
“The great ocean, bhikkhus, slants, slopes, and inclines gradually, not dropping off abruptly.
“The knowledge and vision arose in me: ‘Unshakable is my liberation of mind; this is my last birth; now there is no more renewed existence.’”
“The knowledge and vision arose in me: ‘Unshakable is my liberation of mind; this is my last birth; now there is no more renewed existence.’”
“The knowledge and vision arose in me: ‘Unshakable is my liberation of mind; this is my last birth; now there is no more renewed existence.’” 
“The lazy glutton, unwilling to work,harsh, fierce, rough in speech,a woman who dominates her own supporters:a wife like this is called a wife and a tyrant.
“The life span in the red-lotus hell is long, bhikkhu.
“The lion, bhikkhus, is a designation for the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
“The lotus floweris born and grown up in water,yet is not soiled by the waterbut remains fragrant and delightful.
“The mode of practice that is painful with quick direct knowledge is declared to be inferior because of its painfulness.
“The mode of practice that is painful with sluggish direct knowledge is declared to be inferior for both reasons: because it is painful and because direct knowledge is sluggish.
“The mode of practice that is pleasant with quick direct knowledge is declared to be superior for both reasons: because practice is pleasant and because direct knowledge is quick.
“The mode of practice that is pleasant with sluggish direct knowledge is declared to be inferior because of its sluggishness.
“The one enjoying sensual pleasures who seeks wealth both righteously and unrighteously, both by violence and without violence, and makes himself happy and pleased, and shares the wealth and does meritorious deeds, may be praised on three grounds and criticized on one ground.
“The one enjoying sensual pleasures who seeks wealth both righteously and unrighteously, both by violence and without violence, and makes himself happy and pleased, but does not share the wealth and do meritorious deeds, may be praised on two grounds and criticized on two grounds.
“The one enjoying sensual pleasures who seeks wealth righteously, without violence, and makes himself happy and pleased, and shares it and does meritorious deeds, and uses that wealth without being tied to it, infatuated with it, and blindly absorbed in it, seeing the danger in it and understanding the escape—he may be praised on four grounds.
“The one enjoying sensual pleasures who seeks wealth righteously, without violence, and makes himself happy and pleased, and shares it and does meritorious deeds, but uses that wealth while being tied to it, infatuated with it, and blindly absorbed in it, not seeing the danger in it and understanding the escape—he may be praised on three grounds and criticized on one ground.
“The one enjoying sensual pleasures who seeks wealth righteously, without violence, and makes himself happy and pleased, but does not share the wealth and do meritorious deeds, may be praised on two grounds and criticized on one ground.
“The one enjoying sensual pleasures who seeks wealth unrighteously, by violence, and does not make himself happy and pleased, and does not share the wealth and do meritorious deeds, may be criticized on three grounds.
“The one enjoying sensual pleasures who seeks wealth unrighteously, by violence, and makes himself happy and pleased, and shares the wealth and does meritorious deeds, may be criticized on one ground and praised on two grounds.
“The one enjoying sensual pleasures who seeks wealth unrighteously, by violence, and makes himself happy and pleased, but does not share the wealth and do meritorious deeds, may be criticized on two grounds and praised on one ground.
“the one possessing the three knowledges,who dwells without delusion;they worship him, the BuddhaGotama, bearing his final body.
“The paccorohaṇī festival in the Noble One’s discipline, brahmin, is quite different from the paccorohaṇī festival of the brahmins.”
“The paccorohaṇī festival in the Noble One’s discipline, brahmin, is quite different from the paccorohaṇī festival of the brahmins.”
“The paccorohaṇī festival in the Noble One’s discipline, Master Gotama, is quite different from the paccorohaṇī festival of the brahmins.
“The paccorohaṇī festival in the Noble One’s discipline, Master Gotama, is quite different from the paccorohaṇī festival of the brahmins.
“The person among these who does not violate and does not become remorseful, and does not understand as it really is the liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where these arisen bad unwholesome states of his cease without remainder, should be told: ‘Taints born of violation are not found in you, and taints born of remorse do not increase.
“The person among these who does not violate and yet becomes remorseful, and does not understand as it really is the liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where these arisen bad unwholesome states of his cease without remainder, should be told: ‘Taints born of violation are not found in you, yet taints born of remorse increase.
“The person among these who violates and does not become remorseful, and does not understand as it really is the liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where these arisen bad unwholesome states of his cease without remainder, should be told: ‘Taints born of violation are found in you, but taints born of remorse do not increase.
“The person in whom another has complete confidence may commit an offense because of which the Saṅgha suspends him.
“The person through whom another has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha.
“The person who gains both internal serenity of mind and the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena should base himself on those same wholesome qualities and make a further effort for the destruction of the taints.
“The person who gains both internal serenity of mind and the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena should base himself on those same wholesome qualities and make a further effort to reach the destruction of the taints.
“The person who gains neither internal serenity of mind nor the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena should approach one who gains both and inquire of him: ‘How, friend, should the mind be steadied?
“The person who gains neither internal serenity of mind nor the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to obtain both those wholesome qualities.
“The person who gains the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena but not internal serenity of mind should approach one who gains internal serenity of mind and inquire of him: ‘How, friend, should the mind be steadied?
“The person who gains the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena but not internal serenity of mind should base himself on the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena and make an effort to gain internal serenity of mind.
“The person who gives the best,the giver of the foremost,the giver of the excellent,is long-lived and famouswherever he is reborn.”
“The purpose and benefit of concentration is the knowledge and vision of things as they really are.”
“The purpose and benefit of concentration is the knowledge and vision of things as they really are.”
“The purpose and benefit of disenchantment and dispassion is the knowledge and vision of liberation.
“The purpose and benefit of disenchantment is dispassion.” 
“The purpose and benefit of dispassion is the knowledge and vision of liberation.”
“The purpose and benefit of joy is rapture.”
“The purpose and benefit of joy is rapture.”
“The purpose and benefit of non-regret is joy.”
“The purpose and benefit of non-regret is joy.”
“The purpose and benefit of pleasure is concentration.”
“The purpose and benefit of pleasure is concentration.”
“The purpose and benefit of rapture is tranquility.”
“The purpose and benefit of rapture is tranquility.”
“The purpose and benefit of the knowledge and vision of things as they really are is disenchantment and dispassion.”
“The purpose and benefit of the knowledge and vision of things as they really are is disenchantment.”
“The purpose and benefit of tranquility is pleasure.”
“The purpose and benefit of tranquility is pleasure.”
“The second assurance he has won is this: ‘If there is no other world, and there is no fruit and result of good and bad deeds, still right here, in this very life, I maintain myself in happiness, without enmity and ill will, free of trouble.
“The taints should be understood; the source and origin of the taints should be understood; the diversity of the taints should be understood; the result of the taints should be understood; the cessation of the taints should be understood; the way leading to the cessation of the taints should be understood.
“The Tathāgata is one whose livelihood is purified.
“The Tathāgata is one whose mental behavior is purified.
“The Tathāgata is one whose verbal behavior is purified.
“The Tathāgata or his disciple who is a jhāna-attainer … encompasses his mind with his own mind and considers: ‘Why does this venerable one declare final knowledge thus: “I understand: ‘Destroyed is birth … there is no more coming back to any state of being’”?’
The Tathāgata or his disciple, having encompassed his mind with his own mind, understands: ‘This venerable one overestimates himself, imagines that his estimate of himself is valid, thinks that he has attained what he has not attained, accomplished what he has not accomplished, and achieved what he has not achieved, and by overestimation of himself he declares final knowledge thus: “I understand: ‘Destroyed is birth … there is no more coming back to any state of being.’”’
“The Tathāgata or his disciple who is a jhāna-attainer … encompasses his mind with his own mind and considers: ‘Why does this venerable one declare final knowledge thus: “I understand: ‘Destroyed is birth, the spiritual life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming back to any state of being.’”?’
The Tathāgata or his disciple, having encompassed his mind with his own mind, understands:
“The Tathāgata or his disciple who is a jhāna-attainer … encompasses his mind with his own mind and considers: ‘Why does this venerable one overestimate himself and imagine that his estimate of himself is valid; why does he think that he has attained what he has not attained, accomplished what he has not accomplished, and achieved what he has not achieved; and why, by overestimation of himself, does he declare final knowledge thus: “I understand: ‘Destroyed is birth … there is no more coming back to any state of being’”?’
“The Tathāgata or his disciple who is a jhāna-attainer … encompasses his mind with his own mind and considers: ‘Why is this venerable one a boaster, one who brags about achievements: “I attain and emerge from the first jhāna … I attain and emerge from the cessation of feeling and perception”?’
The Tathāgata or his disciple, having encompassed his mind with his own mind, understands:
“The Tathāgata or his disciple who is a jhāna-attainer … having encompassed his mind with his own mind, understands:
“The Tathāgata or his disciple who is a jhāna-attainer … having encompassed his mind with his own mind, understands: ‘This venerable one has learned much, remembers what he has learned, and accumulates what he has learned.
“The Tathāgata, bhikkhus, is one whose Dhamma is well expounded.
“The teaching of the Dhamma is prescribed particularly for the sake of the person who will enter upon the fixed course rightness in wholesome qualities only if he gets to see the Tathāgata, not if he fails to see him; only if he gets to hear the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata, not if he fails to hear it.
“The third assurance he has won is this: ‘Suppose evil comes to one who does evil.
“The time during which an eon dissolves, which cannot easily be calculated as ‘so many years’ or ‘so many hundreds of years’ or ‘so many thousands of years’ or ‘so many hundreds of thousands of years.’
“The time during which an eon evolves, which cannot easily be calculated as ‘so many years’ or ‘so many hundreds of years’ or ‘so many thousands of years’ or ‘so many hundreds of thousands of years.’
“The time during which an eon remains in a state of dissolution, which cannot easily be calculated as ‘so many years’ or ‘so many hundreds of years’ or ‘so many thousands of years’ or ‘so many hundreds of thousands of years.’
“The time during which an eon remains in a state of evolution, which cannot easily be calculated as ‘so many years’ or ‘so many hundreds of years’ or ‘so many thousands of years’ or ‘so many hundreds of thousands of years.’
“The types of wives here calleda killer, a thief, and a tyrant,immoral, harsh, disrespectful,with the body’s breakup go to hell.
“The Venerable Ānanda is learned, so let him clear this up himself.”
“The Venerable Ānanda is learned, so let him clear this up himself.”
“The Venerable Ānanda is learned.
“The wealth thus amassed has four sources of accretion: one avoids womanizing, drunkenness, and gambling, and cultivates good friendship, good companionship, good comradeship.
“The wealth thus amassed has four sources of dissipation: womanizing, drunkenness, gambling, and bad friendship, bad companionship, bad comradeship.
“the wise one, dispeller of darkness,the triple-knowledge bearer, victor over death;the one they call an abandoner of all,benefactor of devas and humans;
“The wise person has these three characteristics of a wise person, marks of a wise person, manifestations of a wise person.
“The world, bhikkhu, is led by the mind; it is dragged around by the mind; when the mind has arisen, goes under its control.” 
“Then a bhikkhu is practicing thus: ‘It might not be, and it might not be mine.
“Then a bhikkhu is practicing thus: ‘It might not be, and it might not be mine.
“Then a bhikkhu is practicing thus: ‘It might not be, and it might not be mine.
“Then a bhikkhu is practicing thus: ‘It might not be, and it might not be mine.
“Then a bhikkhu is practicing thus: ‘It might not be, and it might not be mine.
“Then a bhikkhu is practicing thus: ‘It might not be, and it might not be mine.
“Then a bhikkhu might say: ‘In such and such a residence a Saṅgha is dwelling with elders and prominent monks.
“Then a bhikkhu might say: ‘In such and such a residence one elder bhikkhu is dwelling who is learned, an heir to the heritage, an expert on the Dhamma, an expert on the discipline, an expert on the outlines.
“Then a bhikkhu might say: ‘In such and such a residence several elder bhikkhus are dwelling who are learned, heirs to the heritage, experts on the Dhamma, experts on the discipline, experts on the outlines.
“Then a hare or a cat comes along.
“Then Brahmā Sahampati, having known with his own mind the reflection in my mind, disappeared from the brahmā world and reappeared before me just as a strong man might extend his drawn-in arm or draw in his extended arm.
“Then can a bad person know of a good person: ‘This fellow is a good person’?”
“Then can a good person know of a bad person: ‘This fellow is a bad person’?”
“Then can a good person know of a good person: ‘This fellow is a good person’?”
“Then do you hold the view: ‘The world is not eternal; this alone is true, anything else is wrong’?”
“Then does one become an end-maker by means of conduct?”
“Then does one become an end-maker by means of knowledge and conduct?”
“Then does one become an end-maker otherwise than by means of knowledge and conduct?”
“Then does the Venerable Bhaddaji agree with the multitude about this?”
“Then express your inspiration, Piṅgiyānī,” the Blessed One said.
“Then Gavesī approached the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One Kassapa, and said to him: ‘Bhante, may I obtain the going forth and full ordination under the Blessed One?’
The lay follower Gavesī obtained the going forth and full ordination under the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One Kassapa.
“Then Gavesī approached the five hundred lay followers and said to them: ‘From today on, you should consider me to be celibate, living apart, abstaining from sexual intercourse, the common person’s practice.’
Then it occurred to those five hundred lay followers: ‘Master Gavesī is our benefactor, leader, and guide.
“Then Gavesī approached the five hundred lay followers and said to them: ‘From today on, you should consider me to be eating once a day, refraining from a night meal, abstaining from eating outside the proper time.’
Then it occurred to those five hundred lay followers: ‘Master Gavesī is our benefactor, leader, and guide.
“Then Gavesī approached the five hundred lay followers and said to them: ‘From today on, you should consider me to be one fulfilling virtuous behavior.’
Then it occurred to those five hundred lay followers: ‘Master Gavesī is our benefactor, leader, and guide.
“Then is it possible, Bhante, to give a simile?”
“Then is the spiritual life lived under the Blessed One for this purpose: ‘Let kamma is not to be experienced become kamma I am to experience’?”
“Then is the spiritual life lived under the Blessed One for this purpose: ‘Let kamma is to be experienced as painful become kamma I am to experience as pleasant ‘?”
“Then is the spiritual life lived under the Blessed One for this purpose: ‘Let kamma is to be experienced in a future life become kamma I am to experience in this life’?”
“Then is the spiritual life lived under the Blessed One for this purpose: ‘Let kamma is to be experienced just slightly become kamma I am to experience copiously’?”
“Then is the spiritual life lived under the Blessed One for this purpose: ‘Let kamma is to be experienced while it has not matured become kamma I am to experience when it has matured’?”
“Then it occurred to me: ‘If my aggregate of virtuous behavior were incomplete, for the sake of completing it I would honor, respect, and dwell in dependence on another ascetic or brahmin.
“Then it occurs to him: ‘With the abandoning of pleasure and pain … I should enter and dwell in the fourth jhāna ….’
Not injuring the fourth jhāna, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain … he enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna ….
“Then it occurs to him: ‘With the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, “space is infinite,” I should enter and dwell in the base of the infinity of space.’
Not injuring the base of the infinity of space, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms … he enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space.
“Then it occurs to him: ‘With the complete surmounting of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, I should enter and dwell in the cessation of perception and feeling.’
Not injuring the cessation of perception and feeling, with the complete surmounting of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, he enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling.
“Then it occurs to him: ‘With the complete surmounting of the base of nothingness, I should enter and dwell in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.’
Not injuring the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, with the complete surmounting of the base of nothingness, he enters and dwells in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
“Then it occurs to him: ‘With the complete surmounting of the base of the infinity of consciousness, “there is nothing,” I should enter and dwell in the base of nothingness.’
Not injuring the base of nothingness, with the complete surmounting of the base of the infinity of consciousness … he enters and dwells in the base of nothingness.
“Then it occurs to him: ‘With the complete surmounting of the base of the infinity of space, “consciousness is infinite,” I should enter and dwell in the base of the infinity of consciousness.’
Not injuring the base of the infinity of consciousness, with the complete surmounting of the base of the infinity of space … he enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of consciousness.
“Then it occurs to him: ‘With the fading away as well of rapture … I should enter and dwell in the third jhāna ….’
Not injuring the third jhāna, with the fading away as well of rapture he enters and dwells in the third jhāna ….
“Then King Yama questions, interrogates, and cross-examines him about the first divine messenger: ‘Good man, didn’t you see the first divine messenger that appeared among human beings?’
And he replies: ‘No, lord, I didn’t see him.’
“Then King Yama says to him: ‘But, good man, didn’t you ever see among human beings a man or a woman, eighty, ninety or a hundred years of age, frail, bent like a roof bracket, crooked, wobbling as they go along leaning on a stick, ailing, youth gone, with broken teeth, with grey and scanty hair or bald, with wrinkled skin and blotched limbs?’
And the man replies: ‘Yes, lord, I have seen this.’
“Then King Yama says to him: ‘But, good man, didn’t you ever see among human beings a man or a woman, one, two, or three days dead, the corpse bloated, livid, and festering?’
And he replies: ‘Yes, lord, I have seen this.’
“Then King Yama says to him: ‘But, good man, didn’t you ever see among human beings a man or a woman, sick, afflicted, gravely ill, lying in his own urine and excrement, having to be lifted up by some and put down by others?’
And he replies: ‘Yes, lord, I have seen this.’
“Then King Yama says to him: ‘Good man, didn’t it occur to you, an intelligent and mature person: “I too am subject to death, I am not exempt from death.
“Then King Yama says to him: ‘Good man, didn’t it occur to you, an intelligent and mature person: “I too am subject to illness, I am not exempt from illness.
“Then King Yama says to him: ‘Good man, didn’t it occur to you, an intelligent and mature person: “I too am subject to old age, I am not exempt from old age.
“Then King Yama says: ‘Through heedlessness, good man, you failed to do good by body, speech, or mind.
“Then King Yama says: ‘Through heedlessness, good man, you failed to do good by body, speech, or mind.
“Then King Yama says: ‘Through heedlessness, good man, you failed to do good by body, speech, or mind.
“Then let King Muṇḍa come at his own convenience.”
“Then listen and attend closely, Sujātā.
“Then listen, bhikkhus, and attend closely.
“Then listen, bhikkhus, and attend closely.
“Then listen, bhikkhus, and attend closely.
“Then listen, bhikkhus, and attend closely.
“Then listen, bhikkhus, and attend closely.
“Then listen, bhikkhus, and attend closely.
“Then listen, brahmin, and attend closely.
“Then listen, friend Bhaddaji, and attend closely.
“Then listen, friend Sāriputta, and attend closely.
“Then listen, friend Sāriputta, and attend closely.
“Then listen, friends, and attend closely.
“Then listen, friends, and attend closely.
“Then listen, Moggallāna, and attend closely.
“Then listen, Subhūti, and attend closely.
“Then Master Gotama and I are in complete and total agreement.”
“Then Sakka the ruler of the devas performed a feat of psychic potency such that a violent rainstorm came and twisted and uprooted the royal banyan tree.
“Then the chariotmaker rolled the wheel that took six days to finish.
“Then those five hundred lay followers approached Gavesī and said to him: ‘From today onward let Master Gavesī consider us to be celibate, living apart, abstaining from sexual intercourse, the common person’s practice.’
“Then those five hundred lay followers approached Gavesī and said to him: ‘From today onward let Master Gavesī consider us to be eating once a day, refraining from a night meal, abstaining from eating outside the proper time.’
“Then those five hundred lay followers approached Gavesī and said to him: ‘From today onward let Master Gavesī consider us to be fulfilling virtuous behavior.’
“Then those five hundred lay followers approached the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One Kassapa, and said to him: ‘Bhante, may we obtain the going forth and full ordination under the Blessed One?’
Then those five hundred lay followers obtained the going forth and full ordination under the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One Kassapa.
“Then, a bhikkhu might say thus: ‘I have developed and cultivated the liberation of the mind by altruistic joy, made it my vehicle and basis, carried it out, consolidated it, and properly undertaken it, yet discontent still obsesses my mind.’
He should be told: ‘Not so!
“Then, a bhikkhu might say thus: ‘I have developed and cultivated the liberation of the mind by compassion, made it my vehicle and basis, carried it out, consolidated it, and properly undertaken it, yet the thought of harming still obsesses my mind.’
He should be told: ‘Not so!
“Then, a bhikkhu might say thus: ‘I have developed and cultivated the liberation of the mind by equanimity, made it my vehicle and basis, carried it out, consolidated it, and properly undertaken it, yet lust still obsesses my mind.’
He should be told: ‘Not so!
“Then, a bhikkhu might say thus: ‘I have developed and cultivated the markless liberation of the mind, made it my vehicle and basis, carried it out, consolidated it, and properly undertaken it, yet my consciousness still follows after marks.’
He should be told: ‘Not so!
“Then, a bhikkhu might say: ‘I have discarded “I am,” and I do not regard “This I am,” yet the dart of doubt and bewilderment still obsesses my mind.’
He should be told: ‘Not so!
“Then, bhikkhus, I approached those ascetics and brahmins who hold such a doctrine and view as this: ‘Whatever this person experiences—whether pleasure, pain, or neither-pain-nor-pleasure—all that is caused by God’s creative activity,’ and I said to them: ‘Is it true that you venerable ones hold such a doctrine and view?’
When I ask them this, they affirm it.
“Then, bhikkhus, I approached those ascetics and brahmins who hold such a doctrine and view as this: ‘Whatever this person experiences—whether pleasure, pain, or neither-painnor-pleasure—all that occurs without a cause or condition,’ and I said to them: ‘Is it true that you venerable ones hold such a doctrine and view?’
When I ask them this, they affirm it.
“Then, bhikkhus, it occurred to me: ‘The pleasure and joy that arise in dependence on the world: this is the gratification in the world.
“Then, bhikkhus, it occurred to the teacher Sunetta: ‘It isn’t fitting that I should have exactly the same future destination as my disciples.
“Then, Brahmin Dhammika, a certain man ate as much as he wanted of the tree’s fruits, broke off a branch, and left.
“Then, Brahmin Dhammika, Sakka the ruler of the devas performed such a feat of psychic potency that a violent rainstorm came and turned upright the royal banyan tree and its roots were covered with bark.
“Then, Brahmin Dhammika, the deity that lived in the tree stood to one side, sad and miserable, weeping with a tearful face.
“Then, brahmin, when I am in such a state, if I walk back and forth, on that occasion my walking back and forth is celestial.
“Then, brahmin, when I am in such a state, if I walk back and forth, on that occasion my walking back and forth is divine.
“Then, brahmin, when I am in such a state, if I walk back and forth, on that occasion my walking back and forth is noble.
“Then, friends, secluded from sensual pleasures … some person enters and dwells in the first jhāna.
“Then, friends, through non-attention to all marks, some person enters and dwells in the markless mental concentration.
“Then, friends, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain … some person enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna….
“Then, friends, with the fading away as well of rapture, some person … enters and dwells in the third jhāna….
“Then, friends, with the subsiding of thought and examination, some person enters and dwells in the second jhāna….
“Then, Kālāmas, that noble disciple, who is thus devoid of longing, devoid of ill will, unconfused, clearly comprehending, ever mindful, dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness … with a mind imbued with compassion … with a mind imbued with altruistic joy … with a mind imbued with equanimity, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter.
“Then, Master Gotama, is the world not eternal?
“Then, Sāḷha, that noble disciple, who is thus devoid of longing, devoid of ill will, unconfused, clearly comprehending, ever mindful, dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness … with a mind imbued with compassion … with a mind imbued with altruistic joy … with a mind imbued with equanimity, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter.
“Then, when a bhikkhu is a body witness, those devas know him thus: ‘This venerable one is a body witness.
“Then, when a bhikkhu is liberated by wisdom, those devas know him thus: ‘This venerable one is liberated by wisdom.
“Then, when a bhikkhu is one attained to view … one liberated by faith … a Dhamma follower, those devas know him thus: ‘This venerable one is a Dhamma follower.
“Then, with the breakup of the body, after death, that poor, destitute, indigent person who engaged in misconduct by body, speech, and mind is bound in the prison of hell or the prison of the animal realm.
“Then, Ānanda, having encompassed his mind with my own mind, I understand some person thus: ‘Wholesome qualities and unwholesome qualities are found in this person.’
On a later occasion, having encompassed his mind with my own mind, I understand him thus: ‘This person does not have even a mere fraction of a hair’s tip of a bright quality.
“Then, Ānanda, having encompassed his mind with my own mind, I understand some person thus: ‘Wholesome qualities and unwholesome qualities are found in this person.’
On a later occasion, having encompassed his mind with my own mind, I understand him thus: ‘This person does not have even a mere fraction of a hair’s tip of an unwholesome quality.
“Then, Ānanda, having encompassed his mind with my own mind, I understand some person thus: ‘Wholesome qualities and unwholesome qualities are found in this person.’
On a later occasion, having encompassed his mind with my own mind, I understand him thus: ‘This person’s unwholesome qualities have disappeared, wholesome qualities are manifest, but he has an unwholesome root that has not been eradicated.
“Then, Ānanda, having encompassed his mind with my own mind, I understand some person thus: ‘Wholesome qualities and unwholesome qualities are found in this person.’
On a later occasion, having encompassed his mind with my own mind, I understand him thus: ‘This person’s unwholesome qualities have disappeared, wholesome qualities are manifest, but he has an unwholesome root that has not been eradicated.
“Then, Ānanda, in one person anger and conceit are found, and from time to time he engages in exchanges of words.
“Then, Ānanda, in one person anger and conceit are found, and from time to time he engages in exchanges of words.
“Then, Ānanda, in one person anger and conceit are found, and from time to time states of greed arise in him.
“Then, Ānanda, in one person anger and conceit are found, and from time to time states of greed arise in him.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to Gavesī: ‘I am the benefactor, the leader, and the guide of these five hundred lay followers, yet neither I myself nor these five hundred lay followers have fulfilled virtuous behavior.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to me: ‘By completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, let me enter and dwell in the cessation of perception and feeling.’
Yet my mind did not launch out upon the cessation of perception and feeling and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, though I saw it as peaceful.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to me: ‘By completely surmounting the base of nothingness, let me enter and dwell in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.’
Yet my mind did not launch out upon the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, though I saw it as peaceful.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to me: ‘By completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness, “there is nothing,” let me enter and dwell in the base of nothingness.’
Yet my mind did not launch out upon the base of nothingness and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, though I saw it as peaceful.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to me: ‘By completely surmounting the base of the infinity of space, “consciousness is infinite,” let me enter and dwell in the base of the infinity of consciousness.’
Yet my mind did not launch out upon the base of the infinity of consciousness and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, though I saw it as peaceful.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to me: ‘If, having seen the danger in forms, I would cultivate that, and if, having achieved the benefit in the base of the infinity of space, I would pursue it, it is then possible that my mind would launch out upon the base of the infinity of space and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, since I see it as peaceful.’
Then, sometime later, having seen the danger in forms, I cultivated that, and having achieved the benefit in the base of the infinity of space, I pursued it.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to me: ‘If, having seen the danger in rapture, I would cultivate that, and if, having achieved the benefit in the absence of rapture, I would pursue it, it is then possible that my mind would launch out upon the absence of rapture and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, since I see it as peaceful.’
Then, sometime later, having seen the danger in rapture, I cultivated that, and having achieved the benefit in the absence of rapture, I pursued it.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to me: ‘If, having seen the danger in sensual pleasures, I would cultivate that, and if, having achieved the benefit in renunciation, I would pursue it, it is then possible that my mind would launch out upon renunciation and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, since I see it as peaceful.’
Sometime later, having seen the danger in sensual pleasures, I cultivated that, and having achieved the benefit in renunciation, I pursued it.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to me: ‘If, having seen the danger in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, I would cultivate that, and if, having achieved the benefit in the cessation of perception and feeling, I would pursue it, it is then possible that my mind would launch out upon the cessation of perception and feeling and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, since I see it as peaceful.’
Then, sometime later, having seen the danger in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, I cultivated that; and having achieved the benefit in the cessation of perception and feeling, I pursued it.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to me: ‘If, having seen the danger in the base of nothingness, I would cultivate that, and if, having achieved the benefit in the base of neither-perceptionnor-non-perception, I would pursue it, it is then possible that my mind would launch out upon the base of neither-perceptionnor-non-perception and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, since I see it as peaceful.’
Then, sometime later, having seen the danger in the base of nothingness, I cultivated that, and having achieved the benefit in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, I pursued it.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to me: ‘If, having seen the danger in the base of the infinity of consciousness, I would cultivate that, and if, having achieved the benefit in the base of nothingness, I would pursue it, it is then possible that my mind would launch out upon the base of nothingness and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, since I see it as peaceful.’
Then, sometime later, having seen the danger in the base of the infinity of consciousness, I cultivated that, and having achieved the benefit in the base of nothingness, I pursued it.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to me: ‘If, having seen the danger in the base of the infinity of space, I would cultivate that, and if, having achieved the benefit in the base of the infinity of consciousness, I would pursue it, it is then possible that my mind would launch out upon the base of the infinity of consciousness and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, since I see it as peaceful.’
Then, sometime later, having seen the danger in the base of the infinity of space, I cultivated that, and having achieved the benefit in the base of the infinity of consciousness, I pursued it.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to me: ‘If, having seen the danger in the pleasure equanimity, I would cultivate that, and if, having achieved the benefit in the absence of pleasure and pain, I would pursue it, it is then possible that my mind would launch out upon the absence of pleasure and pain and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, since I see it as peaceful.’
Then, sometime later, having seen the danger in the pleasure equanimity, I cultivated that, and having achieved the benefit in the absence of pleasure and pain, I pursued it.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to me: ‘If, having seen the danger in thoughts, I would cultivate that, and if, having achieved the benefit in the absence of thought, I would pursue it, it is then possible that my mind would launch out upon the absence of thought and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, since I see it as peaceful.’
Then, sometime later, having seen the danger in thoughts, I cultivated that, and having achieved the benefit in the absence of thought, I pursued it.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to me: ‘With the abandoning of pleasure and pain … let me enter and dwell in the fourth jhāna ….’
Yet my mind did not launch out upon the absence of pleasure and pain and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, though I saw it as peaceful.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to me: ‘With the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, “space is infinite,” let me enter and dwell in the base of the infinity of space.’
Yet my mind did not launch out upon the base of the infinity of space and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, though I saw it as peaceful.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to me: ‘With the fading away as well of rapture … let me enter and dwell in the third jhāna ….’
Yet my mind did not launch out upon the absence of rapture and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, though I saw it as peaceful.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to me: ‘With the subsiding of thought and examination, let me enter and dwell in the second jhāna ….’
Yet my mind did not launch out upon the absence of thought and become placid, settled, and liberated in it, though I saw it as peaceful.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to the bhikkhu Gavesī: ‘I obtain at will, without trouble or difficulty, the unsurpassed bliss of liberation.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to the lay follower Gavesī: ‘I am the benefactor, leader, and guide of these five hundred lay followers.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to the lay follower Gavesī: ‘I am the benefactor, leader, and guide of these five hundred lay followers.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to the lay follower Gavesī: ‘I am the benefactor, leader, and guide of these five hundred lay followers.
“Then, Ānanda, it occurred to those five hundred lay followers: ‘Master Gavesī is our benefactor, leader, and guide.
“Then, Ānanda, there is one person who is immoral yet understands as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where that immorality of his ceases without remainder.
“Then, Ānanda, there is one person who is mild, a pleasant companion, with whom his fellow monks gladly dwell.
“Then, Ānanda, there is one person who is prone to anger and does not understand as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where that anger of his ceases without remainder.
“Then, Ānanda, there is one person who is prone to anger yet understands as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where that anger of his ceases without remainder.
“Then, Ānanda, there is one person who is restless and does not understand as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where that restlessness of his ceases without remainder.
“Then, Ānanda, there is one person who is restless yet understands as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where that restlessness of his ceases without remainder.
“Then, Ānanda, there is one person who is strongly prone to lust and does not understand as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where that lust of his ceases without remainder.
“Then, Ānanda, there is one person who is strongly prone to lust yet understands as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where that lust of his ceases without remainder.
“Then, Ānanda, there is one person who is virtuous and understands as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where that virtuous behavior of his ceases without remainder.
“Then, Ānanda, there is one person who is virtuous yet does not understand as it really is that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, where that virtuous behavior of his ceases without remainder.
“There are beings that are different in body but identical in perception, such as the devas of Brahmā’s company that are reborn through the first.
“There are beings that are different in body but identical in perception, such as the devas of Brahmā’s company that are reborn through the first.
“There are beings that are identical in body and identical in perception, such as the devas of refulgent glory.
“There are beings that are identical in body and identical in perception, such as the devas of refulgent glory.
“There are beings that are identical in body but different in perception, such as the devas of streaming radiance.
“There are beings that are identical in body but different in perception, such as the devas of streaming radiance.
“There are beings that are non-percipient, without experience, such as the devas that are non-percipient.
“There are beings that, by completely surmounting the base of nothingness, belong to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
“There are beings that, by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness, ‘there is nothing,’ belong to the base of nothingness.
“There are beings that, by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness, ‘there is nothing,’ belong to the base of nothingness.
“There are beings that, by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of space, ‘consciousness is infinite,’ belong to the base of the infinity of consciousness.
“There are beings that, by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of space, ‘consciousness is infinite,’ belong to the base of the infinity of consciousness.
“There are beings that, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, ‘space is infinite,’ belong to the base of the infinity of space.
“There are beings that, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, ‘space is infinite,’ belong to the base of the infinity of space.
“There are bhikkhus in this Saṅgha who dwell having attained the state of devas.
“There are some ascetics and brahmins who accept gold and silver and do not refrain from receiving gold and silver.
“There are some ascetics and brahmins who drink liquor and wine and do not refrain from drinking liquor and wine.
“There are some ascetics and brahmins who earn their living by wrong livelihood and do not refrain from wrong livelihood.
“There are some ascetics and brahmins who indulge in sexual intercourse and do not refrain from sexual intercourse.
“There are ten things, bhikkhus, that are nutriments for these ten things that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and rarely gained in the world.
“There are ten things, bhikkhus, that are obstructions to these ten things that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and rarely gained in the world.
“There are these five Tathāgata’s powers that the Tathāgata has, possessing which he claims the place of the chief bull, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets in motion the brahma wheel.
“There are things to be realized by the body; there are things to be realized by memory; there are things to be realized by the eye; there are things to be realized by wisdom.
“There are, Bhante, five subjects of recollection.
“There are, Bhante, persons devoid of faith who have gone forth from the household life into homelessness, not out of faith but intent on earning a living; they are crafty, hypocritical, deceptive, restless, puffed up, vain, talkative, rambling in their talk, unguarded over the doors of the senses, immoderate in eating, not intent on wakefulness, indifferent to the ascetic life, not keenly respectful of the training, luxurious and lax, leaders in backsliding, discarding the duty of solitude, lazy, devoid of energy, muddle-minded, lacking in clear comprehension, unconcentrated, with wandering minds, unwise, stupid.
“There are, bhikkhu, these six proper occasions for going to see an esteemed bhikkhu.
“There are, bhikkhus, beings that are different in body and different in perception, such as humans, some devas, and some in the lower world.
“There are, bhikkhus, beings that are different in body and different in perception, such as humans, some devas, and some in the lower world.
“There are, bhikkhus, some ascetics and brahmins who hold such a doctrine and view as this: ‘Whatever this person experiences—whether pleasure, pain, or neither-pain-nor-pleasure—all that is caused by what was done in the past.’
There are other ascetics and brahmins who hold such a doctrine and view as this: ‘Whatever this person experiences—whether pleasure, pain, or neither-pain-nor-pleasure—all that is caused by God’s creative activity.’
And there are still other ascetics and brahmins who hold such a doctrine and view as this: ‘Whatever this person experiences—whether pleasure, pain, or neither-pain-nor-pleasure—all that occurs without a cause or condition.’
“There are, bhikkhus, these eighteen currents of craving related to the internal and eighteen currents of craving related to the external.
“There are, bhikkhus, these five favorable occasions for striving.
“There are, bhikkhus, these five gifts, great gifts, primal, of long standing, traditional, ancient, unadulterated and never before adulterated, which are not being adulterated and will not be adulterated, not repudiated by wise ascetics and brahmins.
“There are, bhikkhus, these five objects of sensual pleasure: forms cognizable by the eye that are wished for, desired, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual pleasure, tantalizing; sounds cognizable by the ear … odors cognizable by the nose … tastes cognizable by the tongue … tactile objects cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired, agreeable, pleasing, connected with sensual pleasure, tantalizing.
“There are, bhikkhus, these five things that lead to the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma.
“There are, bhikkhus, these four illnesses incurred by a monk.
“There are, bhikkhus, these four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“There are, bhikkhus, these four noble quests.
“There are, bhikkhus, these four non-inversions of perception, non-inversions of mind, and non-inversions of view.
“There are, bhikkhus, these four qualities that make one an elder.
“There are, bhikkhus, these four severances of bonds.
“There are, bhikkhus, these four things in accord with the good Dhamma.
“There are, bhikkhus, these four things that lead to the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma.
“There are, bhikkhus, these four things that lead to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma.
“There are, bhikkhus, these four times.
“There are, bhikkhus, these seven accessories of concentration.
“There are, bhikkhus, these seven principles for the settlement of disciplinary issues, for settling and pacifying any disciplinary issues that may arise.”
“There are, bhikkhus, these six perceptions: perception of forms, perception of sounds, perception of odors, perception of tastes, perception of tactile objects, perception of mental phenomena.
“There are, bhikkhus, these ten principles of cordiality that create affection and respect and conduce to cohesiveness, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity.
“There are, bhikkhus, these ten topics of discussion.
“There are, bhikkhus, these three accomplishments.
“There are, bhikkhus, these three accomplishments.
“There are, bhikkhus, these three accomplishments.
“There are, bhikkhus, these three causes for the origination of kamma.
“There are, bhikkhus, these three causes for the origination of kamma.
“There are, bhikkhus, these three causes for the origination of kamma.
“There are, bhikkhus, these three feelings: pleasant feeling, painful feeling, and neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.
“There are, bhikkhus, these three kinds of intoxication.
“There are, bhikkhus, these three perils that separate mother and son.
“There are, bhikkhus, these three perils when mother and son reconnect that the uninstructed worldling speaks of as perils that separate mother and son.
“There are, bhikkhus, these three taints: the taint of sensuality, the taint of existence, and the taint of ignorance.
“There are, bhikkhus, these three wholesome roots.
“There are, brahmin, these three kinds of wonders.
“There are, Byagghapajja, these four things that lead to a clansman’s welfare and happiness in future lives.
“There are, Byagghapajja, these four things that lead to the welfare and happiness of a clansman in this present life.
“There are, friends, these five benefits in timely listening to the Dhamma, in timely discussion on the Dhamma.
“There are, friends, these five objects of sensual pleasure.
“There are, householder, four things that lead to obtaining those four things.
“There are, householder, two in the world worthy of offerings: the trainee and the one beyond training.
“There are, Mahānāma, these three kinds of teachers found existing in the world.
“There are, Master Gotama, those four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“There are, Master Gotama, those four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“There are, Moggallāna, these five kinds of teachers found in the world.
“There are, Māluṅkyāputta, these four sources of craving for a bhikkhu.
“There are, Potaliya, those four kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“There are, Upāli, ten reasons for suspending the Pātimokkha.
“There are, Upāli, ten roots of disputes.
“There are, Upāli, ten roots of disputes.
“There are, Visākhā, three kinds of uposathas.
“There are, Ānanda, these six benefits of listening to the Dhamma at the proper time and of examining the meaning at the proper time.
“There are, Ānanda, these six types of persons found existing in the world.
“There are, Ānanda, these ten Tathāgata’s powers that the Tathāgata has, possessing which he claims the place of the chief bull, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets in motion the brahma wheel.
“There are, Ānanda, these ten types of persons found existing in the world.
“There can be no guarantor, neither an ascetic … nor any one in the world, that what is subject to illness will not fall ill.
“There can be no guarantor, neither an ascetic … nor anyone in the world, that bad kamma—defiled, conducive to renewed existence, troublesome, ripening in suffering, leading to future birth, old age, and death—will not produce its result.
“There can be no guarantor, neither an ascetic … nor anyone in the world, that what is subject to death will not die.
“There can be no guarantor, neither an ascetic … nor anyone in the world, that what is subject to old age will not grow old.
“There can be, Ānanda.
“There can be, Ānanda.
“There can be, Ānanda.
“There can be, Ānanda.
“There comes a time when a great conflagration arises.
“There comes a time when a great conflagration arises.
“There comes a time when, after a long time, a fifth sun appears.
“There comes a time when, after a long time, a fourth sun appears.
“There comes a time when, after a long time, a second sun appears.
“There comes a time when, after a long time, a seventh sun appears.
“There comes a time when, after a long time, a sixth sun appears.
“There comes a time when, after a long time, a third sun appears.
“There comes a time, bhikkhus, when rain does not fall for many years, for many hundreds of years, for many thousands of years, for many hundreds of thousands of years.
“There comes a time, bhikkhus, when this world dissolves.
“There he was Brahmā, the Great Brahmā, the vanquisher, the unvanquished, the universal seer, the wielder of mastery.
“There is a path, bhikkhus, there is a way that leads to the abandoning and overcoming of these three perils when mother and son reconnect and of these three perils that separate mother and son.
“There is a path, friend, there is a way to the abandoning of lust, hatred, and delusion.”
“There is a way in which one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a consoler who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of consolation and thereby guides his disciples.’
“There is a way in which one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a proponent of deeds who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of deeds and thereby guides his disciples.’
“There is a way in which one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a repeller who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of repulsion and thereby guides his disciples.’
“There is a way in which one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a tormentor who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of torment and thereby guides his disciples.’
“There is a way in which one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is an abolitionist who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of abolition and thereby guides his disciples.’
“There is a way in which one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is an annihilationist who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of annihilation and thereby guides his disciples.’
“There is a way in which one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is retiring, one who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of retiring and thereby guides his disciples.’
“There is little contact with flies, mosquitoes, wind, the burning sun, and serpents.
“There is no entering upon the unwholesome so long as a sense of moral shame is securely settled in wholesome qualities.
“There is no entering upon the unwholesome so long as energy is securely settled in wholesome qualities.
“There is no entering upon the unwholesome so long as moral dread is securely settled in wholesome qualities.
“There is no entering upon the unwholesome so long as wisdom is securely settled in wholesome qualities.
“There is not just one hundred, two hundred, three hundred, four hundred, or five hundred bhikkhus, but even more who can perform these three wonders.”
“There is such a thing, brahmin.”
“There is that kind of wealth, Ugga; this I don’t deny.
“There is, bhikkhus, one unique opportune moment that is the right occasion for living the spiritual life.
“There is, brahmin, a town to the east called Sāvatthī.
“There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a proponent of non-doing.’
For I assert the non-doing of bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct; I assert the non-doing of the numerous kinds of bad unwholesome deeds.
“There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a repeller.’
For I am repelled by bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct; I am repelled by the acquisition of the numerous kinds of bad unwholesome qualities.
“There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a tormentor.’
For I assert that bad unwholesome qualities—bodily, verbal, and mental misconduct—are to be burned up.
“There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is an abolitionist.’
For I teach the Dhamma for the abolition of lust, hatred, and delusion; I teach the Dhamma for the abolition of the numerous kinds of bad unwholesome qualities.
“There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is an annihilationist.’
For I assert the annihilation of lust, hatred, and delusion; I assert the annihilation of the numerous kinds of bad unwholesome qualities.
“There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is not convivial.’
The Tathāgata has abandoned conviviality with forms, sounds, odors, tastes, and tactile objects; he has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
“There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is retiring.’
For I say that someone is retiring when he has abandoned the production of renewed existence, the future bed of the womb; when he has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
“There is, brahmin, a way in which one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama lacks taste.’
The Tathāgata has abandoned his taste for forms, sounds, odors, tastes, and tactile objects; he has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
“There is, householder.”
“There is, Sīha, a way in which one could rightly say of me: ‘The ascetic Gotama is a proponent of non-doing who teaches his Dhamma for the sake of non-doing and thereby guides his disciples.’
“There is, Ānanda, a fragrance that spreads with the wind, against the wind, and both with and against the wind.”
“There is.”
“There might arise in that householder or householder’s son bodily and mental fevers born of delusion, which would torment him so that he would sleep badly; but the Tathāgata has abandoned such delusion, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
“There might arise in that householder or householder’s son bodily and mental fevers born of lust, which would torment him so that he would sleep badly; but the Tathāgata has abandoned such lust, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
“There might be, Ānanda, alteration in the four great elements—the earth element, the water element, the fire element, and the air element—but there cannot be alteration in a noble disciple who possesses unwavering confidence in the Buddha.
“There might be, Ānanda, alteration in the four great elements—the earth element, the water element, the fire element, and the air element—but there cannot be alteration in a noble disciple who possesses unwavering confidence in the Dhamma … in the Saṅgha.
“There would be, Sumanā,” the Blessed One said.
“There would be, Sumanā,” the Blessed One said.
“There would be, Sumanā,” the Blessed One said.
“Therefore one desiring the good,aspiring for greatness,should deeply revere the good Dhamma,recollecting the Buddhas’ teaching.”
“Therefore … It is in this way that you should train yourselves.”
“Therefore … It is in this way that you should train yourselves.”
“Therefore … It is in this way that you should train yourselves.”
“Therefore … It is in this way that you should train yourselves.”
“Therefore … … It is in this way that you should train yourselves.”
“Therefore, Anuruddha, you should also spend the next rains residence right here among the Cetis in the eastern bamboo park.”
“Therefore, bhikkhu, train in the three trainings: the training in the higher virtuous behavior, the training in the higher mind, and the training in the higher wisdom.
“Therefore, bhikkhu, you should train yourself thus: ‘I will be guarded in the doors of the sense faculties, moderate in eating, and intent on wakefulness; I will have insight into wholesome qualities and will dwell intent on the endeavor to develop the aids to enlightenment in the earlier and later phases of the night.’
It is in such a way, bhikkhu, that you should train yourself.”
“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘Our minds will be strengthened in accordance with our going forth, and arisen bad unwholesome qualities will not obsess our minds.
“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will abandon crookedness, faults, and defects of the body; we will abandon crookedness, faults, and defects of speech; we will abandon crookedness, faults, and defects of the mind.’
It is in this way that you should train yourselves.”
“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will avoid the three qualities possessing which one is known as a fool, and we will undertake and observe the three qualities possessing which one is known as a wise person.’
It is in this way that you should train yourselves.”
“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will avoid the three qualities possessing which one is known as a fool, and we will undertake and observe the three qualities possessing which one is known as a wise person.’
It is in this way that you should train yourselves.” 
“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will avoid the three qualities possessing which one is known as a fool, and we will undertake and practice the three qualities possessing which one is known as a wise person.’
It is in this way that you should train yourselves.” 
“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will be guarded in the doors of the sense faculties, moderate in eating, and intent on wakefulness; we will have insight into wholesome qualities and will dwell intent on the endeavor to develop the aids to enlightenment in the earlier and later phases of the night.’
It is in such a way, bhikkhus, that you should train yourselves.”
“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will be like cloth from Kāsi, not like cloth made of bark fabric.’
It is in such a way that you should train yourselves.”
“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will dwell heedfully.
“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will dwell heedfully.
“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will dwell with a mind like that of a newly arrived bride.’
It is in such a way that you should train yourselves.” 
“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will guard the doors of the sense faculties, be moderate in eating, and be intent on wakefulness; we will have insight into wholesome qualities, and will dwell intent on the endeavor to develop the aids to enlightenment in the earlier and later phases of the night.’
Thus, bhikkhus, should you train yourselves.”
“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will have a keen desire to undertake the training in the higher virtuous behavior … the training in the higher mind … the training in the higher wisdom.’
It is in this way that you should train yourselves.”
“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will have a keen desire to undertake the training in the higher virtuous behavior, the training in the higher mind, and the training in the higher wisdom.’
It is in this way that you should train yourselves.”
“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will have a keen desire to undertake the training in the higher virtuous behavior; we will have a keen desire to undertake the training in the higher mind; we will have a keen desire to undertake the training in the higher wisdom.’
It is in this way that you should train yourselves.”
“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will have a keen desire to undertake the training in the higher virtuous behavior; we will have a keen desire to undertake the training in the higher mind; we will have a keen desire to undertake the training in the higher wisdom.’
It is in this way that you should train yourselves.”
“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will not have strong desires or undergo distress, and we will not be discontent with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick.
“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will overcome gain whenever it arises.
“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will possess the power of faith, a trainee’s power; the power of moral shame, a trainee’s power; the power of moral dread, a trainee’s power; the power of energy, a trainee’s power; the power of wisdom, a trainee’s power.’
Thus, bhikkhus, should you train yourselves.”
“Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘When we use robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and provisions for the sick, these services that provide for us will be of great fruit and benefit to them, and this going forth of ours will not be barren, but fruitful and fertile.’
Thus should you train yourselves.
“Therefore, friends, you should train yourselves thus: ‘Those of us who are Dhamma specialists will praise those bhikkhus who are meditators.’
Thus should you train yourselves.
“Therefore, friends, you should train yourselves thus: ‘Those of us who are meditators will praise those bhikkhus who are Dhamma specialists.’
Thus should you train yourselves.
“Therefore, Moggallāna, you should not attend to or cultivate the object that you were attending to when you became drowsy.
“Therefore, Moggallāna, you should train yourself thus: ‘We will not approach families with a head swollen with pride.’
It is in this way, Moggallāna, that you should train yourself.
“Therefore, Moggallāna, you should train yourself thus: ‘We will not engage in contentious talk.’
It is in this way that you should train yourself.
“Therefore, Sāriputta, you should train yourselves thus: ‘There will be no I-making, mine-making, and underlying tendency to conceit in regard to this conscious body; there will be no I-making, mine-making, and underlying tendency to conceit in regard to all external objects; and we will enter and dwell in that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, through which there is no more I-making, mine-making, and underlying tendency to conceit for one who enters and dwells in it.’
It is in this way, Sāriputta, that you should train yourselves.
“Therefore, Sāriputta, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will have peaceful sense faculties and peaceful minds.’
It is in such a way that you should train yourselves.
“Therefore, Ānanda, do not be judgmental regarding people.
“Therefore, Ānanda, do not be judgmental regarding people.
“Therefore, Ānanda, do not be judgmental regarding people.
“Therefore, Ānanda, do not be judgmental regarding people.
“These are five kinds of teachers found in the world.
“These are four subject to death that are frightened and terrified of death.
“These are the eight bases of overcoming.
“These are the eight causes and conditions for a powerful earthquake.” 
“These are the eight grounds for arousing energy.” 
“These are the eight grounds for laziness.
“These are the eight inopportune moments that are not the right occasions for living the spiritual life.
“These are the eight kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These are the eight kinds of persons found existing in the world.” 
“These are the eight kinds of wild colts and the eight faults of a horse.
“These are the feet of trees, bhikkhus, these are empty huts.
“These are the five benefits for a virtuous person because of his accomplishment in virtuous behavior.”
“These are the five benefits in timely listening to the Dhamma, in timely discussion on the Dhamma.”
“These are the five bondages of mind that he has not eradicated.
“These are the five bondages of the mind that he has well eradicated.
“These are the five dangers for an immoral person because of his deficiency in virtuous behavior.
“These are the five favorable occasions for striving.”
“These are the five kinds of mental barrenness that he has abandoned.
“These are the five kinds of mental barrenness that he has not abandoned.
“These are the five kinds of mental barrenness ….
“These are the five kinds of persons similar to warriors found among the bhikkhus.”
“These are the five kinds of persons similar to warriors found among the bhikkhus.”
“These are the five kinds of warriors found in the world.
“These are the five kinds of warriors found in the world.
“These are the five obstacles to rain that the forecasters do not know about, where their eyes do not tread.”
“These are the five perils and enmities that have been eliminated.
“These are the five perils and enmities that have been eliminated.
“These are the five streams of merit, streams of the wholesome, nutriments of happiness—heavenly, ripening in happiness, conducive to heaven—that lead to what is wished for, desired, and agreeable, to one’s welfare and happiness.
“These are the five things that lead to the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma.”
“These are the five things that lead to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma.
“These are the five things that lead to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma.
“These are the five trainee’s powers.
“These are the five unfavorable occasions for striving.
“These are the four benefits to be expected when one has followed the teachings by ear, recited them verbally, examined them with the mind, and penetrated them well by view.”
“These are the four defilements of ascetics and brahmins because of which some ascetics and brahmins do not shine, blaze, and radiate.”
“These are the four developments of concentration.
“These are the four Dhamma factors that are primal, of long standing, traditional, ancient, unadulterated and never before adulterated, which are not being adulterated and will not be adulterated, which are not repudiated by wise ascetics and brahmins.
“These are the four Dhamma factors, primal, of long standing, traditional, ancient, unadulterated and never before adulterated, which are not being adulterated and will not be adulterated, which are not repudiated by wise ascetics and brahmins.”
“These are the four foods that it readily gains, without trouble or difficulty.
“These are the four foremost kinds of confidence.”
“These are the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life, which he gains at will, without trouble or difficulty.
“These are the four kinds of excellent thoroughbred horses found existing in the world.
“These are the four kinds of exquisiteness.”
“These are the four kinds of happiness that a layperson who enjoys sensual pleasures may achieve, depending on time and occasion.”
“These are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These are the four pleasant visible dwellings that pertain to the higher mind, which he gains at will, without trouble or difficulty.
“These are the four postures.”
“These are the four purifications of offerings.”
“These are the four qualities that make one an elder.”
“These are the four streams of merit, streams of the wholesome, nutriments of happiness—heavenly, ripening in happiness, conducive to heaven—that lead to what is wished for, desired, and agreeable, to one’s welfare and happiness.
“These are the four streams of merit, streams of the wholesome, nutriments of happiness—heavenly, ripening in happiness, conducive to heaven—that lead to what is wished for, desired, and agreeable, to one’s welfare and happiness.”
“These are the four strivings.”
“These are the four things that are born.
“These are the four things that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and rarely gained in the world.
“These are the four things that lead to obtaining the four things that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and rarely gained in the world.
“These are the four things that lead to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma.
“These are the four things that lead to the welfare and happiness of a clansman in future lives.”
“These are the four things that lead to the welfare and happiness of a clansman in this very life.
“These are the four things that the Tathāgata does not need to hide.
“These are the four trifles, easily gained and blameless.
“These are the four ways of living together.”
“These are the nine abodes of beings.” 
“These are the seven things gratifying and advantageous to an enemy that come upon an angry man or woman.”
“These are the six Tathāgata’s powers that the Tathāgata has, possessing which he claims the place of the chief bull, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets in motion the brahma wheel.
“These are the six types of persons found existing in the world.
“These are the ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones abide in the past, present, or future.”
“These are the ten cases of wearing away.”
“These are the ten things to be ejected.”
“These are the ten types of persons found existing in the world.
“These are the three causes for the origination of kamma.
“These are the three causes for the origination of kamma.
“These are the three causes for the origination of kamma.
“These are the three causes for the origination of kamma.”
“These are the three causes for the origination of kamma.” 
“These are the three failures.
“These are the three fires that should be abandoned and avoided and should not be cultivated.
“These are the three kinds of persons found existing in the world.
“These are the three kinds of persons found existing in the world.” 
“These are the three kinds of solitude that wanderers of other sects prescribe.
“These are the three perils that separate mother and son of which the uninstructed worldling speaks.
“These are the three perils that separate mother and son.
“These are the three perils when mother and son reconnect that the uninstructed worldling speak of as perils that separate mother and son.
“These are the three things about which the Tathāgata is irreproachable.
“These five objects of sensual pleasure, brahmins, are called ‘the world’ in the Noble One’s discipline.
“These five things lead to the decline of a bhikkhu who is a trainee.
“These five things lead to the non-decline of a bhikkhu who is a trainee.”
“These five things, householder, that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and rarely gained in the world, I say, are not obtained by means of prayers or aspirations.
“These Licchavi youths, Bhante, are violent, rough, and brash.
“These nine persons, passing away with a residue remaining, are freed from hell, the animal realm, and the sphere of afflicted spirits; freed from the plane of misery, the bad destination, the lower world.
“These nine persons, Sāriputta, passing away with a residue remaining, are freed from hell, the animal realm, and the sphere of afflicted spirits; freed from the plane of misery, the bad destination, the lower world.
“These seven perceptions, bhikkhus, when developed and cultivated, are of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as their consummation.” 
“These three persons are helpful to another person.
“These three qualities do not lead to one’s own affliction, the affliction of others, and the affliction of both.
“These, Abhaya, are the three kinds of wearing-away purification that have been properly expounded by the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One who knows and sees, for the purification of beings, for the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, for the passing away of pain and dejection, for the achievement of the method, for the realization of nibbāna.”
“These, Bhante, are eight astounding and amazing qualities found in me.
“These, Bhante, are eight astounding and amazing qualities found in me.
“These, Bhante, are the eight astounding and amazing qualities that the asuras see in the great ocean because of which they take delight in it.
“These, Bhante, are the five subjects of recollection.”
“These, bhikkhu, are the six proper occasions for going to see an esteemed bhikkhu.” 
“These, bhikkhus, are the eight accomplishments.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the eight assemblies.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the eight astounding and amazing qualities that the asuras see in the great ocean because of which they take delight in it.
“These, bhikkhus, are the eight astounding and amazing qualities that the bhikkhus see in this Dhamma and discipline because of which they take delight in it.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the eight bases of overcoming.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the eight causes and conditions that lead to obtaining the wisdom fundamental to the spiritual life when it has not been obtained and to its increase, maturation, and fulfillment by development after it has been obtained.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the eight emancipations.” 
“These, bhikkhus, are the eight kinds of persons who are like wild colts and the eight faults of a person.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the eight kinds of rebirth on account of giving.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the eight streams of merit, streams of the wholesome, nutriments of happiness—heavenly, ripening in happiness, conducive to heaven—that lead to what is wished for, desired, and agreeable, to one’s welfare and happiness.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the five ancient brahmin practices that are now seen among dogs but not among brahmins.” 
“These, bhikkhus, are the five bases of liberation, by means of which, if a bhikkhu dwells heedful, ardent, and resolute, his unliberated mind is liberated, his undestroyed taints are utterly destroyed, and he reaches the as-yet-unreached unsurpassed security from bondage.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the five bondages of the mind ….
“These, bhikkhus, are the five bondages of the mind.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the five dangers in a person who is like a charnel ground.” 
“These, bhikkhus, are the five dangers in basing one’s confidence on a person.” 
“These, bhikkhus, are the five factors that assist striving.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the five future perils as yet unarisen that will arise in the future.
“These, bhikkhus, are the five future perils as yet unarisen that will arise in the future.
“These, bhikkhus, are the five future perils considering which it is enough for a bhikkhu to dwell heedful, ardent, and resolute for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the five future perils considering which it is enough for a forest bhikkhu to dwell heedful, ardent, and resolute for the attainment of the as-yet-unattained, for the achievement of the as-yet-unachieved, for the realization of the as-yet-unrealized.” 
“These, bhikkhus, are the five kinds of mental barrenness.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the five kinds of persons found in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the five kinds of wealth.” 
“These, bhikkhus, are the five powers.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the five powers.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the five situations that are unobtainable by an ascetic or a brahmin, by a deva, Māra, or Brahmā, or by anyone in the world.
“These, bhikkhus, are the five things that lead to the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma.” 
“These, bhikkhus, are the four astounding and amazing things about a wheel-turning monarch.
“These, bhikkhus, are the four astounding and amazing things about Ānanda.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four astounding and amazing things about Ānanda.” 
“These, bhikkhus, are the four astounding and amazing things that become manifest with the manifestation of a Tathāgata, an Arahant, a Perfectly Enlightened One.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four astounding and amazing things that become manifest with the manifestation of a Tathāgata, an Arahant, a Perfectly Enlightened One.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four cases of deeds.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four facts that can be known from four facts.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four great references.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four incalculable divisions of an eon.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of Dhamma speakers.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of excellent thoroughbred persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of kamma proclaimed by me after I realized them for myself with direct knowledge.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of kamma proclaimed by me after I realized them for myself with direct knowledge.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of kamma proclaimed by me after I realized them for myself with direct knowledge.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of kamma proclaimed by me after I realized them for myself with direct knowledge.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of kamma proclaimed by me after I realized them for myself with direct knowledge.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.” 
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.” 
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons found existing in the world.” 
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons similar to bulls found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons similar to clouds found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons similar to clouds found existing in the world.” 
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons similar to mangoes found existing in the world.” mangoes,” which is apparently why Be assigns the title.
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons similar to mice found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons similar to pools of water found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons similar to pots found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons similar to trees found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of persons similar to vipers found existing in the world.” 
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of self-confidence that the Tathāgata has, possessing which he claims the place of the chief bull, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets in motion the wheel of Brahmā.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four kinds of striving.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four modes of practice.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four modes of practice.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four modes of practice.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four modes of practice.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four modes of practice.” 
“These, bhikkhus, are the four noble lineages, primal, of long standing, traditional, ancient, unadulterated and never before adulterated, which are not being adulterated and will not be adulterated, which are not repudiated by wise ascetics and brahmins.
“These, bhikkhus, are the four perils of offenses.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four perils to be expected for a clansman who has gone forth out of faith from the household life into homelessness in this Dhamma and discipline.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four perils.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four powers.
“These, bhikkhus, are the four things that lead to the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four things that the Tathāgata does not have to hide and the three things about which he is irreproachable.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four things to be realized.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the four things.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the seven destinations of persons and attainment of nibbāna through non-clinging.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the seven destinations of persons.
“These, bhikkhus, are the seven kinds of persons found existing in the world similar to those in water.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the seven kinds of persons who are worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the seven kinds of persons who are worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the seven kinds of wealth.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the seven powers.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the seven stations for consciousness.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the six elements of escape.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the six principles of cordiality that create affection and respect and conduce to cohesiveness, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the six principles of cordiality.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the six roots of dispute.” 
“These, bhikkhus, are the six subjects of recollection.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the six unsurpassed things.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the ten dangers in entering the king’s inner palace.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the ten grounds for praise.” 
“These, bhikkhus, are the ten principles of cordiality that create affection and respect and conduce to cohesiveness, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity.” 
“These, bhikkhus, are the ten Tathāgata’s powers that the Tathāgata has, possessing which he claims the place of the chief bull, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets in motion the brahma wheel.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the ten things that one who has gone forth should often reflect upon.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three accomplishments.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three accomplishments.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three accomplishments.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three authorities.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three bases of meritorious activity.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three causes for the origination of kamma.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three failures.
“These, bhikkhus, are the three failures.
“These, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of assemblies.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of excellent thoroughbred persons.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of persons found existing among the bhikkhus.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of persons found existing in the world.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of persons found existing in the world.” 
“These, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of persons who are like good horses.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of persons who are like wild colts.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three kinds of sagacity.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three purities.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three purities.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three sectarian tenets which, when questioned, interrogated, and cross-examined by the wise, and taken to their conclusion, will eventuate in non-doing.
“These, bhikkhus, are the three trainings.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three trainings.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three ways of practice.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the three ways of practice.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the two faults.
“These, bhikkhus, are the two kinds of assemblies.
“These, bhikkhus, are the two kinds of assemblies.
“These, bhikkhus, are the two kinds of assemblies.
“These, bhikkhus, are the two kinds of assemblies.
“These, bhikkhus, are the two kinds of assemblies.
“These, bhikkhus, are the two kinds of assemblies.
“These, bhikkhus, are the two kinds of assemblies.
“These, bhikkhus, are the two kinds of assemblies.
“These, bhikkhus, are the two kinds of assemblies.
“These, bhikkhus, are the two kinds of assemblies.
“These, bhikkhus, are the two powers.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the two powers.”
“These, bhikkhus, are the two powers.”
“These, bhikkhus, were the five great dreams that appeared to the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One, before his enlightenment, while he was just a bodhisatta, not fully enlightened.” 
“These, brahmin, are four subject to death that are not frightened and terrified of death.”
“These, brahmin, are the three fires that should be properly and happily maintained, having honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated them.
“These, brahmin, are the three kinds of wonders.
“These, Byagghapajjas, are the four factors of striving for purity that the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One, knowing and seeing, has rightly expounded for the purification of beings, for the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, for the passing away of pain and dejection, for the achievement of the method, for the realization of nibbāna.”
“These, Cunda, are the ten courses of unwholesome kamma.
“These, Cunda, are the ten courses of wholesome kamma.
“These, friends, are the five ways of removing resentment by means of which a bhikkhu can entirely remove resentment toward whomever it has arisen.”
“These, householder, are the five utilizations of wealth.
“These, householder, are the four worthy deeds that the noble disciple undertakes with wealth acquired by energetic striving, amassed by the strength of his arms, earned by the sweat of his brow, righteous wealth righteously gained.
“These, householder, are the ten kinds of persons who enjoy sensual pleasures found existing in the world.
“These, Pahārāda, are the eight astounding and amazing qualities that the bhikkhus see in this Dhamma and discipline because of which they take delight in it.”
“These, wanderers, are the four brahmin truths that I have proclaimed, having realized them for myself with direct knowledge.”
“These, Ānanda, are the six benefits of listening to the Dhamma at the proper time and of examining the meaning at the proper time.”
“These, Ānanda, are the six classes.”
“These, Ānanda, are the ten Tathāgata’s powers that the Tathāgata has, possessing which he claims the place of the chief bull, roars his lion’s roar in the assemblies, and sets in motion the brahma wheel.” 
“They are headed by concentration.”
“They are not sensual pleasures, the pretty things in the world:a person’s sensual pleasure is lustful intention;the pretty things remain just as they are in the world,but the wise remove the desire for them.
“They are, Sāriputta, the devas of the base of neither perception-nor-non-perception.”
“They converge upon feeling.”
“They culminate in the deathless.”
“They originate from contact.”
“They should be encouraged, settled, and established in a correct perspective thus: ‘Come, friends, hold right view and have a correct perspective.’ 
“They should be encouraged, settled, and established in bodily seclusion thus: ‘Come, friends, be forest dwellers.
“They should be encouraged, settled, and established in limiting their speech thus: ‘Come, friends, do not talk much.
“They should be encouraged, settled, and established in the restraint of the Pātimokkha thus: ‘Come, friends, be virtuous; dwell restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
“They should be encouraged, settled, and established in the restraint of the sense faculties thus: ‘Come, friends, guard the doors of the sense faculties; take mindfulness as protector; be mindful and alert, possessing a protected mind, a mind under the protection of mindfulness.’
“They should be encouraged, settled, and established in unwavering confidence in the Buddha thus: ‘The Blessed One is … … teacher of devas and humans, the Enlightened One, the Blessed One.’
“They should be encouraged, settled, and established in unwavering confidence in the Dhamma thus: ‘The Dhamma is well expounded by the Blessed One, directly visible … … to be personally experienced by the wise.’
“They should be encouraged, settled, and established in unwavering confidence in the Saṅgha thus: ‘The Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is practicing the good way … … the unsurpassed field of merit for the world.’
“This assembly, Ānanda, is impure.”
“This bhikkhu has no psychic potency or spiritual might: ‘Let my mind be liberated from the taints by non-clinging today, or tomorrow, or the day after tomorrow!’ Rather, as this bhikkhu trains in the higher virtuous behavior, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom, there comes an occasion when his mind is liberated from the taints by non-clinging.
“This bhikkhu should reflect thus: ‘Do I have any bad unwholesome qualities that have not been abandoned which might become an obstacle for me if I were to die this day?’
If, upon review, the bhikkhu knows: ‘I have bad unwholesome qualities that I have not yet abandoned, which might become an obstacle for me if I were to die this day,’ then he should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to abandon those bad unwholesome qualities.
“This bhikkhu should reflect thus: ‘Do I have any bad unwholesome qualities that have not been abandoned which might become an obstacle for me if I were to die this day?’
If, upon review, the bhikkhu knows: ‘I have bad unwholesome qualities that I have not yet abandoned, which might become an obstacle for me if I were to die this day,’ then he should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to abandon those bad unwholesome qualities.
“This bhikkhu should reflect thus: ‘Do I have any bad unwholesome qualities that have not been abandoned, which might become an obstacle for me if I were to die tonight?’
If, upon review, the bhikkhu knows: ‘I have bad unwholesome qualities that have not been abandoned, which might become an obstacle for me if I were to die tonight,’ then he should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to abandon those bad unwholesome qualities.
“This bhikkhu should reflect thus: ‘Do I have any bad unwholesome qualities that have not been abandoned, which might become an obstacle for me if I were to die tonight?’
If, upon review, the bhikkhu knows: ‘I have bad unwholesome qualities that have not been abandoned, which might become an obstacle for me if I were to die tonight,’ then he should put forth extraordinary desire, effort, zeal, enthusiasm, indefatigability, mindfulness, and clear comprehension to abandon those bad unwholesome qualities.
“This bhikkhu, Bhante, is virtuous … he trains in them.
“This body, sister, has originated from sexual intercourse, but in regard to sexual intercourse the Blessed One has declared the demolition of the bridge.”
“This Dhamma is for one with few desires, not for one with strong desires.
“This farmer has no psychic potency or spiritual might: ‘Let my crops start growing today!
“This is called a bhikkhu who neither picks up nor pushes away, who does not fume, does not blaze, and does not ruminate.
“This is called mindfulness of breathing.
“This is how disengagement comes about.
“This is how Nanda is intent on wakefulness: During the day, while walking back and forth and sitting, Nanda purifies his mind of obstructive qualities.
“This is how Nanda observes moderation in eating: Here, reflecting carefully, Nanda consumes food neither for amusement nor for intoxication nor for the sake of physical beauty and attractiveness, but only for the support and maintenance of this body, for avoiding harm, and for assisting the spiritual life, considering: ‘Thus I shall terminate the old feeling and not arouse a new feeling, and I shall be healthy and blameless and dwell at ease.’
That is how Nanda observes moderation in eating.
“This is how union comes about.
“This is Nanda’s mindfulness and clear comprehension: Nanda knows feelings as they arise, as they remain present, as they disappear; he knows perceptions as they arise, as they remain present, as they disappear; he knows thoughts as they arise, as they remain present, as they disappear.
“This is not the case, friend.”
“This is not the case, friend.”
“This is not the case, friend.”
“This is not the case, friend.”
“This is one thing properly expounded by the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One who knows and sees, such that if a bhikkhu dwells in it diligent, ardent, and resolute, his unliberated mind is liberated, his undestroyed taints are destroyed, and he attains the as-yet-unattained unsurpassed security from bondage.
“This is the first true knowledge attained by him.
“This is the noble method that he has clearly seen and thoroughly penetrated with wisdom.
“This is the second true knowledge attained by him.
“This is the third true knowledge attained by him.
“This is the time for it, Blessed One!
“This is the time for it, Blessed One!
“This is what Brahmā Sahampati said.
“This is what wanderers of other sects prescribe as solitude with respect to almsfood: they eat greens, millet, forest rice, hide-parings, moss, rice bran, the scum of rice, sesamum flour, grass, or cow dung.
“This is what wanderers of other sects prescribe as solitude with respect to lodgings: a forest, the foot of a tree, a charnel ground, remote lodgings in forests and jungle groves, the open air, a heap of straw, a chaff-house.
“This meditator, delighting in consolation,is inwardly well concentrated.When walking, the nāga is concentrated;when standing, the nāga is concentrated.
“This noble disciple reflects thus: ‘I am not the only one who is subject to death, not exempt from death.
“This noble disciple reflects thus: ‘I am not the only one who is subject to illness, not exempt from illness.
“This noble disciple reflects thus: ‘I am not the only one who is subject to old age, not exempt from old age.
“This noble disciple reflects thus: ‘I am not the only one who is the owner of one’s kamma, the heir of one’s kamma; who has kamma as one’s origin, kamma as one’s relative, kamma as one’s resort; who will be the heir of whatever kamma, good or bad, that one does.
“This noble disciple reflects thus: ‘I am not the only one who must be parted and separated from everyone and everything dear and agreeable.
“This noble disciple, Bhante, whose mind is in this way without enmity, without ill will, undefiled, and pure, has won these four assurances in this very life.
“This noble disciple, bhikkhus, who is thus devoid of longing, devoid of ill will, unconfused, clearly comprehending, ever mindful, dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with compassion … with a mind imbued with altruistic joy … with a mind imbued with equanimity, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter.
“This noble disciple, bhikkhus, who is thus devoid of longing, devoid of ill will, unconfused, clearly comprehending, ever mindful, dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter.
“This noble disciple, Kālāmas, whose mind is in this way without enmity, without ill will, undefiled, and pure, has won four assurances in this very life.
“This noble disciple, Kālāmas, whose mind is in this way without enmity, without ill will, undefiled, and pure, has won these four assurances in this very life.”
“This noble disciple, Visākhā, reflects thus: ‘As long as they live the arahants abandon and abstain from the destruction of life; with the rod and weapon laid aside, conscientious and kindly, they dwell compassionate toward all living beings.
“This noble eightfold path is the way leading to the cessation of feelings, namely, right view … right concentration.
“This noble eightfold path is the way leading to the cessation of kamma, namely, right view … right concentration.
“This noble eightfold path is the way leading to the cessation of perceptions, namely, right view … right concentration.
“This noble eightfold path is the way leading to the cessation of sensual pleasures, namely, right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
“This noble eightfold path is the way leading to the cessation of suffering, namely, right view … right concentration.
“This noble eightfold path is the way leading to the cessation of the taints, namely, right view … right concentration.
“This simile, which conveys the meaning,was taught by the wise.Great nāgas will know the nāgathat was taught by the nāga.
“This verse, bhikkhus, was badly recited by Sakka, ruler of the devas, not well recited.
“This verse, bhikkhus, was badly recited by Sakka, ruler of the devas, not well recited.
“This verse, bhikkhus, was well recited by Brahmā Sanaṃkumāra, not badly recited; it was well spoken, not badly spoken; it is beneficial, not harmful, and I approved of it.
“This was said, friend, by the young deva Pañcālacaṇḍa:
“This was what Brahmā Sahampati said.
“This, Bhante, is my daughter-in-law Sujātā, who is rich and has been brought here from a rich family.
“This, Bhante, was the conversation I was having with Vappa the Sakyan when the Blessed One arrived.”
“This, bhikkhus, is that craving—the ensnarer, streaming, widespread, and sticky—by which this world has been smothered and enveloped, and by which it has become a tangled skein, a knotted ball of thread, a mass of reeds and rushes, so that it does not pass beyond the plane of misery, the bad destination, the lower world, saṃsāra.”
“This, bhikkhus, is that exposition of the Dhamma on creeping.” 
“This, bhikkhus, is that noble emetic that always succeeds and never fails, and in dependence on which beings subject to birth are freed from birth; beings subject to old age are freed from old age; beings subject to death are freed from death; beings subject to sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish are freed from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish.”
“This, bhikkhus, is that noble purgative that always succeeds and never fails, and in dependence on which beings subject to birth are freed from birth; beings subject to old age are freed from old age; beings subject to death are freed from death; beings subject to sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish are freed from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish.”
“This, bhikkhus, is that noble washing that leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.
“This, bhikkhus, is that penetrative exposition of the Dhamma.”
“This, bhikkhus, is the attainment of the nine progressive dwellings.”
“This, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma exposition on union and disengagement.”
“This, bhikkhus, is the distinction, the disparity, the difference between an instructed noble disciple and an uninstructed worldling.”
“This, bhikkhus, is the goal of talk, the goal of discussion, the goal of a supporting condition, the goal of lending an ear, that is, the emancipation of the mind through non-clinging.” 
“This, bhikkhus, is what wanderers of other sects prescribe as solitude with respect to robes: they wear hemp robes, robes of hemp-mixed cloth, shroud robes, rag-robes; robes made from tree bark, antelope hides, strips of antelope hide; robes of kusa grass, bark fabric, or wood-shavings fabric; a blanket made of head hair or of animal wool, a covering made of owls’ wings.
“This, brahmin, is the one thing which, when developed and cultivated, can accomplish both kinds of good, the good pertaining to the present life and the good pertaining to the future life.”
“This, brahmin, is the reason why sometimes even those hymns that have been recited over a long period do not recur to the mind, let alone those that have not been so recited.
“This, brahmin, was the first true knowledge attained by me in the first watch of the night.
“This, brahmin, was the second true knowledge attained by me in the middle watch of the night.
“This, brahmin, was the third true knowledge attained by me in the last watch of the night.
“This, householder, is a subject that we should see the Blessed One about.
“This, Mallikā, is why some women here are ugly, ill formed, and unsightly; poor, destitute, and indigent; and lacking in influence.
“This, Sāriputta, is the reason some beings here who pass away from that group are returners, who come back to this state of being, while others are non-returners, who do not come back to this state of being.”
“This, Sāriputta, is the reason why a gift given by someone here is not of great fruit and benefit.
“This, Sāriputta, is the reason why for one person here the business he undertakes ends in failure, for another the same kind of business does not fulfill his expectations, for still another the same kind of business fulfills his expectations, and for still another the same kind of business surpasses his expectations.”
“This, too, is one thing properly expounded by the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One who knows and sees, such that if a bhikkhu dwells in it diligent, ardent, and resolute, his unliberated mind is liberated, his undestroyed taints are destroyed, and he attains the as-yet-unattained unsurpassed security from bondage.”
“This, too, is one thing properly expounded by the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One who knows and sees, such that if a bhikkhu dwells in it … he attains the as-yet-unattained unsurpassed security from bondage.
“This, too, is one thing properly expounded by the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One who knows and sees, such that if a bhikkhu dwells in it … he attains the as-yet-unattained unsurpassed security from bondage.
“This, too, is one thing properly expounded by the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One who knows and sees, such that if a bhikkhu dwells in it … he attains the as-yet-unattained unsurpassed security from bondage.
“This, too, is one thing properly expounded by the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One who knows and sees, such that if a bhikkhu dwells in it … he attains the as-yet-unattained unsurpassed security from bondage.
“This, Ānanda, is the fragrance that spreads with the wind, against the wind, and both with and against the wind.”
“Those deities then said: ‘In the past, Bhante, when we were human beings, monks approached our homes.
“Those deities—ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, and even sixty in number—stand in an area even as small as the tip of an awl yet do not encroach upon one another.
“Those practicing for the abandoning of lust, hatred, and delusion are practicing the good way in the world.
“Those who fall back on absence of cause and condition as the essential truth have no desire what should be done and what should not be done, nor do they make an effort in this respect.
“Those who fall back on God’s creative activity as the essential truth have no desire what should be done and what should not be done, nor do they make an effort in this respect.
“Those who fall back on past deeds as the essential truth have no desire what should be done and what should not be done, nor do they make an effort in this respect.
“Those who have abandoned lust, hatred, and delusion, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them so that they are no more subject to future arising are fortunate ones in the world.
“Those, Vaccha, who say: ‘The ascetic Gotama says: “Alms should be given only to me … only what is given to my disciples is very fruitful, not what is given to the disciples of others,”’ do not state what has been said by me but misrepresent me with what is untrue and contrary to fact.
“Through direct knowledge, Uttiya, I teach the Dhamma to my disciples for the purification of beings, for the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, for the passing away of pain and dejection, for the achievement of the method, for the realization of nibbāna.”
“Through these three kinds of knowledgeone is a triple-knowledge brahmin.I call him a triple-knowledge master,not the other who utters incantations.
“Through these three kinds of knowledgeone is a triple-knowledge brahmin.I call him a triple-knowledge master,not the other who utters incantations.
“Thus associating with good persons, becoming full, fills up hearing the good Dhamma.
“Thus associating with good persons, becoming full, fills up hearing the good Dhamma….
“Thus he is incomplete with respect to that factor.
“Thus he is incomplete with respect to that factor.
“Thus he is incomplete with respect to that factor.
“Thus in this very life he dwells hungerless, quenched and cooled, experiencing bliss, having himself become divine.”
“Thus not associating with good persons, becoming full, fills up not hearing the good Dhamma.
“Thus not associating with good persons, becoming full, fills up not hearing the good Dhamma….
“Thus the donor has three factors, and the recipients have three factors.
“Thus there are eighteen currents of craving related to the internal, and eighteen currents of craving related to the external.
“Thus when it was said: ‘Bhikkhus, this spiritual life is lived with the training as its benefit, with wisdom as its supervisor, with liberation as its core, and with mindfulness as its authority,’ it is because of this that this was said.”
“Thus, Bhaddiya, when we said: ‘Come, Bhaddiya, do not go by oral tradition … But when you know for yourself: “These things are wholesome; these things are blameless; these things are praised by the wise; these things, if accepted and undertaken, lead to welfare and happiness,” then you should live in accordance with them,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“Thus, Bhaddiya, when we said: ‘Come, Bhaddiya, do not go by oral tradition … … But when you know for yourself: “These things are unwholesome; these things are blameworthy; these things are censured by the wise; these things, if undertaken and practiced, lead to harm and suffering,” then you should abandon them,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“Thus, bhikkhu, I have taught the one absorbed in learning, the one absorbed in communication, the one absorbed in recitation, the one absorbed in thought, and the one who dwells in the Dhamma.
“Thus, bhikkhu, I have taught the one absorbed in learning, the one absorbed in communication, the one absorbed in recitation, the one absorbed in thought, and the one who dwells in the Dhamma.
“Thus, bhikkhus, being ever stable among things seen, heard, sensed, and cognized, the Tathāgata is a stable one.
“Thus, bhikkhus, concentration is the path; lack of concentration is the wrong path.” 
“Thus, bhikkhus, for a human being with a life span of a hundred years, I have reckoned his life span, the limit of his life span, the number of seasons, years, months, and fortnights; the number of his nights, days, and meals, and the obstacles to meals.
“Thus, bhikkhus, greed is a source and origin of kamma; hatred is a source and origin of kamma; delusion is a source and origin of kamma.
“Thus, bhikkhus, one stage flows into the next stage, one stage fills up the next stage, for going from the near shore to the far shore.”
“Thus, bhikkhus, one stage flows into the next stage, one stage fills up the next stage, for going from the near shore to the far shore.”
“Thus, bhikkhus, one who cultivates fully reaches fulfillment; one who cultivates in part succeeds in part.
“Thus, bhikkhus, one who cultivates in part succeeds in part; one who cultivates fully reaches fulfillment.
“Thus, bhikkhus, one who cultivates in part succeeds in part; one who cultivates fully reaches fulfillment.
“Thus, bhikkhus, since you are repelled, humiliated, and disgusted with a celestial life span, celestial beauty, celestial happiness, celestial glory, and celestial authority, so much more then should you be repelled, humiliated, and disgusted with bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct.”
“Thus, bhikkhus, when persons of these four types are exhorted and instructed by the example of the fifth type of person, they gradually attain the destruction of the taints.”
“Thus, bhikkhus, – the knowledge and vision of liberation is the purpose and benefit of disenchantment and dispassion; disenchantment and dispassion are the purpose and benefit of the knowledge and vision of things as they really are; the knowledge and vision of things as they really are is the purpose and benefit of concentration; concentration is the purpose and benefit of pleasure; pleasure is the purpose and benefit of tranquility; tranquility is the purpose and benefit of rapture; rapture is the purpose and benefit of joy; joy is the purpose and benefit of non-regret; and non-regret is the purpose and benefit of virtuous behavior.
“Thus, bhikkhus, – the knowledge and vision of liberation is the purpose and benefit of dispassion; dispassion is the purpose and benefit of disenchantment; disenchantment is the purpose and benefit of the knowledge and vision of things as they really are; the knowledge and vision of things as they really are is the purpose and benefit of concentration; concentration is the purpose and benefit of pleasure; pleasure is the purpose and benefit of tranquility; tranquility is the purpose and benefit of rapture; rapture is the purpose and benefit of joy; joy is the purpose and benefit of non-regret; and non-regret is the purpose and benefit of virtuous behavior.
“Thus, friends, when it was said by the Blessed One in ‘The Great Questions’: ‘A question about one, a concise statement about one, an explanation of one….
“Thus, householder, you have declared: ‘The Dhamma of those who teach the abandoning of lust, hatred, and delusion is well expounded.’
You have declared: ‘Those practicing for the abandoning of lust, hatred, and delusion are practicing the good way in the world.’
And you have declared: ‘Those who have abandoned lust, hatred, and delusion, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them so that they are no more subject to future arising are fortunate ones in the world.’”
“Thus, Kālāmas, when we said: ‘Come, Kālāmas, do not go by oral tradition … But when you know for yourselves: “These things are unwholesome; these things are blameworthy; these things are censured by the wise; these things, if undertaken and practiced, lead to harm and suffering,” then you should abandon them,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“Thus, Kālāmas, when we said: ‘Come, Kālāmas, do not go by oral tradition … But when you know for yourselves: “These things are wholesome; these things are blameless; these things are praised by the wise; these things, if accepted and undertaken, lead to welfare and happiness,” then you should live in accordance with them,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“Thus, sister, it is in such a way that the meaning should be seen in detail of this statement that the Blessed One spoke in brief in ‘The Maidens’ Questions’:
“Thus, Sāḷha, when we said: ‘Come, Sāḷha, do not go by oral tradition … But when you know for yourselves: “These things are unwholesome; these things are blameworthy; these things are censured by the wise; these things, if undertaken and practiced, lead to harm and suffering,” then you should abandon them,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“Thus, Sāḷha, when we said: ‘Come, Sāḷha, do not go by oral tradition … But when you know for yourselves: “These things are wholesome; these things are blameless; these things are praised by the wise; these things, if accepted and undertaken, lead to welfare and happiness,” then you should live in accordance with them,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“Thus, Ānanda, for beings hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving, kamma is the field, consciousness the seed, and craving the moisture for their consciousness to be established in a middling realm.
“Thus, Ānanda, for beings hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving, kamma is the field, consciousness the seed, and craving the moisture for their consciousness to be established in a superior realm.
“Thus, Ānanda, for beings hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving, kamma is the field, consciousness the seed, and craving the moisture for their consciousness to be established in an inferior realm.
“Thus, Ānanda, for beings hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving, kamma is the field, consciousness the seed, and craving the moisture for their volition and aspiration to be established in a middling realm.
“Thus, Ānanda, for beings hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving, kamma is the field, consciousness the seed, and craving the moisture for their volition and aspiration to be established in a superior realm.
“Thus, Ānanda, for beings hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving, kamma is the field, consciousness the seed, and craving the moisture for their volition and aspiration to be established in an inferior realm.
“Thus, Ānanda, those five hundred bhikkhus headed by Gavesī, striving in successively higher and more sublime ways, realized the unsurpassed bliss of liberation.
“Thus, Ānanda, – the purpose and benefit of wholesome virtuous behavior is non-regret; the purpose and benefit of non-regret is joy; the purpose and benefit of joy is rapture; the purpose and benefit of rapture is tranquility; the purpose and benefit of tranquility is pleasure; the purpose and benefit of pleasure is concentration; the purpose and benefit of concentration is the knowledge and vision of things as they really are; the purpose and benefit of the knowledge and vision of things as they really are is disenchantment and dispassion; and the purpose and benefit of disenchantment and dispassion is the knowledge and vision of liberation.
“Thus, Ānanda, – the purpose and benefit of wholesome virtuous behavior is non-regret; the purpose and benefit of non-regret is joy; the purpose and benefit of joy is rapture; the purpose and benefit of rapture is tranquility; the purpose and benefit of tranquility is pleasure; the purpose and benefit of pleasure is concentration; the purpose and benefit of concentration is the knowledge and vision of things as they really are; the purpose and benefit of the knowledge and vision of things as they really are is disenchantment; the purpose and benefit of disenchantment is dispassion; and the purpose and benefit of dispassion is the knowledge and vision of liberation.
“To conceal his bodily misconduct, he nurtures an evil desire.
“To conceal his verbal misconduct … To conceal his mental misconduct, he nurtures an evil desire.
“To the extent, friend, that there is a speculative view, a basis for views, a foundation for views, obsession with views, the origination of views, and the uprooting of views, I know and see this.
“To what extent is it of great fruit and benefit?
“To what extent is it of great fruit and benefit?
“To whatever extent there are beings, whether footless or with two feet, four feet, or many feet, whether having form or formless, whether percipient or non-percipient, or neither percipient nor non-percipient, the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One is declared the foremost among them.
“To whatever extent there are phenomena conditioned or unconditioned, dispassion is declared the foremost among them, that is, the crushing of pride, the removal of thirst, the uprooting of attachment, the termination of the round, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, nibbāna.
“To whatever extent there are phenomena that are conditioned, the noble eightfold path is declared the foremost among them.
“To whatever extent there are Saṅghas or groups, the Saṅgha of the Tathāgata’s disciples is declared the foremost among them, that is, the four pairs of persons, the eight types of individuals—this Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, the unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“To whatever extent, Cundī, there are phenomena that are conditioned, the noble eightfold path is declared the foremost among them.
“To whatever extent, Cundī, there are phenomena whether conditioned or unconditioned, dispassion is declared the foremost among them, that is, the crushing of pride, the removal of thirst, the uprooting of attachment, the termination of the round, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, nibbāna.
“To whatever extent, Cundī, there are Saṅghas or groups, the Saṅgha of the Tathāgata’s disciples is declared the foremost among them, that is, the four pairs of persons, the eight types of individuals—this Saṅgha of the Blessed One’s disciples is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, the unsurpassed field of merit for the world.
“To whatever extent, Cundī, there is virtuous behavior, the virtuous behavior loved by the noble ones is declared the foremost among them, that is, when it is unbroken, flawless, unblemished, unblotched, freeing, praised by the wise, ungrasped, leading to concentration.
“Today, Bhante, I am observing the uposatha.”
“Today, Master Gotama, is the brahmin clan’s paccorohaṇī festival.”
“Today, Master Gotama, is the brahmin clan’s paccorohaṇī festival.” 
“Training in the higher virtuous behavior,I rejoiced in hearing the good Dhamma.Hatthaka has gone to Avihanot having gotten enough of these three things.”
“Truly, bhikkhus, it is impossible that a bhikkhu who considers any conditioned phenomenon to be pleasurable will possess a conviction in conformity.
“Truly, brahmins, you are old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, come to the last stage, a hundred and twenty years of age, but you have not done anything good and wholesome, nor have you made a shelter for yourselves.
“Truly, brahmins, you are old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, come to the last stage, a hundred and twenty years of age, but you have not done anything good and wholesome, nor have you made a shelter for yourselves.
“Truly, friends, it is impossible for a bhikkhu who has not abandoned these ten things to achieve growth, progress, and maturity in this Dhamma and discipline.
“Truly, friends, it is impossible for a bhikkhu who has not abandoned these ten things to achieve growth, progress, and maturity in this Dhamma and discipline.
“Truly, friends, it is impossible for a bhikkhu who has not abandoned these ten things to achieve growth, progress, and maturity in this Dhamma and discipline.
“Two persons who examine the meaning of the teachings that have been retained in mind: one has understood the meaning and the Dhamma and then practices in accordance with the Dhamma; one has not understood the meaning and the Dhamma and does not practice in accordance with the Dhamma.
“Two persons who have understood the meaning and the Dhamma and then practice in accordance with the Dhamma: one is practicing for his own welfare but not for the welfare of others; one is practicing for his own welfare and for the welfare of others.
“Two persons who listen to the Dhamma with eager ears: one, having heard the Dhamma, retains it in mind; one, having heard the Dhamma, does not retain it in mind.
“Two persons who want to hear the good Dhamma: one listens to the Dhamma with eager ears; one does not listen to the Dhamma with eager ears.
“Two persons who want to see the noble ones: one wants to hear the good Dhamma; one does not want to hear the good Dhamma.
“Two persons who, having heard the Dhamma, retain it in mind: one examines the meaning of the teachings that have been retained in mind; one does not examine the meaning of the teachings that have been retained in mind.
“Two persons: one wants to see the noble ones; one does not want to see the noble ones.
“Upaka, I have proclaimed: ‘That which is unwholesome should be abandoned.’
The Tathāgata has unlimited Dhamma teachings about this, with unlimited words and phrases,: ‘For such and such reasons, that which is unwholesome should be abandoned.’
“Upaka, I have proclaimed: ‘That which is wholesome should be developed.’
The Tathāgata has unlimited Dhamma teachings about this, with unlimited words and phrases,: ‘For such and such reasons, that which is wholesome should be developed.’”
“Upaka, I have proclaimed: ‘This is unwholesome.’
The Tathāgata has unlimited Dhamma teachings about this, with unlimited words and phrases,: ‘For such and such reasons, this is unwholesome.’
“Upaka, I have proclaimed: ‘This is wholesome.’
The Tathāgata has unlimited Dhamma teachings about this, with unlimited words and phrases,: ‘For such and such reasons, this is wholesome.’
“Upavāṇa, how many qualities should an elder bhikkhu possess to be pleasing and agreeable to his fellow monks and to be respected and esteemed by them?”
“Upon what do they converge?”
“Upāli, those things which you might know thus: ‘These things do not lead exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna,’ you should definitely recognize: ‘This is not the Dhamma; this is not the discipline; this is not the teaching of the Teacher.’
But those things which you might know thus: ‘These things lead exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna,’ you should definitely recognize: ‘This is the Dhamma; this is the discipline; this is the teaching of the Teacher.’” 
“Uttiya, I also have not declared: ‘The Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death; this alone is true, anything else is wrong.’”
“Uttiya, I also have not declared: ‘The world is not eternal; this alone is true, anything else is wrong.’”
“Uttiya, I have not declared: ‘The world is eternal; this alone is true, anything else is wrong.’”
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Venerable sir,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Virtuous behavior, concentration, wisdom,and unsurpassed liberation:these things the illustrious Gotamaunderstood by himself.
“Virtuous behavior, concentration, wisdom,and unsurpassed liberation:these things the illustrious Gotamaunderstood by himself.
“Visākhā, observed complete in eight factors, the uposatha is of great fruit and benefit, extraordinarily brilliant and pervasive.
“Visākhā, possessing eight qualities, a woman, with the breakup of the body, after death, is reborn in companionship with the agreeable-bodied deities.
“Visākhā, possessing four qualities, a woman is heading for victory in the present world and her life in this world succeeds.
“Vāseṭṭha, observed complete in eight factors, the uposatha is of great fruit and benefit, extraordinarily brilliant and pervasive.
“Wanderers, if anyone should say about me: ‘Though you claim to be perfectly enlightened, you are not fully enlightened about these things,’ I might question him closely about this matter, interrogate him, and cross-examine him.
“Wanderers, there are these four brahmin truths that I have proclaimed, having realized them for myself with direct knowledge.
“We are brahmins, Master Gotama, old, aged … a hundred and twenty years of age.
“We are brahmins, Master Gotama, old, aged … a hundred and twenty years of age.
“We do not know these five kinds of brahmins, Master Gotama.
“We do, friend.” 
“We have seen this, Bhante, and we have heard of it, and we will hear of it.”
“We have seen this, Bhante, and we have heard of it, and we will hear of it.”
“We have seen this, Bhante, and we have heard of it, and we will hear of it.”
“We have seen this, Bhante, and we have heard of it, and we will hear of it.”
“We have seen this, Bhante, and we have heard of it, and we will hear of it.”
“We would come from far away, friend, to learn the meaning of this statement from the Venerable Sāriputta.
“We would come from far away, friend, to learn the meaning of this statement from the Venerable Sāriputta.
“Wealth, brahmin, is the aim of brahmins; their quest is for wisdom; the Vedic hymns are their support; they are intent on sacrifice; and their final goal is the brahmā world.”
“Wealth, brahmin, is the aim of householders; their quest is for wisdom; their craft is their support; they are intent on work; and their final goal is to complete their work.”
“Wealth, brahmin, is the aim of khattiyas; their quest is for wisdom; their support is power; they are intent on territory; and their final goal is sovereignty.”
“Well then, bhikkhus, listen and attend closely.
“Well then, brahmin, I will question you about this matter.
“Well then, brahmin, I will question you in turn about this.
“Well then, brahmin, listen and attend closely.
“Well then, brahmin, listen and attend closely.
“Well then, brahmin, listen and attend closely.
“Well then, brahmin, listen and attend closely.
“Well then, brahmin, listen and attend closely.
“Well then, brahmin, listen and attend closely.
“Well then, Cunda, listen and attend closely.
“Well then, friend Piyaka, get the finest carriages harnessed!”
“Well then, friends, listen and attend closely.
“Well then, friends, listen and attend closely.
“Well then, Gotamī, you wait right here while I ask the Blessed One to grant women the going forth.”
“Well then, householder, I will question you about this matter.
“Well then, prince, I will question you about this matter.
“Well then, ruler of the devas, I will give you a simile; even by means of a simile, some intelligent people understand the meaning of what has been said.
“Well then, Sīha, I will question you about this matter.
“Well then, Sīvaka, I will question you in turn about this.
“Well then, Ānanda, distinguish.”
“Well then, Ānanda, listen and attend closely.
“Well then, Ānanda, listen and attend closely.
“Well-behaved fellow monks speak thus about him: ‘This venerable one acts in such a way, behaves in such a way.’
This, I say, is his being reproved.
“What are the five bondages of the mind that he has not eradicated?
“What are the five bondages of the mind that he has well eradicated?
“What are the five kinds of mental barrenness that he has not abandoned?
“What are the five perils and enmities that have been eliminated?
“What are the five perils and enmities that have been eliminated?
“What are the five training rules by which his actions are restrained?
“What are the four pleasant visible dwellings that pertain to the higher mind, which he gains at will, without trouble or difficulty?
“What are the four things that the Tathāgata does not need to hide?
“What are the seven good qualities that he possesses?
“What are the seven kinds of appurtenances of a fortress with which it is well provided?
“What are the three factors of the donor?
“What are the three factors of the recipients?
“What are the three things they have abandoned?
“What are the three things they have abandoned?
“What are the three things they have cultivated?
“What are the three things they have cultivated?
“What are you saying, Udāyī, you foolish and incompetent fellow?
“What discussion were you engaged in just now as you were sitting together here?
“What do you think of the ascetic Gotama’s competence in wisdom?
“What do you think, Bhaddiya?
“What do you think, Bhaddiya?
“What do you think, Bhaddiya?
“What do you think, Bhaddiya?
“What do you think, Bhaddiya?
“What do you think, Bhaddiya?
“What do you think, bhikkhus, if a youth were to develop the liberation of mind by loving-kindness from his childhood on, would he do a bad deed?”
“What do you think, bhikkhus, if a youth would develop the liberation of mind by equanimity, from his childhood on, would he do a bad deed?”
“What do you think, bhikkhus?
“What do you think, bhikkhus?
“What do you think, bhikkhus?
“What do you think, bhikkhus?
“What do you think, bhikkhus?
“What do you think, bhikkhus?
“What do you think, bhikkhus?
“What do you think, bhikkhus?
“What do you think, bhikkhus?
“What do you think, bhikkhus?
“What do you think, bhikkhus?
“What do you think, bhikkhus?
“What do you think, Brahmin Dhammika?
“What do you think, brahmin?
“What do you think, brahmin?
“What do you think, brahmin?
“What do you think, brahmin?
“What do you think, brahmin?
“What do you think, brahmin?
“What do you think, brahmin?
“What do you think, householder?
“What do you think, householder?
“What do you think, householder?
“What do you think, Kālāmas?
“What do you think, Kālāmas?
“What do you think, Kālāmas?
“What do you think, Kālāmas?
“What do you think, Kālāmas?
“What do you think, Kālāmas?
“What do you think, Kālāmas?
“What do you think, Kālāmas?
“What do you think, prince?
“What do you think, prince?
“What do you think, Sakyans?
“What do you think, Sakyans?
“What do you think, Sakyans?
“What do you think, Sakyans?
“What do you think, Soṇa?
“What do you think, Sāḷha, is there delusion?”
“What do you think, Sāḷha, is there greed?”
“What do you think, Sāḷha, is there hatred?” “Yes, Bhante.”
“What do you think, Sāḷha, is there non-delusion?”
“What do you think, Sāḷha, is there non-greed?”
“What do you think, Sāḷha, is there non-hatred?”
“What do you think, Sāḷha?
“What do you think, Sāḷha?
“What do you think, Sīha?
“What do you think, Sīha?
“What do you think, Sīha?
“What do you think, Sīha?
“What do you think, Sīha?
“What do you think, Sīha?
“What do you think, Sīha?
“What do you think, Sīvaka?
“What do you think, Vappa?
“What do you think, Vappa?
“What do you think, Vappa?
“What do you think, Vappa?
“What exercises authority over them?”
“What five factors has he abandoned?
“What grounds do you see, Master Piṅgiyānī, for placing such full confidence in the ascetic Gotama?”
“What is the cause and reason why, Bhante, the good Dhamma continues long after a Tathāgata has attained final nibbāna?”
“What is the cause and reason why, Bhante, the good Dhamma continues long after a Tathāgata has attained final nibbāna?”
“What is the cause and reason why, Bhante, the good Dhamma continues long after a Tathāgata has attained final nibbāna?”
“What is the cause and reason why, Bhante, the good Dhamma does not continue long after a Tathāgata has attained final nibbāna?”
“What is the cause and reason why, Bhante, the good Dhamma does not continue long after a Tathāgata has attained final nibbāna?”
“What is the cause and reason why, Bhante, the good Dhamma does not continue long after a Tathāgata has attained final nibbāna?”
“What is their core?”
“What is their supervisor?”
“What is this bhikkhu’s name, Subhūti?”
“What is your name?
“What kind of person can the sheep merchant or butcher execute, imprison, fine, or otherwise penalize for stealing a sheep?
“What kind of person can’t the sheep merchant or butcher execute, imprison, fine, or otherwise penalize for stealing a sheep?
“What kind of person creates exactly the same trifling bad kamma and yet it is to be experienced in this very life, without even a slight being seen, much less abundant?
“What kind of person creates exactly the same trifling bad kamma and yet it is to be experienced in this very life, without even a slight being seen, much less an abundant?
“What kind of person creates exactly the same trifling bad kamma and yet it is to be experienced in this very life, without even a slight being seen, much less an abundant?
“What kind of person creates exactly the same trifling bad kamma and yet it is to be experienced in this very life, without even a slight being seen, much less an abundant?
“What kind of person creates trifling bad kamma that leads him to hell?
“What kind of person creates trifling bad kamma that leads him to hell?
“What kind of person creates trifling bad kamma that leads him to hell?
“What kind of person creates trifling bad kamma that leads him to hell?
“What kind of person has abandoned the lower fetters and the fetters for obtaining rebirth but not the fetters for obtaining existence?
“What kind of person has abandoned the lower fetters, but not the fetters for obtaining rebirth or the fetters for obtaining existence?
“What kind of person has abandoned the lower fetters, the fetters for obtaining rebirth, and the fetters for obtaining existence?
“What kind of person has not abandoned the lower fetters, the fetters for obtaining rebirth, or the fetters for obtaining existence?
“What kind of person is imprisoned for half a kahāpaṇa, a kahāpaṇa, or a hundred kahāpaṇas?
“What kind of person is not imprisoned for half a kahāpaṇa, a kahāpaṇa, or a hundred kahāpaṇas?
“What three things?
“What, bhikkhus, are the four great references?
“What, bhikkhus, is the near shore, and what is the far shore?
“What, bhikkhus, is the near shore, and what is the far shore?
“What, friend, has the Blessed One spoken of as confinement and what as the achievement of an opening in the midst of confinement?”
“What, friends, is the first end?
“Whatever animals hear the lion roaring for the most part are filled with fear, a sense of urgency, and terror.
“Whatever bhikkhu or bhikkhunī, friends, has declared the attainment of arahantship in my presence has done so by these four paths or by a certain one among them.”
“Whatever delusion occurs is unwholesome.
“Whatever greed occurs, bhikkhus, is unwholesome.
“Whatever hatred occurs is unwholesome.
“Whatever high and luxurious kinds of bedding there are—that is, a sofa, a divan, a long-haired coverlet, a coverlet of diverse colors, a white coverlet, a woolen coverlet with floral designs, a quilt of cotton wool, a woolen coverlet ornamented with animal figures, a woolen coverlet with double borders, a woolen coverlet with a single border, a silken sheet studded with gems, a sheet made with silk threads and studded with gems, a dancer’s rug, an elephant rug, a horse rug, a chariot rug, a rug of antelope hide, a spread made of the hide of the kadali-deer, with a canopy above and red bolsters at both ends—Master Gotama surely gains them at will, without trouble or difficulty.”
“Whatever non-delusion occurs is wholesome.
“Whatever non-greed occurs, bhikkhus, is wholesome.
“Whatever non-hatred occurs is wholesome.
“When a bhikkhu exercises ardor for the non-arising of unarisen bad unwholesome qualities, for the arising of unarisen wholesome qualities, and for enduring arisen bodily feelings that are painful, racking, sharp, piercing, harrowing, disagreeable, sapping one’s vitality, he is called a bhikkhu who is ardent, alert, and mindful in order to make a complete end of suffering.”
“When a bhikkhu has abandoned the fetter of compliance, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising; when he has abandoned the fetter of aversion … the fetter of views … the fetter of doubt … the fetter of conceit … the fetter of lust for existence … the fetter of ignorance, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising, he is then called a bhikkhu who has cut off craving, stripped off the fetter, and by completely breaking through conceit, has made an end of suffering.”
“When a bhikkhu has abandoned the underlying tendency to sensual lust, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising; when he has abandoned the underlying tendency to aversion … the underlying tendency to views … the underlying tendency to doubt … the underlying tendency to conceit … the underlying tendency to lust for existence … the underlying tendency to ignorance, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising, he is then called a bhikkhu without underlying tendencies, one who has cut off craving, stripped off the fetter, and by completely breaking through conceit, has made an end of suffering.” 
“When a bhikkhu has abandoned these five factors and possesses these five factors, he is called, in this Dhamma and discipline, a supreme person who is consummate and complete in living the spiritual life.”
“When a bhikkhu has abandoned these three kinds of craving and these three kinds of conceit, he is called a bhikkhu who has cut off craving, stripped off the fetter, and by completely breaking through conceit, has made an end of suffering.”
“When a bhikkhu has abandoned these three kinds of existence and has completed these three trainings, he is called a bhikkhu who has cut off craving, stripped off the fetter, and by completely breaking through conceit, he has made an end of suffering.” 
“When a bhikkhu has good friends, good companions, good comrades, it can be expected of him that he will arouse energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities … not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
“When a bhikkhu has good friends, good companions, good comrades, it can be expected of him that he will arouse energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities … not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
“When a bhikkhu has good friends, good companions, good comrades, it can be expected of him that he will be wise, possessing the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
“When a bhikkhu has good friends, good companions, good comrades, it can be expected of him that he will be wise, possessing the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
“When a bhikkhu has good friends, good companions, good comrades, it can be expected of him that he will get to hear at will, without trouble or difficulty, talk concerned with the austere life that is conducive to opening up the heart, that is, talk on fewness of desires … on the knowledge and vision of liberation.
“When a bhikkhu has good friends, good companions, good comrades, it can be expected of him that he will get to hear at will, without trouble or difficulty, talk concerned with the austere life that is conducive to opening up the heart, that is, talk on fewness of desires … on the knowledge and vision of liberation.
“When a bhikkhu is endowed with faith and approaches him, but he does not attend on him … When he attends on him but does not ask questions … When he asks questions but does not listen to the Dhamma with eager ears … When he listens to the Dhamma with eager ears, but having heard it, does not retain it in mind … When, having heard it, he retains it in mind but does not examine the meaning of the teachings that have been retained in mind … When he examines the meaning of the teachings that have been retained in mind but does not understand the meaning and the Dhamma and then practice in accordance with the Dhamma, the Tathāgata is not disposed to teach the Dhamma.
“When a bhikkhu is liberated in mind and liberated by wisdom, he is called a bhikkhu who has removed the crossbar, filled in the moat, pulled out the pillar, a boltless one, a noble one with banner lowered, with burden dropped, detached.
“When a bhikkhu is liberated in mind and liberated by wisdom, he is called a bhikkhu who has removed the crossbar, filled in the moat, pulled out the pillar, a boltless one, a noble one with banner lowered, with burden dropped, detached.
“When a bhikkhu is virtuous, one who has abandoned immorality and remains secluded from it; when he is one of right view, who has abandoned wrong view and remains secluded from it; when he is one whose taints are destroyed, who has abandoned the taints and remains secluded from them, he is then called a bhikkhu who has attained the foremost, attained the core, one who is pure and established in the core.
“When a bhikkhu often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of death, his mind shrinks away from attachment to life, turns back from it, rolls away from it, and is not drawn toward it, and either equanimity or revulsion becomes settled in him.
“When a bhikkhu often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of impermanence, his mind shrinks away from gain, honor, and praise, turns back from them, rolls away from them, and is not drawn toward them, and either equanimity or revulsion becomes settled in him.
“When a bhikkhu often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of non-delight in the entire world, his mind shrinks away from the world’s beautiful things, turns back from them, rolls away from them, and is not drawn toward them, and either equanimity or revulsion becomes settled in him.
“When a bhikkhu often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of non-self in what is suffering, his mind is devoid of I-making, mine-making, and conceit regarding this conscious body and all external objects; it has transcended discrimination and is peaceful and well liberated.
“When a bhikkhu often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of suffering in the impermanent, a keen perception of danger becomes settled in him toward indolence, laziness, slackness, heedlessness, lack of effort, and unreflectiveness, just as toward a murderer with drawn sword.
“When a bhikkhu often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of the repulsiveness of food, his mind shrinks away from craving for tastes, turns back from it, rolls away from it, and is not drawn toward it, and either equanimity or revulsion becomes settled in him.
“When a bhikkhu often dwells with a mind accustomed to the perception of unattractiveness, his mind shrinks away from sexual intercourse, turns back from it, rolls away from it, and is not drawn toward it, and either equanimity or revulsion becomes settled in him.
“When a bhikkhu who possesses these five factors resorts to and uses a lodging that possesses these five factors, in no long time, with the destruction of the taints, he might realize for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwell in it.”
“When a bhikkhunī has observed the rains, she should invite correction before both Saṅghas in regard to three things: in regard to anything seen, heard, or suspected.
“When a bhikkhu’s mind has been strengthened in accordance with his going forth, and arisen bad unwholesome qualities do not obsess his mind—when his mind has been strengthened in the perception of impermanence … when his mind has been strengthened in the perception of cessation—one of two fruits is to be expected for him: either final knowledge in this very life or, if there is a residue remaining, the state of non-returning.”
“When a noble disciple has shaved off his hair and beard, put on ochre robes, and gone forth from the household life into homelessness, on that occasion he is one whose foliage has fallen, like the Tāvatiṃsa devas’ pāricchattaka coral tree.
“When a noble disciple possesses these four powers, he has transcended these five fears.”
“When a person has taken birthan axe is born inside his mouthwith which the fool cuts himselfby uttering wrongful speech.
“When beings are seen to act with force because the element of force exists, this is the self-initiative of beings; this is the initiative taken by others.
“When beings are seen to be possessed of strength because the element of strength exists, this is the self-initiative of beings; this is the initiative taken by others.
“When beings are seen to continue because the element of continuation exists, this is the self-initiative of beings; this is the initiative taken by others.
“When beings are seen to exert themselves in activity because the element of exertion exists, this is the self-initiative of beings; this is the initiative taken by others.
“When beings are seen to instigate activity because the element of instigation exists, this is the self-initiative of beings; this is the initiative taken by others.
“When beings are seen to persist in activity because the element of persistence exists, this is the self-initiative of beings; this is the initiative taken by others.
“When elder bhikkhus are engaged in a discussion pertaining to the Dhamma, don’t repeatedly interrupt their talk but wait until their discussion is finished.”
“When he accepts a robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick, this is not of great fruit and benefit for those.
“When he accepts a robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and provisions for the sick, this is of great fruit and benefit for those.
“When he feels a feeling terminating with the body, he understands: ‘I feel a feeling terminating with the body.’
When he feels a feeling terminating with life, he understands: ‘I feel a feeling terminating with life.’
He understands: ‘With the breakup of the body, following the exhaustion of life, all that is felt, not being delighted in, will become cool right here.’
“When he has gone to the forest, to the foot of a tree, or to an empty dwelling, bad unwholesome thoughts accompanied by remorse assail him.
“When he knows and sees thus, his mind is liberated from the taint of sensuality, from the taint of existence, and from the taint of ignorance.
“When he knows and sees thus, his mind is liberated from the taint of sensuality, from the taint of existence, and from the taint of ignorance.
“When he meditates in such a way, the devas along with Indra, Brahmā, and Pajāpati worship the excellent thoroughbred person from afar, saying:
“When his mind has been concentrated in this way, purified, cleansed, unblemished, rid of defilement, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs it to the knowledge of the recollection of past abodes … … to the knowledge of the passing away and rebirth of beings … … to the knowledge of the destruction of the taints.
“When his mind is thus concentrated, purified, cleansed, unblemished, rid of defilement, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs it to the knowledge of the destruction of the taints.
“When his mind is thus concentrated, purified, cleansed, unblemished, rid of defilement, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs it to the knowledge of the destruction of the taints.
“When his mind is thus concentrated, purified, cleansed, unblemished, rid of defilement, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs it to the knowledge of the destruction of the taints.
“When his mind is thus concentrated, purified, cleansed, unblemished, rid of defilement, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs it to the knowledge of the passing away and rebirth of beings.
“When his mind is thus concentrated, purified, cleansed, unblemished, rid of defilement, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, he directs it to the knowledge of the recollection of past abodes.
“When I asked you: ‘How is it, Master Gotama, is the world eternal?
“When I asked you: ‘How is it, sir, do you hold the view: “The world is eternal; this alone is true, anything else is wrong”?’ you said: ‘I don’t hold such a view, friend.’
But when I asked you: ‘Then do you hold the view: “The world is not eternal; this alone is true, anything else is wrong”?’ you said: ‘I don’t hold such a view, friend.’
When I asked you: ‘Do you hold the view: “The world is finite” … “The Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death; this alone is true, anything else is wrong”?’ you said: ‘I don’t hold such a view, friend.’
Then when I asked you: ‘Could it then be that you do not know and see?’ you said: ‘It isn’t the case, friend, that I do not know and see.
“When I knew and saw thus, my mind was liberated from the taint of sensuality, from the taint of existence, and from the taint of ignorance.
“When it is new, bhikkhus, cloth from Kāsi is beautiful, comfortable, and of great value.
“When it was said by the Blessed One: ‘A question about eight, a concise statement about eight, an explanation of eight,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.
“When it was said by the Blessed One: ‘A question about four, a concise statement about four, an explanation of four,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.
“When it was said by the Blessed One: ‘A question about four, a concise statement about four, an explanation of four,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said by the Blessed One: ‘A question about nine, a concise statement about nine, an explanation of nine,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.
“When it was said by the Blessed One: ‘A question about nine, a concise statement about nine, an explanation of nine,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said by the Blessed One: ‘A question about one, a concise statement about one, an explanation of one,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.
“When it was said by the Blessed One: ‘A question about one, a concise statement about one, an explanation of one,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said by the Blessed One: ‘A question about ten, a concise statement about ten, an explanation of ten,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.
“When it was said by the Blessed One: ‘A question about ten, a concise statement about ten, an explanation of ten,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said by the Blessed One: ‘A question about three, a concise statement about three, an explanation of three,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.
“When it was said by the Blessed One: ‘A question about two, a concise statement about two, an explanation of two,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘A question about eight, a concise statement about eight, an explanation of eight,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘A question about eight, a concise statement about eight, an explanation of eight,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘A question about five, a concise statement about five, an explanation of five,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘A question about five, a concise statement about five, an explanation of five,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘A question about four, a concise statement about four, an explanation of four,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘A question about four, a concise statement about four, an explanation of four,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘A question about nine, a concise statement about nine, an explanation of nine,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘A question about nine, a concise statement about nine, an explanation of nine,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘A question about one, a concise statement about one, an explanation of one,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘A question about one, a concise statement about one, an explanation of one,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘A question about seven, a concise statement about seven, an explanation of seven,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘A question about seven, a concise statement about seven, an explanation of seven,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘A question about six, a concise statement about six, an explanation of six,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘A question about six, a concise statement about six, an explanation of six,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘A question about ten, a concise statement about ten, an explanation of ten,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.”
“When it was said: ‘A question about ten, a concise statement about ten, an explanation of ten,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘A question about three, a concise statement about three, an explanation of three,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘A question about three, a concise statement about three, an explanation of three,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘A question about two, a concise statement about two, an explanation of two,’ it is with reference to this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘A question about two, a concise statement about two, an explanation of two,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘Almsfood too, I say, is twofold: that to be used and that not to be used,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘Almsfood, friends, should be understood to be twofold: that to be used and that not to be used,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘Bhikkhus, be observant of virtuous behavior and observant of the Pātimokkha; dwell restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults; having undertaken them, train in the training rules,’ it is because of this that this was said.”
“When it was said: ‘Bhikkhus, I say that the destruction of the taints also occurs in dependence on the base of nothingness,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘Bhikkhus, I say that the destruction of the taints also occurs in dependence on the base of the infinity of space,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘Bhikkhus, I say that the destruction of the taints also occurs in dependence on the base of the infinity of space,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘Bhikkhus, I say that the destruction of the taints also occurs in dependence on the first jhāna,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘Bhikkhus, I say that the destruction of the taints also occurs in dependence on the fourth jhāna,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘Bhikkhus, I say that the destruction of the taints occurs in dependence on the first jhāna,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘Bhikkhus, what is non-Dhamma and harmful should be understood, and what is the Dhamma and beneficial should also be understood.
“When it was said: ‘Bhikkhus, what is non-Dhamma and harmful should be understood, and what is the Dhamma and beneficial should also be understood.
“When it was said: ‘Bhikkhus, what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma should be understood, and what is harmful and what is beneficial should also be understood.
“When it was said: ‘Bhikkhus, what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma should be understood, and what is harmful and what is beneficial should be understood.
“When it was said: ‘Bhikkhus, what is non-Dhamma and what is the Dhamma should be understood, and what is harmful and what is beneficial should be understood.
“When it was said: ‘Countries or regions too, I say, are twofold: those to be resorted to and those not to be resorted to,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘Countries or regions, friends, should be understood to be twofold: those to be resorted to and those not to be resorted to,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘Feelings should be understood … the way leading to the cessation of feelings should be understood,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘Feelings should be understood … the way leading to the cessation of feelings should be understood,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘Kamma should be understood … the way leading to the cessation of kamma should be understood,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘Kamma should be understood … the way leading to the cessation of kamma should be understood,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘Lodgings too, I say, are twofold: those to be used and those not to be used,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘Lodgings, friends, should be understood to be twofold: those to be used and those not to be used,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘Perceptions should be understood … the way leading to the cessation of perceptions should be understood,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘Perceptions should be understood … the way leading to the cessation of perceptions should be understood,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘Persons too, I say, are twofold: those to be associated with and those not to be associated with,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘Persons, friends, should be understood to be twofold: those to be associated with and those not to be associated with,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘Persons, friends, should be understood to be twofold: those to be associated with and those not to be associated with,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘Robes, friends, should be understood to be twofold: those to be used and those not to be used,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘Robes, I say, are twofold: those to be used and those not to be used,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘Sensual pleasures should be understood … the way leading to the cessation of sensual pleasures should be understood,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘Sensual pleasures should be understood; the source and origin of sensual pleasures should be understood; the diversity of sensual pleasures should be understood; the result of sensual pleasures should be understood; the cessation of sensual pleasures should be understood; the way leading to the cessation of sensual pleasures should be understood,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘Suffering should be understood … the way leading to the cessation of suffering should be understood,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘Suffering should be understood; the source and origin of suffering should be understood; the diversity of suffering should be understood; the result of suffering should be understood; the cessation of suffering should be understood; the way leading to the cessation of suffering should be understood,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘The perception of death, bhikkhus, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘The perception of impermanence, bhikkhus, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘The perception of non-delight in the entire world, bhikkhus, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘The perception of non-self in what is suffering, bhikkhus, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘The perception of suffering in the impermanent, bhikkhus, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘The perception of the repulsiveness of food, bhikkhus, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘The perception of unattractiveness, bhikkhus, when developed and cultivated, is of great fruit and benefit, culminating in the deathless, having the deathless as its consummation,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘The taints should be understood … the way leading to the cessation of the taints should be understood,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘The taints should be understood … the way leading to the cessation of the taints should be understood,’ it is because of this that this was said.
“When it was said: ‘This body has originated from conceit; in dependence on conceit, conceit is to be abandoned.’
With reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘This body has originated from craving; in dependence on craving, craving is to be abandoned,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘This body, sister, has originated from nutriment; in dependence on nutriment, nutriment is to be abandoned,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘This Dhamma is for one who delights in non-proliferation, who takes delight in non-proliferation, not for one who delights in proliferation, who takes delight in proliferation,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘This Dhamma is for one who is concentrated, not for one who is unconcentrated,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘This Dhamma is for one who is content, not for one who is discontent,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘This Dhamma is for one who is energetic, not for one who is lazy,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘This Dhamma is for one who is wise, not for one who is unwise,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘This Dhamma is for one who resorts to solitude, not for one who delights in company,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘This Dhamma is for one with few desires, not for one with strong desires,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘This Dhamma is for one with mindfulness established, not for one who is muddle-minded,’ with reference to what was this said?
“When it was said: ‘Villages or towns too, I say, are twofold: those to be resorted to and those not to be resorted to,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘Villages or towns, friends, should be understood to be twofold: those to be resorted to and those not to be resorted to,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘“These are the eighteen mental examinations”: this, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma taught by me that is unrefuted … uncensured by wise ascetics and brahmins,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘“These are the four noble truths”: this, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma taught by me that is unrefuted … uncensured by wise ascetics and brahmins,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘“These are the four noble truths”: this, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma taught by me that is unrefuted, undefiled, irreproachable, and uncensured by wise ascetics and brahmins,’ it is because of this that this was said.” 
“When it was said: ‘“These are the six bases for contact”: this, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma taught by me that is unrefuted … uncensured by wise ascetics and brahmins,’ for what reason was this said?
“When it was said: ‘“These are the six elements”: this, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma taught by me that is unrefuted … uncensured by wise ascetics and brahmins,’ for what reason was this said?
“When its strings were too loose, was your lute well tuned and easy to play?”
“When King Yama has questioned, interrogated, and cross-examined him about the first divine messenger, he again questions, interrogates, and cross-examines him about the second divine messenger: ‘Good man, didn’t you see the second divine messenger that appeared among human beings?’
And he replies: ‘No, lord, I didn’t see him.’
“When King Yama has questioned, interrogated, and cross-examined him about the second divine messenger, he again questions, interrogates, and cross-examines him about the third divine messenger: ‘Good man, didn’t you see the third divine messenger that appeared among human beings?’
And he replies: ‘No, lord, I didn’t see him.’
“When lying down, the nāga is concentrated;when sitting, too, the nāga is concentrated.
“When my mind was thus concentrated, purified, cleansed, unblemished, rid of defilement, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, I directed it to the knowledge of the destruction of the taints.
“When my mind was thus concentrated, purified, cleansed, unblemished, rid of defilement, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, I directed it to the knowledge of the passing away and rebirth of beings.
“When my mind was thus concentrated, purified, cleansed, unblemished, rid of defilement, malleable, wieldy, steady, and attained to imperturbability, I directed it to the knowledge of the recollection of past abodes.
“When she asked me this, I replied: ‘Sister, the concentration that does not lean forward and does not bend back, and that is not reined in and checked by forcefully suppressing —by being liberated, it is steady; by being steady, it is content; by being content, one is not agitated.
“When she possesses three qualities, Anuruddha, with the breakup of the body, after death, a woman is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
“When that is the case, Master Gotama, this is a meritorious practice that extends to many people, that is, one based on going forth.”
“When the bhikkhus dwell in concord, harmoniously, without disputes, blending like milk and water, viewing each other with eyes of affection, on that occasion they generate much merit.
“When the element of continuation exists, are beings seen to continue?”
“When the element of exertion exists, are beings seen to exert themselves in activity?”
“When the element of force exists, are beings seen to act with force?”
“When the element of instigation exists, are beings seen to instigate activity?”
“When the element of persistence exists, are beings seen to persist in activity?”
“When the element of strength exists, are beings seen to be possessed of strength?”
“When the foliage of the Tāvatiṃsa devas’ pāricchattaka coral tree has fallen, the Tāvatiṃsa devas are elated,: ‘The foliage of the pāricchattaka coral tree now has fallen.
“When the son has fallen ill, the mother cannot fulfill her wish: ‘Let me fall ill, but may my son not fall ill!’ And when the mother has fallen ill, the son cannot fulfill his wish: ‘Let me fall ill, but may my mother not fall ill!’
“When the son is dying, the mother cannot fulfill her wish: ‘Let me die, but may my son not die!’ And when the mother is dying, the son cannot fulfill his wish: ‘Let me die, but may my mother not die!’
“When the son is growing old, the mother cannot fulfill her wish: ‘Let me grow old, but may my son not grow old!’ And when the mother is growing old, the son cannot fulfill his wish: ‘Let me grow old, but may my mother not grow old!’
“When the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One … that four birds of different colors came from the four quarters, fell at his feet, and turned all white, that members of the four classes—khattiyas, brahmins, vessas, and suddas—would go forth from the household life into homelessness in the Dhamma and discipline proclaimed by the Tathāgata and realize unsurpassed liberation.
“When the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One … that he climbed up a huge mountain of dung without being soiled by it, that he would receive robes, almsfood, dwellings, and medicines and provisions for the sick, and he would use them without being tied to them, infatuated with them, and blindly absorbed in them, seeing the danger and knowing the escape.
“When the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One … that tiriyā grass rose up from his navel and stood touching the sky, that he would awaken to the noble eightfold path and would proclaim it well among devas and humans.
“When the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One … that white worms with black heads crawled from his feet up to his knees and covered them, that many white-robed householders would go for lifelong refuge to the Tathāgata.
“When the Tāvatiṃsa devas’ pāricchattaka coral tree has fully blossomed, the Tāvatiṃsa devas are elated, and they spend four celestial months at the foot of the pāricchattaka coral tree enjoying themselves furnished and endowed with the five objects of sensual pleasure.
“When the Tāvatiṃsa devas’ pāricchattaka coral tree has had its bud burst, the Tāvatiṃsa devas are elated,: ‘The pāricchattaka coral tree now has had its bud burst.
“When the Tāvatiṃsa devas’ pāricchattaka coral tree has had its bud formation, the Tāvatiṃsa devas are elated,: ‘The pāricchattaka coral tree now has had its bud formation.
“When the Tāvatiṃsa devas’ pāricchattaka coral tree has had its floral differentiation, the Tāvatiṃsa devas are elated,: ‘The pāricchattaka coral tree now has had its floral differentiation.
“When the Tāvatiṃsa devas’ pāricchattaka coral tree has had its floral initiation, the Tāvatiṃsa devas are elated,: ‘The pāricchattaka coral tree now has had its floral initiation.
“When the wise person does not shake in adversities,knowing how to determine what is good,his enemies are saddened, having seenthat his former facial expression does not change.
“When the woman’s husband acquires wealthby toiling at a craft, trade, or farming,she tries to steal it, even if but little:a wife like this is called a wife and a thief.
“When the world was dissolving,I fared on to streaming radiance.When the world was evolving,I fared on to an empty Brahmā.
“When there is enjoyment, this happiness is to be expected.
“When there is ill will in him … When there is dullness and drowsiness in him … When there is restlessness and remorse in him … … When there is doubt in him, he understands: ‘There is doubt in me’; or when there is no doubt in him, he understands: ‘There is no doubt in me’; and he also understands how unarisen doubt arises, how arisen doubt is abandoned, and how abandoned doubt does not arise again in the future.
“When there is no rebirth, this happiness is to be expected: no cold, no heat, no hunger, no thirst, no defecation, and no urination; no being afflicted by fire, sticks, or knives; and relatives and friends don’t get together and scold one.
“When they again become human beings, the generous one would surpass the other in five ways: in human life span, human beauty, human happiness, human fame, and human authority.
“When this concentration has been developed and cultivated by you in this way, then you should develop this concentration with thought and examination; you should develop it without thought but with examination only; you should develop it without thought and examination.
“When this concentration has been developed and cultivated by you in this way, then you should develop this concentration with thought and examination; you should develop it without thought but with examination only; you should develop it without thought and examination.
“When this concentration has been developed and cultivated by you in this way, then you should develop this concentration with thought and examination; you should develop it without thought but with examination only; you should develop it without thought and examination.
“When this concentration has been developed and cultivated by you in this way, then you should develop this concentration with thought and examination; you should develop it without thought but with examination only; you should develop it without thought and examination.
“When this great earth and Sineru, the king of mountains, are blazing and burning, neither ashes nor soot are seen.
“When this noble disciple is thus accomplished in virtuous behavior, concentration, and wisdom, with the destruction of the taints, he realizes for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
“When those devas who are long-lived, beautiful, abounding in happiness, dwelling for a long time in lofty palaces, hear the Tathāgata’s teaching of the Dhamma, for the most part they are filled with fear, a sense of urgency, and terror thus: ‘It seems that we are actually impermanent, though we thought ourselves permanent; it seems that we are actually transient, though we thought ourselves everlasting; it seems that we are actually non-eternal, though we thought ourselves eternal.
“When you are asked: ‘Could you be a deva, sir?’ you say: ‘I will not be a deva, brahmin.’
When you are asked: ‘Could you be a gandhabba, sir?’ you say: ‘I will not be a gandhabba, brahmin.’
When you are asked: ‘Could you be a yakkha, sir?’ you say: ‘I will not be a yakkha, brahmin.’
When you are asked: ‘Could you be a human being, sir?’ you say: ‘I will not be a human being, brahmin.’
What, then, could you be, sir?”
“When you are asked: ‘Friend Sāriputta, does one become an end-maker by means of knowledge?’ you say: ‘This is not the case, friend.’
When you are asked: ‘Then does one become an end-maker by means of conduct?
“When you reflect on these eight thoughts of a great person, then, as much as you wish, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous passing away of joy and sadness, you will enter and dwell in the fourth jhāna, neither painful nor pleasant, which has purification of mindfulness by equanimity.
“When you reflect on these eight thoughts of a great person, then, as much as you wish, with the fading away as well of rapture, you will dwell equanimous and, mindful and clearly comprehending, experience pleasure with the body; you will enter and dwell in the third jhāna of which the noble ones declare: ‘He is equanimous, mindful, one who dwells happily.’
“When you reflect on these eight thoughts of a great person, then, as much as you wish, with the subsiding of thought and examination, you will enter and dwell in the second jhāna, which has internal placidity and unification of mind and consists of rapture and pleasure born of concentration, without thought and examination.
“When you reflect upon these eight thoughts of a great person and gain at will … these four jhānas … then, while you dwell contentedly, your dwelling place at the foot of a tree will seem to you as a house with a peaked roof, plastered inside and out, draft-free, with bolts fastened and shutters closed, seems to a householder or a householder’s son; and it will serve for your delight, relief, and ease, and for entering upon nibbāna.
“When you reflect upon these eight thoughts of a great person and gain at will … these four jhānas … then, while you dwell contentedly, your medicine of fermented cow’s urine will seem to you as various medicaments of ghee, butter, oil, honey, and molasses seem to a householder or a householder’s son; and it will serve for your delight, relief, and ease, and for entering upon nibbāna.
“When you reflect upon these eight thoughts of a great person and gain at will … these four jhānas … then, while you dwell contentedly, your scraps of almsfood will seem to you as a dish of rice cleaned of black grains and served with many gravies and curries seems to a householder or a householder’s son; and they will serve for your delight, relief, and ease, and for entering upon nibbāna.
“When you reflect upon those eight thoughts of a great person and gain at will … these four jhānas … then, while you dwell contentedly, your bed and seat made of straw will seem to you as a couch spread with rugs, blankets, and covers, with an excellent covering of antelope hide, with a canopy above and red bolsters at both ends, seems to a householder or a householder’s son; and it will serve for your delight, relief, and ease, and for entering upon nibbāna.
“When you were asked: ‘On what basis, Samiddhi, do intentions and thoughts arise in a person?’ you said: ‘On the basis of name-and-form, Bhante.’ … … When you were asked: ‘In what do they culminate?’ you said: ‘They culminate in the deathless.’
Good, good, Samiddhi!
“When, Abhaya, this bhikkhu is thus accomplished in virtuous behavior and concentration, then, with the destruction of the taints, he realizes for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
“When, Abhaya, this bhikkhu is thus accomplished in virtuous behavior, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he enters and dwells in the first jhāna … … the fourth jhāna….
“When, Anuruddha, you reflect on these eight thoughts of a great person, then, as much as you wish, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, you will enter and dwell in the first jhāna, which consists of rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, accompanied by thought and examination.
“When, Anuruddha, you reflect upon these eight thoughts of a great person and gain at will, without trouble or difficulty, these four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life, then, while you dwell contentedly, your rag-robe will seem to you as a chest full of variously colored garments seems to a householder or a householder’s son; and it will serve for your delight, relief, and ease, and for entering upon nibbāna.
“When, Bhante, I first saw the Blessed One in the distance, as soon as I saw him my mind acquired confidence in him.
“When, bhikkhu, this concentration has been developed and well developed by you in this way, then wherever you walk, you will walk at ease; wherever you stand, you will stand at ease; wherever you sit, you will sit at ease; wherever you lie down, you will lie down at ease.”
“When, bhikkhu, this concentration has been developed and well developed by you in this way, then you should train yourself thus: ‘I will dwell contemplating the body in the body, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed longing and dejection in regard to the world.’
Thus should you train yourself.
“When, bhikkhu, your mind is firm and well settled internally, and arisen bad unwholesome states do not obsess your mind, then you should train yourself thus: ‘I will develop and cultivate the liberation of the mind by loving-kindness, make it a vehicle and basis, carry it out, consolidate it, and properly undertake it.’
Thus should you train yourself.
“When, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu enters and emerges from each of these meditative attainments, his mind becomes malleable and wieldy.
“When, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu has good friends, good companions, good comrades, it can be expected of him that he will be virtuous, one who dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha … will train in them.
“When, bhikkhus, a bodhisatta passes away from the Tusita heaven and mindfully and with clear comprehension enters his mother’s womb, then in this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, in this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its devas and humans, a measureless glorious radiance becomes manifest, surpassing the divine majesty of the devas.
“When, bhikkhus, a carpenter or a carpenter’s apprentice sees the impressions of his fingers and his thumb on the handle of his adze, he does not know: ‘I have worn away so much of the adze handle today, so much yesterday, so much earlier’; but when it has worn away, he knows that it has worn away.
“When, bhikkhus, a king’s frontier fortress is well provided with these seven appurtenances of a fortress, and when it readily gains, without trouble or difficulty, these four kinds of food, it can be said that the king’s frontier fortress cannot be assailed by external foes and enemies.
“When, bhikkhus, a noble disciple possesses these five streams of merit, streams of the wholesome, it is not easy to measure his merit thus: ‘Just so much is his stream of merit, stream of the wholesome, nutriment of happiness—heavenly … that leads to … one’s welfare and happiness’; rather, it is reckoned simply as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit.
“When, bhikkhus, a noble disciple possesses these four streams of merit, streams of the wholesome, it is not easy to measure his merit thus: ‘Just so much is his stream of merit, stream of the wholesome, nutriment of happiness … that leads to … one’s welfare and happiness’; rather, it is reckoned simply as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit.
“When, bhikkhus, a noble disciple possesses these seven good qualities, and when he gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, these four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and are pleasant dwellings in this very life, he is then called a noble disciple who cannot be assailed by Māra, who cannot be assailed by the Evil One.”
“When, bhikkhus, a noble disciple thus understands feeling, the source and origin of feelings, the diversity of feelings, the result of feelings, the cessation of feelings, and the way leading to the cessation of feelings, he understands this penetrative spiritual life to be the cessation of feelings.
“When, bhikkhus, a noble disciple thus understands kamma, the source and origin of kamma, the diversity of kamma, the result of kamma, the cessation of kamma, and the way leading to the cessation of kamma, he understands this penetrative spiritual life to be the cessation of kamma.
“When, bhikkhus, a noble disciple thus understands perceptions, the source and origin of perceptions, the diversity of perceptions, the result of perceptions, the cessation of perceptions, and the way leading to the cessation of perceptions, he understands this penetrative spiritual life to be the cessation of perceptions.
“When, bhikkhus, a noble disciple thus understands sensual pleasures, the source and origin of sensual pleasures, the diversity of sensual pleasures, the result of sensual pleasures, the cessation of sensual pleasures, and the way leading to the cessation of sensual pleasures, he understands this penetrative spiritual life to be the cessation of sensual pleasures.
“When, bhikkhus, a noble disciple thus understands suffering, the source and origin of suffering, the diversity of suffering, the result of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the way leading to the cessation of suffering, he understands this penetrative spiritual life to be the cessation of suffering.
“When, bhikkhus, a noble disciple thus understands the taints, the source and origin of the taints, the diversity of the taints, the result of the taints, the cessation of the taints, and the way leading to the cessation of the taints, he understands this penetrative spiritual life to be the cessation of the taints.
“When, bhikkhus, any bhikkhu or bhikkhunī develops and cultivates these five things, one of two fruits is to be expected: either final knowledge in this very life or, if there is a residue remaining, the state of non-returning.”
“When, bhikkhus, King Yama has questioned, interrogated, and cross-examined him about the third divine messenger, he falls silent.
“When, bhikkhus, noble five-factored right concentration has been developed and cultivated in this way, then, there being a suitable basis, he is capable of realizing any state realizable by direct knowledge toward which he might incline his mind.
“When, bhikkhus, the liberation of the mind by loving-kindness has been pursued, developed, and cultivated, made a vehicle and basis, carried out, consolidated, and properly undertaken, these eight benefits are to be expected.”
“When, bhikkhus, the liberation of the mind by loving-kindness has been repeatedly pursued, developed, and cultivated, made a vehicle and basis, carried out, consolidated, and properly undertaken, these eleven benefits are to be expected.”
“When, bhikkhus, the mind of a bhikkhu is well consolidated by wisdom, he is able to assert: ‘Destroyed is birth, the spiritual life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming back to any state of being.’”
“When, bhikkhus, these seven factors of enlightenment are developed and cultivated, they fulfill these three true knowledges.”
“When, brahmin, one experiences the remainderless destruction of lust, the remainderless destruction of hatred, and the remainderless destruction of delusion, it is in this way, too, that nibbāna is directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see, applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.”
“When, friend, a bhikkhu is thus perfectly liberated in mind, even if powerful forms cognizable by the eye come into range of the eye, they do not obsess his mind; his mind is not at all affected.
“When, girls, a woman possesses these five qualities, with the breakup of the body, after death, she is reborn in companionship with the agreeable-bodied devas.”
“When, householder, a noble disciple has understood thus: ‘Longing and unrighteous greed are a defilement of the mind,’ he abandons them.
“When, householder, a noble disciple has understood thus: ‘Longing and unrighteous greed are a defilement of the mind’ and has abandoned them; when he has understood thus: ‘Ill will … Dullness and drowsiness … Restlessness and remorse … Doubt is a defilement of the mind,’ and has abandoned it, he is then called a noble disciple of great wisdom, of wide wisdom, one who sees the range, one accomplished in wisdom.
“When, householder, the mind is protected, bodily, verbal, and mental actions are protected.
“When, Mahānāma, a lay follower abstains from the destruction of life, from taking what is not given, from sexual misconduct, from false speech, and from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness, in that way a lay follower is virtuous.”
“When, Mahānāma, a lay follower is himself accomplished in faith and also encourages others to accomplish faith; when he is himself accomplished in virtuous behavior and also encourages others to accomplish virtuous behavior; when he is himself accomplished in generosity and also encourages others to accomplish generosity; when he himself wants to see bhikkhus and also encourages others to see bhikkhus; when he himself wants to hear the good Dhamma and also encourages others to hear the good Dhamma; when he himself retains in mind the teachings he has heard and also encourages others to retain the teachings in mind; when he himself examines the meaning of the teachings that have been retained in mind and also encourages others to examine their meaning; when he himself understands the meaning and the Dhamma and then practices in accordance with the Dhamma, and also encourages others to practice in accordance with the Dhamma: it is in this way, Mahānāma, that a lay follower is practicing for his own welfare and also for the welfare of others.”
“When, Mahānāma, a lay follower is himself accomplished in faith but does not encourage others to accomplish faith; when he is himself accomplished in virtuous behavior but does not encourage others to accomplish virtuous behavior; when he is himself accomplished in generosity but does not encourage others to accomplish generosity; when he himself wants to see bhikkhus but does not encourage others to see bhikkhus; when he himself wants to hear the good Dhamma but does not encourage others to hear the good Dhamma; when he himself retains in mind the teachings he has heard but does not encourage others to retain the teachings in mind; when he himself examines the meaning of the teachings that have been retained in mind but does not encourage others to examine their meaning; when he himself has understood the meaning and the Dhamma and practices in accordance with the Dhamma, but does not encourage others to do so: it is in this way, Mahānāma, that a lay follower is practicing for his own welfare but not for the welfare of others.
“When, Mahānāma, one has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha, in that way one is a lay follower.”
“When, Meghiya, a bhikkhu has good friends, good companions, good comrades, it can be expected of him that he will be virtuous, one who dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha … … will train in them.
“When, Nāgita, I am traveling on a highway and do not see anyone ahead of me or behind me, even if it is for the purpose of defecating and urinating, on that occasion I am at ease.”
“When, Nāgita, I am traveling on a highway and do not see anyone ahead of me or behind me, even if it is just for the purpose of defecating and urinating, on that occasion I am at ease.”
“When, Nāgita, you come together and meet, intent on companionship, it occurs to me: ‘Surely, these venerable ones do not gain at will, without trouble or difficulty, this bliss of renunciation, bliss of solitude, bliss of peace, bliss of enlightenment that I gain at will, without trouble or difficulty; for when they come together and meet, they are intent upon companionship.
“When, Puṇṇiya, a bhikkhu is endowed with faith and approaches him, but he does not attend on him … When he attends on him but does not ask questions … When he asks questions but does not listen to the Dhamma with eager ears … When he listens to the Dhamma with eager ears, but having heard it, does not retain it in mind … When, having heard it, he retains it in mind but does not examine the meaning of the teachings that have been retained in mind … When he examines the meaning of the teachings that have been retained in mind but does not understand the meaning and the Dhamma and then practice in accordance with the Dhamma … When he understands the meaning and the Dhamma and then practices in accordance with the Dhamma, but he is not a good speaker with a good delivery, one gifted with speech that is polished, clear, articulate, expressive of the meaning … When he is a good speaker with a good delivery, one gifted with speech that is polished, clear, articulate, expressive of the meaning, but he does not instruct, encourage, inspire, and gladden his fellow monks, the Tathāgata is not disposed to teach the Dhamma.
“When, Puṇṇiya, a bhikkhu is endowed with faith but does not approach him, the Tathāgata is not disposed to teach the Dhamma.
“When, Puṇṇiya, a bhikkhu is endowed with faith but does not approach him, the Tathāgata is not disposed to teach the Dhamma.
“When, Rāhula, a bhikkhu does not recognize a self or the belongings of a self in these four elements, he is called a bhikkhu who has cut off craving, stripped off the fetter, and by completely breaking through conceit, has made an end of suffering.”
“When, secluded from sensual pleasures … a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the first jhāna, on that occasion affection born from affection does not exist in him, hatred born from affection does not exist in him, affection born from hatred does not exist in him, and hatred born from hatred does not exist in him.
“When, secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a noble disciple enters and dwells in the first jhāna … on that occasion his floral initiation has occurred, like the Tāvatiṃsa devas’ pāricchattaka coral tree.
“When, Sāriputta, a bhikkhu has no I-making, mine-making, and underlying tendency to conceit in regard to this conscious body; when he has no I-making, mine-making, and underlying tendency to conceit in regard to all external objects; and when he enters and dwells in that liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, through which there is no more I-making, mine-making, and underlying tendency to conceit for one who enters and dwells in it, he is called a bhikkhu who has cut off craving, stripped off the fetter, and, by completely breaking through conceit, has made an end of suffering.
“When, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous passing away of joy and dejection, a noble disciple enters and dwells in the fourth jhāna … on that occasion his buds have burst open, like the Tāvatiṃsa devas’ pāricchattaka coral tree.
“When, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, ‘space is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space, on that occasion he is called a bhikkhu who has blinded Māra, put out Māra’s eyes without a trace, and gone beyond sight of the Evil One.
“When, with the destruction of the taints, a bhikkhu has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it, then he has abandoned affection born from affection, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising; he has abandoned hatred born from affection, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising; he has abandoned affection born from hatred, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising; and he has abandoned hatred born from hatred, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it so that it is no more subject to future arising.
“When, with the destruction of the taints, a noble disciple has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, dwells in it, on that occasion he has fully blossomed, like the Tāvatiṃsa devas’ pāricchattaka coral tree.
“When, with the fading away as well of rapture, a noble disciple … enters and dwells in the third jhāna … on that occasion his bud formation has occurred, like the Tāvatiṃsa devas’ pāricchattaka coral tree.
“When, with the subsiding of thought and examination, a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the second jhāna … the third jhāna … the fourth jhāna, on that occasion affection born from affection does not exist in him, hatred born from affection does not exist in him, affection born from hatred does not exist in him, and hatred born from hatred does not exist in him.
“When, with the subsiding of thought and examination, a noble disciple enters and dwells in the second jhāna … on that occasion his floral differentiation has occurred, like the Tāvatiṃsa devas’ pāricchattaka coral tree.
“When, Ānanda, a bhikkhu is himself accomplished in virtuous behavior but does not exhort others in regard to virtuous behavior, to this extent he can dwell at ease while living in the Saṅgha.”
“Whenever I attend on a bhikkhu, I attend on him respectfully, not without respect.
“Whenever I attend on a bhikkhu, I attend on him respectfully, not without respect.
“Where do they become diversified?”
“Where is Master Piṅgiyānī coming from in the middle of the day?”
“Wherever bhikkhus are dwelling in concord … I conclude: ‘Surely, those venerable ones have abandoned these three things and cultivated these three things.’”
“Wherever bhikkhus take to arguing and quarreling and fall into a dispute … I conclude: ‘Surely, those venerable ones have abandoned these three things and cultivated these three things.’
“Wherever one might gain one’s good,in whatever way—by chanting, mantras,maxims, gifts, or tradition—thereone should exert oneself in just that way.
“Which devas, Tissa, know one who has a residue remaining as ‘one with a residue remaining’ and one who has no residue remaining as ‘one without residue remaining’?”
“Which devas, Tissa, know: ‘I am a stream-enterer, no longer subject to the lower world, fixed in destiny, heading for enlightenment’?”
“While I was dwelling thus,having known the state without acquisitions,I overcame all intoxications—intoxication with health,with youth, and with life—having seen security in renunciation.
“While I was dwelling thus,having known the state without acquisitions,I overcame all intoxications—intoxication with health,with youth, and with life—having seen security in renunciation.
“Who am I, sir, that I could know the ascetic Gotama’s competence in wisdom?
“Who am I, sir, that I could praise the ascetic Gotama?
“Who are the five that gain the goal having left this world?
“Who are the five that gain the goal having left this world?
“Who are the five that gain the goal here in this world?
“Who are the five that gain the goal here in this world?
“Who are you, friend?”
“Who in the world, Bhante, is worthy of offerings, and where is a gift to be given?”
“Who is here, friend?”
“Who is that, my dear?”
“Who, indeed, is the female lay follower Migasālā, a foolish, incompetent woman with a woman’s intellect?
“Who, indeed, is the female lay follower Migasālā, a foolish, incompetent woman with a woman’s intellect?
“Who, indeed, is the female lay follower Migasālā, a foolish, incompetent woman with a woman’s intellect?
“Who, indeed, is the female lay follower Migasālā, a foolish, incompetent woman with a woman’s intellect?
“Who, Sāriputta, are those foolish and incompetent wanderers of other sects and who are those that know one with a residue remaining as ‘one with a residue remaining’ and one without residue remaining as ‘one without residue remaining’?
“Who, Sāriputta, are those foolish and incompetent wanderers of other sects, and who are those that know one with a residue remaining as ‘one with a residue remaining’ and one without residue remaining as ‘one without residue remaining’?
“Why is it, Bhante, that some beings who pass away from that group are returners, who come back to this state of being, while others are non-returners, who do not come back to this state of being?”
“Why is it, brahmin, that on the uposatha day you stand to one side with your head washed, wearing a new pair of linen clothes, holding a handful of wet kusa grass?
“Why is it, brahmin, that on the uposatha day you stand to one side with your head washed, wearing a new pair of linen clothes, holding a handful of wet kusa grass?
“Why is it, friend Sāriputta, that some beings do not attain nibbāna in this very life?”
“Why is it, friend Sāriputta, that some beings here attain nibbāna in this very life?”
“Why is it, Master Gotama, that some beings here, with the breakup of the body, after death, are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world?”
“Why is it, Master Kaccāna, that ascetics fight with ascetics?”
“Why, Bhante, would the arahants first approach the person without faith who is miserly, mean, and abusive?
“Why, Bhante, would the arahants first receive alms from the person without faith who is miserly, mean, and abusive?
“Why, Bhante, would the arahants first show compassion to the person without faith who is miserly, mean, and abusive?
“Why, Bhante, would the arahants first teach the Dhamma to the person without faith who is miserly, mean, and abusive?
“Why, Visākhā, have you come in the middle of the day?”
“Why, Ānanda, shouldn’t the bhikkhu Phagguṇa’s faculties have been serene?
“Wisdom is their supervisor.”
“With a confident mind, I attended on the Blessed One.
“With a confident mind, I attended on the Blessed One.
“With hateful mind, devoid of sympathy,lusting for others, despising her husband,she seeks to kill the one who bought her with wealth:a wife like this is called a wife and a killer.
“With the cessation of views, bhikkhu, doubt does not arise in the instructed noble disciple about the undeclared points.
“With the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, ‘space is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space.
“With the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, ‘space is infinite,’ a bhikkhu enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space.
“With the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, ‘space is infinite,’ one enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space.
“With the destruction of the taints, he has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
“With the destruction of the taints, he has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
“With the destruction of the taints, he has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
“With the destruction of the taints, he has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
“With the destruction of the taints, he has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
“With the destruction of the taints, he has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
“With the destruction of the taints, he has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
“With the destruction of the taints, this bhikkhu has realized for himself with direct knowledge, in this very life, the taintless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom, and having entered upon it, he dwells in it.
“With the divine ear element, which is purified and surpasses the human, he hears both kinds of sounds, the divine and human, those that are far as well as near.
“With the divine ear element, which is purified and surpasses the human, he hears both kinds of sounds, the divine and human, those that are far as well as near.
“With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human … he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma.
“With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human … … he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma.
“With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma thus: ‘These beings who engaged in misconduct by body, speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong view, and undertook kamma based on wrong view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell; but these beings who engaged in good conduct by body, speech, and mind, who did not revile the noble ones, who held right view, and undertook kamma based on right view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.’
Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma.
“With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma thus: ‘These beings who engaged in misconduct by body, speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong view, and undertook kamma based on wrong view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell; but these beings who engaged in good conduct by body, speech, and mind, who did not revile the noble ones, who held right view, and undertook kamma based on right view, with the breakup of the body, after death, have been reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.’
Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings passing away and being reborn, inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he understands how beings fare in accordance with their kamma.
“With the remainderless fading away and cessation of the six bases for contact, is there both something else and nothing else?”
“With the remainderless fading away and cessation of the six bases for contact, is there neither something else nor nothing else?”
“With the remainderless fading away and cessation of the six bases for contact, is there nothing else?”
“With wealth acquired by energetic striving, amassed by the strength of his arms, earned by the sweat of his brow, righteous wealth righteously gained, the noble disciple undertakes four worthy deeds.
“Without force, without weapons,I conquered this earth.I ruled it by righteousness,without violence, by Dhamma,exercising rulership by Dhammaover this sphere of the earth.
“Without having abandoned these three things, one is incapable of abandoning birth, old age, and death.
“Without having abandoned these three things, one is incapable of abandoning careless attention, following a wrong path, and mental sluggishness.
“Without having abandoned these three things, one is incapable of abandoning disrespect, being difficult to correct, and bad friendship.
“Without having abandoned these three things, one is incapable of abandoning lack of desire to see the noble ones, lack of desire to hear the noble Dhamma, and a mind bent on criticism.
“Without having abandoned these three things, one is incapable of abandoning lack of faith, uncharitableness, and laziness.
“Without having abandoned these three things, one is incapable of abandoning lust, hatred, and delusion.
“Without having abandoned these three things, one is incapable of abandoning muddle-mindedness, lack of clear comprehension, and mental distraction.
“Without having abandoned these three things, one is incapable of abandoning personal-existence view, doubt, and wrong grasp of behavior and observances.
“Without having abandoned these three things, one is incapable of abandoning restlessness, non-restraint, and immorality.
“Without investigating and scrutinizing, he speaks praise of one who deserves dispraise.
“Worldlings subject to illness,old age, and death are disgusted who existin accordance with their nature.
“Worldlings subject to illness,old age, and death, are disgusted who existin accordance with their nature.
“Wrong action is non-Dhamma; right action is the Dhamma.
“Wrong concentration is non-Dhamma; right concentration is the Dhamma.
“Wrong effort is non-Dhamma; right effort is the Dhamma.
“Wrong intention is non-Dhamma; right intention is the Dhamma.
“Wrong knowledge is non-Dhamma; right knowledge is the Dhamma.
“Wrong liberation is non-Dhamma; right liberation is the Dhamma.
“Wrong liberation is non-Dhamma; right liberation is the Dhamma.
“Wrong livelihood is non-Dhamma; right livelihood is the Dhamma.
“Wrong mindfulness is non-Dhamma; right mindfulness is the Dhamma.
“Wrong speech is non-Dhamma; right speech is the Dhamma.
“Wrong view is non-Dhamma; right view is the Dhamma.
“Wrong view is non-Dhamma; right view is the Dhamma.
“Wrong view is non-Dhamma; right view is the Dhamma.
“Wrong view, friends, is non-Dhamma; right view is the Dhamma.
“Yes, Bhante,” Cunda, the smith’s son, replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” Hatthaka replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” Mahānāma replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” Mahānāma replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” she replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” she replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” that bhikkhu replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” the bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” the householder Tapussa replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” the Venerable Anuruddha replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” the Venerable Mahāmoggallāna replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” the Venerable Soṇa replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” the Venerable Subhūti replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” the Venerable Sāriputta replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” the Venerable Ānanda replied and, having taken a sitting cloth, he followed closely behind the Blessed One.
“Yes, Bhante,” the Venerable Ānanda replied, and he rose from his seat, paid homage to the Blessed One, circumambulated him keeping the right side toward him, and sat down at the foot of a tree not far from the Blessed One.
“Yes, Bhante,” the Venerable Ānanda replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” the Venerable Ānanda replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” the Venerable Ānanda replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” the Venerable Ānanda replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” the Venerable Ānanda replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” the Venerable Ānanda replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those lay followers replied.
“Yes, Bhante,” those Licchavis replied.
“Yes, Bhante.
“Yes, Bhante.
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, Bhante.”
“Yes, friend,” the Venerable Bhaddaji replied.
“Yes, friend,” the Venerable Saviṭṭha and the Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita replied.
“Yes, friend,” the Venerable Sāriputta replied.
“Yes, friend,” the Venerable Sāriputta replied.
“Yes, friend,” the Venerable Sāriputta replied.
“Yes, friend,” those bhikkhus replied, and having delighted and rejoiced in the Venerable Mahākaccāna’s statement, they rose from their seats and went to the Blessed One.
“Yes, friend,” those bhikkhus replied, and having delighted and rejoiced in the Venerable Ānanda’s statement, they rose from their seats and went to the Blessed One.
“Yes, friend,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, friend,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, friend,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, friend,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, friend,” those bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, friend,” those elder bhikkhus replied.
“Yes, friend.”
“Yes, householder,” the bhikkhu replied.
“Yes, householder,” the bhikkhu replied.
“Yes, noble lady,” that man replied.
“Yes, noble lady,” those lay followers of Kajaṅgalā replied.
“Yes, prince, I slept well.
“Yes, ruler of the devas.”
“Yes, Sajjha, you heard that correctly, grasped it correctly, attended to it correctly, remembered it correctly.
“Yes, sir,” that brahmin replied.
“Yes, sir,” the brahmin Doṇa replied.
“Yes, sir,” the brahmin Jāṇussoṇī replied.
“Yes, sir,” the brahmin Jāṇussoṇī replied.
“Yes, sir,” the brahmin Jāṇussoṇī replied.
“Yes, sir,” the brahmin Jāṇussoṇī replied.
“Yes, sir,” the brahmin Tikaṇṇa replied.
“Yes, sir,” the brahmin Vassakāra replied.
“Yes, sir,” those brahmins replied.
“Yes, sir.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Yes, sire,” Piyaka replied, and after he had gotten the finest carriages harnessed he told King Muṇḍa: “Sire, the finest carriages have been harnessed.
“Yes, sire,” Piyaka replied.
“Yes, sire,” the treasurer Piyaka replied.
“Yes, Sutavā, you heard that correctly, grasped it correctly, attended to it correctly, remembered it correctly.
“You may ask, friend.
“You may do so, Meghiya, at your own convenience.”
“You may go, brahmin, at your own convenience.”
“You may go, brahmin, at your own convenience.”
“You may go, great king, at your own convenience.”
“You may go, Sāriputta, at your own convenience.”
“You might think, householder: ‘He was someone else, the brahmin Velāma who on that occasion gave that great alms offering.’
But you should not look at it in such a way.
“You praise the ascetic Gotama with lofty praise, indeed.”
“You should know, Sāriputta, that any white-robed householder whose actions are restrained by these five training rules and who gains at will, without trouble or difficulty, these four pleasant visible dwellings that pertain to the higher mind, might, if he so wished, declare of himself: ‘I am finished with hell, the animal realm, and the sphere of afflicted spirits; I am finished with the plane of misery, the bad destination, the lower world; I am a stream-enterer, no longer subject to the lower world, fixed in destiny, heading for enlightenment.’”
“You speak out of confidence, Ānanda, but the Tathāgata knows this for a fact.
“Your retinue is large, Hatthaka.
“Zeal then arose in meas I clearly saw nibbāna.Now I am incapableof indulging in sensual pleasures.Relying on the spiritual life,never will I turn back.”
“Zeal then arose in meas I clearly saw nibbāna.Now I am incapableof indulging in sensual pleasures.Relying on the spiritual life,never will I turn back.”
“Ānanda, a bhikkhu should possess eight qualities to be agreed upon as an exhorter of bhikkhunīs.
“Ānanda, among the former three persons, one is not subject to decline, one is subject to decline, and one is bound for the plane of misery, bound for hell.
“Ānanda, are all behavior and observances, lifestyles, and spiritual life fruitful when set up as the essence?”
“Ānanda, as long as the Vajjis assemble in harmony, adjourn in harmony, and conduct the affairs of the Vajjis in harmony, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“Ānanda, as long as the Vajjis assemble often and hold frequent assemblies, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“Ānanda, as long as the Vajjis do not abduct women and girls from their families and force them to live with them, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“Ānanda, as long as the Vajjis do not decree anything that has not been decreed or abolish anything that has already been decreed but undertake and follow the ancient Vajji principles as they have been decreed, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“Ānanda, as long as the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and venerate the Vajji elders and think they should be heeded, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“Ānanda, as long as the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and venerate their traditional shrines, both those within and those outside, and do not neglect the righteous oblations as given and done to them in the past, only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.
“Ānanda, as long as the Vajjis provide righteous protection, shelter, and guard for arahants,: ‘How can those arahants who have not yet come here come to our realm, and how can those arahants who have already come dwell at ease here?’ only growth is to be expected for them, not decline.”
“Ānanda, have you heard whether the Vajjis are assembling often and holding frequent assemblies?”
“Ānanda, I claim to be confident about the things that lead to the realization by direct knowledge of the various doctrinal principles, to teach the Dhamma to various people in various ways such that one who practices accordingly will know of what exists that it exists and of what does not exist that it does not exist; such that one will know of the inferior that it is inferior and of the sublime that it is sublime; such that one will know of what is surpassable that it is surpassable and of what is unsurpassable that it is unsurpassable; such that it is possible that one will know, see, and realize this just as it is to be known, seen, and realized.
“Ānanda, I have declared definitively that deeds of bodily good conduct, verbal good conduct, and mental good conduct are to be done because in acting thus this benefit is to be expected: one does not blame oneself; the wise, having investigated, praise one; one acquires a good reputation; one dies unconfused; and with the breakup of the body, after death, one is reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.
“Ānanda, I have declared definitively that deeds of bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct are not to be done because in acting thus this danger is to be expected: one blames oneself; the wise, having investigated, censure one; a bad report circulates about one; one dies confused; and with the breakup of the body, after death, one is reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.
“Ānanda, if a bhikkhu possesses these seven bases for ‘ten-less,’ then, if he lives the complete and pure spiritual life for twelve years, he is fit to be called ‘ten-less.’
If, too, he lives the complete and pure spiritual life for twenty-four years, he is fit to be called ‘ten-less.’
If, too, he lives the complete and pure spiritual life for thirty-six years, he is fit to be called ‘ten-less.’
If, too, he lives the complete and pure spiritual life for forty-eight years, he is fit to be called ‘ten-less.’”
“Ānanda, if Isidatta had possessed the same kind of virtuous behavior that Purāṇa had, Purāṇa could not have even known his destination.
“Ānanda, if Isidatta had possessed the same kind of virtuous behavior that Purāṇa had, Purāṇa could not have even known his destination.
“Ānanda, that bhikkhu must be either newly ordained, not long gone forth, or a foolish and incompetent elder.
“Ānanda, the purpose and benefit of wholesome virtuous behavior is non-regret.”
“Ānanda, the purpose and benefit of wholesome virtuous behavior is non-regret.”
“Ānanda, there are these eight causes and conditions for a powerful earthquake.
“Ānanda, this great earth is established upon water; the water rests upon wind; the wind blows in space.
“Ānanda, those bhikkhus who are newcomers, who have recently gone forth, who have just come to this Dhamma and discipline, should be encouraged, settled, and established by you in five things.
“Ānanda, those bhikkhus who are newcomers, who have recently gone forth, who have just come to this Dhamma and discipline, should be encouraged, settled, and established by you in these five things.”
“Ānanda, those for whom you have compassion and who think you should be heeded, whether friends or companions, relatives or family members, should be encouraged, settled, and established by you in these three things.”
“Ānanda, those for whom you have compassion and who think you should be heeded, whether friends or companions, relatives or family members, should be encouraged, settled, and established by you in three things.
“Ānanda, those who are judgmental will pass such judgment on them … I alone, or one like me, may pass judgment on people.
“Ānanda, those who are judgmental will pass such judgment on them: ‘This one has the same qualities as the other.
“Ānanda, those who are judgmental will pass such judgment on them: ‘This one has the same qualities as the other.
“Ānanda, those who are judgmental will pass such judgment on them: ‘This one has the same qualities as the other.
“Ānanda, those who are judgmental will pass such judgment on them: ‘This one has the same qualities as the other.
“Ānanda, those who are judgmental will pass such judgment on them….
“Ānanda, those who are judgmental will pass such judgment on them….
“Ānanda, those who are judgmental will pass such judgment on them….
“Ānanda, women are prone to anger; women are envious; women are miserly; women are unwise.
“‘A boil,’ bhikkhus, is a designation for this body consisting of the four great elements, originating from mother and father, built up out of rice and gruel, subject to impermanence, to kneading and abrasion, to breaking apart and dispersal.
“‘A person with faith,’ friends: this is a case of non-decline.
“‘A person without faith,’ friends: this is a case of decline.
“‘Again, friends, a bhikkhu gets to hear at will, without trouble or difficulty, talk concerned with the austere life that is conducive to opening up the heart, that is, talk on fewness of desires, on contentment, on solitude, on not getting bound up, on arousing energy, on virtuous behavior, on concentration, on wisdom, on liberation, on the knowledge and vision of liberation.
“‘Again, friends, a bhikkhu has aroused energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities and acquiring wholesome qualities; he is strong, firm in exertion, not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
“‘Again, friends, a bhikkhu is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha, possessed of good conduct and resort, seeing danger in minute faults.
“‘Again, friends, a bhikkhu is wise; he possesses the wisdom that discerns arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering.
“‘As long as they live the arahants abandon and abstain from false speech; they speak truth, adhere to truth; they are trustworthy and reliable, no deceivers of the world.
“‘As long as they live the arahants abandon and abstain from false speech; they speak truth, adhere to truth; they are trustworthy and reliable, no deceivers of the world.
“‘As long as they live the arahants abandon and abstain from false speech; they speak truth, adhere to truth; they are trustworthy and reliable, no deceivers of the world.
“‘As long as they live the arahants abandon and abstain from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
“‘As long as they live the arahants abandon and abstain from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
“‘As long as they live the arahants abandon and abstain from liquor, wine, and intoxicants, the basis for heedlessness.
“‘As long as they live the arahants abandon and abstain from taking what is not given; they take only what is given, expect only what is given, and are honest at heart, devoid of theft.
“‘As long as they live the arahants abandon and abstain from taking what is not given; they take only what is given, expect only what is given, and dwell honestly without thoughts of theft.
“‘As long as they live the arahants abandon and abstain from taking what is not given; they take only what is given, expect only what is given, and dwell honestly without thoughts of theft.
“‘As long as they live the arahants abandon and abstain from the use of high and luxurious beds; they lie down on a low resting place, either a small bed or a straw mat.
“‘As long as they live the arahants abandon and abstain from the use of high and luxurious beds; they lie down on a low resting place, either a small bed or a straw mat.
“‘As long as they live the arahants abandon and abstain from the use of high and luxurious beds; they lie down on a low resting place, either a small bed or a straw mat.
“‘As long as they live the arahants abandon and abstain from the use of high and luxurious beds; they lie down on a low resting place, either a small bed or a straw mat.
“‘As long as they live the arahants abandon sexual activity and observe celibacy, living apart, abstaining from sexual intercourse, the common person’s practice.
“‘As long as they live the arahants abandon sexual activity and observe celibacy, living apart, abstaining from sexual intercourse, the common person’s practice.
“‘As long as they live the arahants abandon sexual activity and observe celibacy, living apart, abstaining from sexual intercourse, the common person’s practice.
“‘As long as they live the arahants abstain from dancing, singing, instrumental music, and unsuitable shows, and from adorning and beautifying themselves by wearing garlands and applying scents and unguents.
“‘As long as they live the arahants abstain from dancing, singing, instrumental music, and unsuitable shows, and from adorning and beautifying themselves by wearing garlands and applying scents and unguents.
“‘As long as they live the arahants abstain from dancing, singing, instrumental music, and unsuitable shows, and from adorning and beautifying themselves by wearing garlands and applying scents and unguents.
“‘As long as they live the arahants eat once a day, abstaining from eating at night and from food outside the proper time.
“‘As long as they live the arahants eat once a day, abstaining from eating at night and from food outside the proper time.
“‘As long as they live the arahants eat once a day, abstaining from eating at night and from food outside the proper time.
“‘As this venerable one is living in dependence on the Teacher or on a certain fellow monk in the position of a teacher … … those venerable ones … dispel his perplexity about numerous perplexing points.
“‘Brahmā,’ bhikkhus, is a designation for mother and father.
“‘Brahmā,’ bhikkhus, is a designation for mother and father.
“‘But with the remainderless fading away and cessation of ignorance comes cessation of volitional activities; with the cessation of volitional activities, cessation of consciousness; with the cessation of consciousness, cessation of name-and-form; with the cessation of name-and-form, cessation of the six sense bases; with the cessation of the six sense bases, cessation of contact; with the cessation of contact, cessation of feeling; with the cessation of feeling, cessation of craving; with the cessation of craving, cessation of clinging; with the cessation of clinging, cessation of existence; with the cessation of existence, cessation of birth; with the cessation of birth, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejection, and anguish cease.
“‘But, sirs, it is because the ascetic Rāmaputta is wiser than King Eḷeyya’s vassals, more astute than those astute in matters pertaining to tasks and administrative duties, to edicts and proclamations, that King Eḷeyya’s vassals have complete confidence in him and show him supreme honor by paying homage to him, rising up for him, reverentially saluting him, and observing proper etiquette toward him.’”
“‘But, sirs,’ ‘it is because the ascetic Rāmaputta is wiser than the wise King Eḷeyya, more astute than this astute in matters pertaining to tasks and administrative duties, to edicts and proclamations, that King Eḷeyya has complete confidence in him and shows him supreme honor by paying homage to him, rising up for him, reverentially saluting him, and observing proper etiquette toward him.
“‘For a long time this venerable one’s conduct has been broken, flawed, blemished, and blotched, and he does not consistently observe and follow virtuous behavior.
“‘Friends, all things are rooted in desire.
“‘Friends, all things are rooted in desire.
“‘Having conquered the army of the pleasant and agreeable,meditating alone, I discovered bliss,the attainment of the goal, the peace of the heart.
“‘Having conquered the army of the pleasant and agreeable,meditating alone, I discovered bliss,the attainment of the goal, the peace of the heart.Therefore I don’t form intimate ties with people,nor does intimacy with anyone get a chance with me.’ 
“‘Having heard that Dhamma, this venerable one resorts to two kinds of withdrawal: withdrawal in body and withdrawal in mind.
“‘Having understood both ends,the wise one does not stick in the middle.I call him a great man:he has here transcended the seamstress.’
“‘Having understood both ends,the wise one does not stick in the middle.I call him a great man:he has here transcended the seamstress.’”
“‘Here, friends, a bhikkhu has good friends, good companions, good comrades.
“‘Homage to you, O thoroughbred person!
“‘Homage to you, O thoroughbred person!Homage to you, O supreme person!We ourselves do not understandWhat you meditate in dependence on.’”
“‘Homage to you, O thoroughbred person!Homage to you, O supreme person!We ourselves do not understandWhat you meditate in dependence on.’”
“‘I am not afraid of disrepute….
“‘I have entered upon a classless condition; my living is dependent upon others; my deportment should be different.’
When these three perceptions of an ascetic are developed and cultivated, they fulfill seven things.
“‘If my aggregate of concentration were incomplete, for the sake of completing it I would honor, respect, and dwell in dependence on another ascetic or brahmin.
“‘If my aggregate of liberation were incomplete, for the sake of completing it I would honor, respect, and dwell in dependence on another ascetic or brahmin.
“‘If my aggregate of wisdom were incomplete, for the sake of completing it I would honor, respect, and dwell in dependence on another ascetic or brahmin.
“‘If you censure and repudiate this Dhamma factor of non-longing, then you must regard as worthy of worship and praise those ascetics and brahmins who are full of longing and deeply passionate about sensual pleasures.
“‘In the midst of the Saṅgha, this venerable one does not engage in rambling and pointless talk … or he adopts noble silence.
“‘Is it possible, Bhante, by traveling to know, see, or reach the end of the world, where one is not born, does not grow old and die, does not pass away and get reborn?’”
“‘Just as a drop of dew on the tip of a blade of grass will quickly vanish at sunrise and will not last long, so too, brahmins, human life is like a drop of dew.
“‘Just as a line drawn on water with a stick will quickly vanish and will not last long, so too, brahmins, human life is like a line drawn on water with a stick.
“‘Just as a piece of meat thrown into an iron pan heated all day will quickly vanish and will not last long, so too, brahmins, human life is like this piece of meat.
“‘Just as a river flowing down from a mountain, going a long distance, with a swift current, carrying along much flotsam, will not stand still for a moment, an instant, a second, but will rush on, swirl, and flow forward, so too, brahmins, human life is like a mountain stream.
“‘Just as a strong man might form a lump of spittle at the tip of his tongue and spit it out without difficulty, so too, brahmins, human life is like a lump of spittle.
“‘Just as, when a cow to be slaughtered is being led to the slaughterhouse, whatever leg she lifts, she is close to slaughter, close to death, so too, brahmins, human life is like a cow doomed to slaughter.
“‘Just as, when thick drops of rain are pouring down, a water bubble will quickly vanish and will not last long, so too, brahmins, human life is like a water bubble.
“‘May my mind not be deluded by things that cause delusion!’ One bent on his own welfare should practice heedfulness, mindfulness, and guarding of the mind thus.
“‘May my mind not be full of hate toward things that provoke hatred!’ One bent on his own welfare should practice heedfulness, mindfulness, and guarding of the mind thus.
“‘May my mind not be intoxicated by things that intoxicate!’ One bent on his own welfare should practice heedfulness, mindfulness, and guarding of the mind thus.
“‘May my mind not become excited by things that provoke lust!’ One bent on his own welfare should practice heedfulness, mindfulness, and guarding of the mind thus.
“‘The khattiya is the best among peoplefor those whose standard is the clan,but one accomplished in true knowledge and conductis best among devas and humans.’
“‘The khattiya is the best among peoplefor those whose standard is the clan,but one accomplished in true knowledge and conductis best among devas and humans.’”
“‘The lion,’ bhikkhus, is a designation for the Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
“‘The perfect Buddhas of the past,the Buddhas of the future,and the present Buddhawho removes the sorrow of many:all those dwelled, now dwell,and will dwellrevering the good Dhamma.This is the nature of the Buddhas.
“‘The person who would be like me …and during special fortnights.’
“‘The person who would be like me …and during special fortnights.’
“‘The person who would be like me …and during special fortnights.’ 
“‘The person who would be like meshould observe the uposathacomplete in the eight factors,on the fourteenth, fifteenth,and eighth of the fortnight,and during special fortnights.’
“‘The sage, the withdrawn chief bull,the Buddha who awakened to jhāna,the One of Broad Wisdom has foundthe opening amid confinement.’
“‘The Tathāgata exists after death’: this is an involvement with craving … … this is an involvement with perception … … something conceived … … a proliferation … … an involvement with clinging … … a remorse; ‘The Tathāgata does not exist after death’: this is a remorse; ‘The Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death’: this is a remorse; ‘The Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death’: this is a remorse.
“‘The Tathāgata exists after death’: this is an involvement with views; ‘The Tathāgata does not exist after death’: this is an involvement with views; ‘The Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death’: this is an involvement with views; ‘The Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death’: this is an involvement with views.
“‘The world is eternal; this alone is true, anything else is wrong,’ friend: this is a speculative view.
“‘There are, bhikkhu, these six proper occasions for going to see an esteemed bhikkhu.
“‘Therefore one desiring the good,aspiring for greatness,should revere the good Dhamma,recollecting the Buddhas’ teaching.’
“‘These are the six elements’: this, bhikkhus, is the Dhamma taught by me that is unrefuted … uncensured by wise ascetics and brahmins.
“‘This is suffering,’ friend, is what one has not known, seen, attained, realized, and penetrated, and it is for the purpose of knowing, seeing, attaining, realizing, and penetrating this that one lives the spiritual life under the Blessed One.
“‘This venerable one delights in company, takes delight in company, is devoted to delight in company.
“‘This venerable one delights in sleep, takes delight in sleep, is devoted to delight in sleep.
“‘This venerable one delights in talk, takes delight in talk, is devoted to delight in talk.
“‘This venerable one delights in work, takes delight in work, is devoted to delight in work.
“‘This venerable one dwells contemplating arising and vanishing in the five aggregates subject to clinging….
“‘This venerable one has aroused energy for abandoning unwholesome qualities … not casting off the duty of cultivating wholesome qualities.
“‘This venerable one has bad friends.
“‘This venerable one has evil desires and his mind is often obsessed by desire.
“‘This venerable one has learned much … and penetrated well by view.
“‘This venerable one is a deceiver.
“‘This venerable one is crafty and his mind is often obsessed by craftiness.
“‘This venerable one is deceitful and his mind is often obsessed by deceitfulness.
“‘This venerable one is difficult to correct.
“‘This venerable one is difficult to support.
“‘This venerable one is envious and his mind is often obsessed by envy.
“‘This venerable one is full of ill will and his mind is often obsessed by ill will.
“‘This venerable one is full of longing and his mind is often obsessed by longing.
“‘This venerable one is given to doubt and his mind is often obsessed by doubt.
“‘This venerable one is given to dullness and drowsiness and his mind is often obsessed by dullness and drowsiness.
“‘This venerable one is hostile and his mind is often obsessed by hostility.
“‘This venerable one is insolent and his mind is often obsessed by insolence.
“‘This venerable one is lazy.
“‘This venerable one is miserly and his mind is often obsessed by miserliness.
“‘This venerable one is muddle-minded.
“‘This venerable one is of little learning and without proper conduct.
“‘This venerable one is prone to anger and his mind is often obsessed by anger.
“‘This venerable one is prone to denigration and his mind is often obsessed by denigration.
“‘This venerable one is restless and his mind is often obsessed by restlessness.
“‘This venerable one is unwise.
“‘This venerable one is virtuous; he dwells restrained by the Pātimokkha … he trains in them.
“‘This venerable one is without faith.
“‘We have heard, Master Gotama: “The ascetic Gotama does not pay homage to brahmins who are old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, come to the last stage; nor does he stand up for them or offer them a seat.”
This is indeed true, for Master Gotama does not pay homage to brahmins who are old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in life, come to the last stage; nor does he stand up for them or offer them a seat.
“‘What do you think, sirs, in matters pertaining to tasks and administrative duties, to edicts and proclamations, are King Eḷeyya’s vassals—Yamaka, Moggalla, Ugga, Nāvindakī, Gandhabba, Aggivessa—wise and more astute even than those who are very astute?’
“‘When there is something further to be done, this venerable one comes to a stop along the way on account of some lower achievement of distinction.
“‘When there is something further to be done, this venerable one comes to a stop along the way on account of some lower achievement of distinction.
“‘Yes, sir, in matters pertaining to tasks and administrative duties, to edicts and proclamations, King Eḷeyya’s vassals—Yamaka … Aggivessa—are wise and more astute even than those who are very astute.’
“… among attendants of the Saṅgha is the householder Uggata.”
“… among donors is the householder Sudatta Anāthapiṇḍika.”
“… among donors is Visākhā Migāramātā.”
“… among forest dwellers is Revata Khadiravaniya.”
“… among meditators is Kaṅkhārevata.”
“… among meditators is Nandā.”
“… among meditators is Uttarā Nandamātā.”
“… among personal attendants is Ānanda.”
“… among speakers on the Dhamma is Dhammadinnā.”
“… among speakers on the Dhamma is the householder Citta of Macchikāsaṇḍa.”
“… among the upholders of the discipline is Upāli.”
“… among those from eminent families is Bhaddiya Kāḷigodhāyaputta.”
“… among those pleasing and agreeable to the deities is Piḷindavaccha.”
“… among those resolved through faith is Sigālamātā.”
“… among those resolved through faith is Vakkalī.”
“… among those skilled in mental transformation is Cullapanthaka.”
“… among those skilled in the transformation of perception is Mahāpanthaka.”
“… among those who are excellent speakers is Soṇa Kuṭikaṇṇa.”
“… among those who are first to take meal tickets is Kuṇḍadhāna.”
“… among those who are intimate is the housewife Nakulamātā.”
“… among those who are learned is Khujjuttarā.”
“… among those who are resolute is Ānanda.”
“… among those who arouse energy is Soṇa Koḷivīsa.”
“… among those who arouse energy is Soṇā.”
“… among those who assign lodgings is Dabba Mallaputta.”
“… among those who attain great direct knowledge is Bhaddā Kaccānā.”
“… among those who attend on the sick is the female lay follower Suppiyā.”
“… among those who compose inspired verse is Vaṅgīsa.”
“… among those who dwell in loving-kindness is Sāmāvatī.”
“… among those who dwell without conflict is Subhūti.”
“… among those who exhort bhikkhunīs is Nandaka.”
“… among those who exhort bhikkhus is Mahākappina.”
“… among those who explain in detail the meaning of what has been stated in brief is Mahākaccāna.” 
“… among those who expound the ascetic practices is Mahākassapa.”
“… among those who give what is agreeable is the householder Ugga of Vesālī.”
“… among those who give what is excellent is Mahānāma the Sakyan.”
“… among those who give what is excellent is Suppavāsā the Koliyan daughter.”
“… among those who guard the doors of the sense faculties is Nanda.”
“… among those who have attained the analytical knowledges is Mahākoṭṭhita.”
“… among those who have gone forth out of faith is Raṭṭhapāla.”
“… among those who have trust is the householder Nakulapitā.”
“… among those who inspire confidence in all respects is Upasena Vaṅgantaputta.”
“… among those who inspire confidence in families is Kāludāyi.”
“… among those who make gains is Sīvalī.”
“… among those who make use of the four means of attracting and sustaining others is Hatthaka of Āḷavī.”
“… among those who quickly attain direct knowledge is Bhaddā Kuṇḍalakesā.”
“… among those who quickly attain direct knowledge is Bāhiya Dārucīriya.”
“… among those who receive eloquent discourses is Rādha.”
“… among those who recollect past lives is Bhaddā Kāpilānī.”
“… among those who recollect past lives is Sobhita.”
“… among those who speak on the Dhamma is Puṇṇa Mantāṇiputta.”
“… among those who uphold the discipline is Paṭācārā.”
“… among those who wear coarse robes is Kisāgotamī.”
“… among those who wear coarse robes is Mogharājā.”
“… among those whose confidence is based on hearsay is the female lay follower Kāḷī of Kuraraghara.”
“… among those with a large retinue is Uruvelakassapa.”
“… among those with a quick grasp is Ānanda.”
“… among those with a sweet voice is Lakuṇṭaka Bhaddiya.”
“… among those with confidence in persons is Jīvaka Komārabhacca.”
“… among those with good health is Bakkula.”
“… among those with good memory is Ānanda.” 
“… among those with great wisdom is Khemā.”
“… among those with great wisdom is Sāriputta.”
“… among those with psychic potency is Mahāmoggallāna.”
“… among those with psychic potency is Uppalavaṇṇā.”
“… among those with skill with the fire element is Sāgata.”
“… among those with the divine eye is Anuruddha.”
“… among those with the divine eye is Sakulā.”
“… among those with the lion’s roar is Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja.”
“… among those with unwavering confidence is Kātiyānī.”
“… among those with unwavering confidence is Sūra Ambaṭṭha.”
“… among those with variegated speech is Kumārakassapa.”
“… among those worthy of gifts is Subhūti.”
“… and I also knew about those deities: ‘After passing away here these deities were reborn there as a result of this kamma.’
Yet I did not know of those deities: ‘As a result of this kamma, these deities subsist on such food and experience such pleasure and pain.’
“… and I also knew about those deities: ‘As a result of this kamma, these deities have a life span of such length.’
Yet I did not know whether or not I had previously lived together with those deities.
“… and I also knew about those deities: ‘As a result of this kamma, these deities subsist on such food and experience such pleasure and pain.’
Yet I did not know of those deities: ‘As a result of this kamma, these deities have a life span of such length.’
“… bad friendship … … good friendship …”
“… bad friendship … … good friendship …”
“… careless attention … … careful attention …”
“… careless attention … … careful attention …”
“… careless attention … … careful attention …”
“… develops recollection of the Buddha … develops recollection of the Dhamma … develops recollection of the Saṅgha … develops recollection of virtuous behavior … develops recollection of generosity … develops recollection of the deities … develops mindfulness of breathing … develops mindfulness of death … develops mindfulness directed to the body … develops recollection of peace …”
“… develops right view … develops right intention … develops right speech … develops right action … develops right livelihood … develops right effort … develops right mindfulness … develops right concentration …”
“… develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to desire and activities of striving … develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to energy and activities of striving … develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to mind and activities of striving … develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to investigation and activities of striving …”
“… develops the earth kasiṇa …  develops the water kasiṇa … develops the fire kasiṇa … develops the air kasiṇa … develops the blue kasiṇa … develops the yellow kasiṇa … develops the red kasiṇa … develops the white kasiṇa … develops the space kasiṇa … develops the consciousness kasiṇa …”
“… develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness … develops the enlightenment factor of discrimination of phenomena … develops the enlightenment factor of energy … develops the enlightenment factor of rapture … develops the enlightenment factor of tranquility … develops the enlightenment factor of concentration … develops the enlightenment factor of equanimity …”
“… develops the faculty of faith accompanied by loving-kindness … develops the faculty of energy … develops the faculty of mindfulness … develops the faculty of concentration … develops the faculty of wisdom … develops the power of faith … develops the power of energy … develops the power of mindfulness … develops the power of concentration … develops the power of wisdom accompanied by loving-kindness …”
“… develops the faculty of faith accompanied by the first jhāna … develops the faculty of energy … develops the faculty of mindfulness … develops the faculty of concentration … develops the faculty of wisdom … develops the power of faith … develops the power of energy … develops the power of mindfulness … develops the power of concentration … develops the power of wisdom accompanied by the first jhāna …”
“… develops the faculty of faith … develops the faculty of energy … develops the faculty of mindfulness … develops the faculty of concentration … develops the faculty of wisdom … develops the power of faith … develops the power of energy … develops the power of mindfulness … develops the power of concentration … develops the power of wisdom …”
“… develops the perception of impermanence … develops the perception of non-self …  develops the perception of death … develops the perception of the repulsiveness of food … develops the perception of non-delight in the entire world … develops the perception of a skeleton … develops the perception of a worm-infested corpse … develops the perception of a livid corpse … develops the perception of a fissured corpse … develops the perception of a bloated corpse …”
“… develops the perception of unattractiveness … develops the perception of death … develops the perception of the repulsiveness of food … develops the perception of non-delight in the entire world … develops the perception of impermanence … develops the perception of suffering in the impermanent … develops the perception of non-self in what is suffering … develops the perception of abandoning … develops the perception of dispassion … develops the perception of cessation …”
“… dwells contemplating the body in the body, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed longing and dejection in regard to the world … dwells contemplating feelings in feelings … dwells contemplating mind in mind … dwells contemplating phenomena in phenomena, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed longing and dejection in regard to the world …”
“… generates desire for the non-arising of unarisen bad unwholesome qualities; makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives … generates desire for the abandoning of arisen bad unwholesome qualities; makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives … generates desire for the arising of unarisen wholesome qualities; makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives … generates desire for the maintenance of arisen wholesome qualities, for their non-decline, increase, expansion, and fulfillment by development; makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives …”
“… has added an amendment prescribed …”
“… has prescribed a legal act that consists in a motion …”
“… has prescribed a legal act that includes a motion as the fourth …”
“… has prescribed a legal act that includes a motion as the second …”
“… has prescribed aggravated misconduct …”
“… has prescribed covering over with grass.
“… has prescribed full ordination …”
“… has prescribed rehabilitation …”
“… has prescribed reinstatement …”
“… has prescribed removal by presence …”
“… has prescribed removal on account of insanity …”
“… has prescribed removal on account of recollection …”
“… has prescribed removal …”
“… has prescribed sending back to the beginning …”
“… has prescribed the acknowledgment …”
“… has prescribed the imposition of penance …”
“… has prescribed the imposition of probation …”
“… has prescribed the invitation ceremony …”
“… has prescribed the legal act of banishment …”
“… has prescribed the legal act of censure …”
“… has prescribed the legal act of dependence …”
“… has prescribed the legal act of reconciliation …”
“… has prescribed the legal act of suspension …”
“… has prescribed the majority …”
“… has prescribed the recitation of the Pātimokkha …” 
“… has prescribed the suspension of the invitation ceremony …”
“… has prescribed the suspension of the Pātimokkha …”
“… has prescribed when none had been prescribed before …”
“… He abstains from the destruction of life, abstains from taking what is not given, abstains from sexual misconduct, and abstains from false speech….”
“… He destroys life, takes what is not given, engages in sexual misconduct, and speaks falsely….
“… he develops right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration.
“… he develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to desire and activities of striving.
“… he develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness, the enlightenment factor of discrimination of phenomena, the enlightenment factor of energy, the enlightenment factor of rapture, the enlightenment factor of tranquility, the enlightenment factor of concentration, the enlightenment factor of equanimity….”
“… he develops the faculty of faith, the faculty of energy, the faculty of mindfulness, the faculty of concentration, the faculty of wisdom….”
“… he develops the power of faith, the power of energy, the power of mindfulness, the power of concentration, the power of wisdom….”
“… he does not gaze and stare straight into women’s eyes … but he listens to their voices behind a wall or through a rampart as they laugh, talk, sing, or weep….
“… he does not joke with women, play with them, and amuse himself with them … but he gazes and stares straight into their eyes….
“… he does not listen to the voices of women behind a wall or through a rampart as they laugh, talk, sing, or weep … but he recollects laughing, talking, and playing with them in the past….
“… he does not look at a householder or a householder’s son enjoying himself furnished and endowed with the five objects of sensual pleasure, but he lives the spiritual life aspiring for a certain order of devas,: ‘By this virtuous behavior, observance, austerity, or spiritual life I will be a deva or one of the devas.’
He relishes this, desires it, and finds satisfaction in it.
“… he does not recollect laughing, talking, and playing with women in the past … but he looks at a householder or a householder’s son enjoying himself furnished and endowed with the five objects of sensual pleasure….
“… He is devoid of faith, immoral, morally shameless, and morally reckless….
“… He is endowed with faith, virtuous, and has a sense of moral shame and moral dread….” 
“… He is intent upon non-confusion because he is devoid of lust through the destruction of lust; because he is devoid of hatred through the destruction of hatred; because he is devoid of delusion through the destruction of delusion.
“… He is intent upon the destruction of clinging because he is devoid of lust through the destruction of lust; because he is devoid of hatred through the destruction of hatred; because he is devoid of delusion through the destruction of delusion.
“… He is intent upon the destruction of craving because he is devoid of lust through the destruction of lust; because he is devoid of hatred through the destruction of hatred; because he is devoid of delusion through the destruction of delusion.
“… He is of right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration….”
“… He is of wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong concentration….
“… He is of wrong view, wrong intention, wrong speech, and wrong action….
“… He says that he has not seen what he has not seen; he says that he has not heard what he has not heard; he says that he has not sensed what he has not sensed; he says that he has not cognized what he has not cognized….”
“… He says that he has not seen what he has seen; he says that he has not heard what he has heard; he says that he has not sensed what he has sensed; he says that he has not cognized what he has cognized….
“… He says that he has seen what he has not seen; he says that he has heard what he has not heard; he says that he has sensed what he has not sensed; he says that he has cognized what he has not cognized….
“… He says that he has seen what he has seen; he says that he has heard what he has heard; he says that he has sensed what he has sensed; he says that he has cognized what he has cognized….”
“… Heis of right view, right intention, right speech, and right action….”
“… in craving for forms … in craving for sounds … in craving for odors … in craving for tastes … in craving for tactile objects … in craving for phenomena …”
“… in examination of forms … in examination of sounds … in examination of odors … in examination of tastes … in examination of tactile objects … in examination of phenomena …”
“… in eye-consciousness … in ear-consciousness … in nose-consciousness … in tongue-consciousness … in body-consciousness … in mind-consciousness …”
“… in eye-contact … in ear-contact … in nose-contact … in tongue-contact … in body-contact … in mind-contact …”
“… in feeling born of eye-contact … in feeling born of ear-contact … in feeling born of nose-contact … in feeling born of tongue-contact … in feeling born of body-contact … in feeling born of mind-contact …”
“… in forms … in sounds … in odors … in tastes … in tactile objects … in phenomena …”
“… in perception of forms … in perception of sounds … in perception of odors … in perception of tastes … in perception of tactile objects … in perception of phenomena …”
“… in the ear … in the nose … in the tongue … in the body … in the mind …”
“… in thought about forms … in thought about sounds … in thought about odors … in thought about tastes … in thought about tactile objects … in thought about phenomena …”
“… in volition regarding forms … in volition regarding sounds … in volition regarding odors … in volition regarding tastes … in volition regarding tactile objects … in volition regarding phenomena …”
“… lack of clear comprehension … … clear comprehension …”
“… lack of clear comprehension … … clear comprehension …”
“… lack of clear comprehension … … clear comprehension …”
“… non-contentment … … contentment …”
“… non-contentment … … contentment …”
“… non-contentment … … contentment …”
“… One abstains from divisive speech oneself, encourages others to abstain from divisive speech, and approves of abstaining from divisive speech….”
“… One abstains from false speech oneself, encourages others to abstain from false speech, and approves of abstaining from false speech….”
“… One abstains from harsh speech oneself, encourages others to abstain from harsh speech, and approves of abstaining from harsh speech….”
“… One abstains from idle chatter oneself, encourages others to abstain from idle chatter, and approves of abstaining from idle chatter….”
“… One abstains from sexual misconduct oneself, encourages others to abstain from sexual misconduct, and approves of abstaining from sexual misconduct….”
“… One abstains from taking what is not given oneself, encourages others to abstain from taking what is not given, and approves of abstaining from taking what is not given….”
“… One abstains from the destruction of life, from taking what is not given, from sexual misconduct, and from false speech….” 
“… One destroys life, takes what is not given, engages in sexual misconduct, and speaks falsely….
“… One engages in sexual misconduct oneself, encourages others to engage in sexual misconduct, and approves of engaging in sexual misconduct….”
“… One has ill will oneself, encourages others in ill will, and approves of ill will….”
“… One holds right view oneself, encourages others in right view, and approves of right view.
“… One holds wrong view oneself, encourages others in wrong view, and approves of wrong view….”
“… One indulges in idle chatter oneself, encourages others to indulge in idle chatter, and approves of indulging in idle chatter….”
“… One is devoid of faith, immoral, morally shameless, and morally reckless….
“… One is endowed with faith, virtuous, and has a sense of moral shame and moral dread….”
“… One is full of longing oneself, encourages others in longing, and approves of longing….”
“… One is of right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration….”
“… One is of right view, right intention, right speech, and right action….”
“… One is of wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong concentration….
“… One is of wrong view, wrong intention, wrong speech, and wrong action….
“… One is without ill will oneself, encourages others to be without ill will, and approves of being without ill will….”
“… One is without longing oneself, encourages others to be without longing, and approves of being without longing….” 
“… One says that one has not seen what one has not seen; one says that one has not heard what one has not heard; one says that one has not sensed what one has not sensed; one says that one has not cognized what one has not cognized….”
“… One says that one has not seen what one has seen; one says that one has not heard what one has heard; one says that one has not sensed what one has sensed; one says that one has not cognized what one has cognized….
“… One says that one has seen what one has not seen; one says that one has heard what one has not heard; one says that one has sensed what one has not sensed; one says that one has cognized what one has not cognized….
“… One says that one has seen what one has seen; one says that one has heard what one has heard; one says that one has sensed what one has sensed; one says that one has cognized what one has cognized….”
“… One speaks divisively oneself, encourages others to speak divisively, and approves of divisive speech….”
“… One speaks falsely oneself, encourages others to speak falsely, and approves of false speech….”
“… One speaks harshly oneself, encourages others to speak harshly, and approves of harsh speech….”
“… One takes what is not given oneself, encourages others to take what is not given, and approves of taking what is not given….”
“… percipient of forms internally, sees forms externally, limited, beautiful or ugly, and having overcome them, is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see’ … percipient of forms internally, sees forms externally, measureless, beautiful or ugly, and having overcome them, is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see’ … not percipient of forms internally, sees forms externally, limited, beautiful or ugly, and having overcome them, is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see’ … not percipient of forms internally, sees forms externally, measureless, beautiful or ugly, and having overcome them, is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see’ … not percipient of forms internally, sees forms externally, blue ones, blue in color, with a blue hue, with a blue tint, and having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see’ … not percipient of forms internally, sees forms externally, yellow ones, yellow in color, with a yellow hue, with a yellow tint, and having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see’ … not percipient of forms internally, sees forms externally, red ones, red in color, with a red hue, with a red tint, and having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see’ … not percipient of forms internally, sees forms externally, white ones, white in color, with a white hue, with a white tint, and having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see’ …”
“… possessing form sees forms …  not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally … is focused only on ‘beautiful’ … with the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, ‘space is infinite,’ enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space … by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of space, ‘consciousness is infinite,’ enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of consciousness … by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness, ‘there is nothing,’ enters and dwells in the base of nothingness … by completely surmounting the base of nothingness, enters and dwells in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception … by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, he enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling …”
“… She is of right effort and right mindfulness….”
“… She is of right speech and right action….”
“… She is of wrong effort and wrong mindfulness….
“… She is of wrong speech and wrong action….
“… so too those beings are few who acquire a sense of urgency about things inspiring urgency; more numerous are those who do not acquire a sense of urgency about things inspiring urgency.”
“… so too those beings are few who are endowed with the noble eye of wisdom; more numerous are those beings who are confused and immersed in ignorance.”
“… so too those beings are few who are reborn among human beings; more numerous are those beings who have been reborn elsewhere than among human beings.”
“… so too those beings are few who are reborn in the middle provinces; more numerous are those who have been reborn in the outlying provinces among the uncouth foreigners.”
“… so too those beings are few who are wise, intelligent, astute, able to understand the meaning of what has been well stated and badly stated; more numerous are those who are unwise, stupid, obtuse, unable to understand the meaning of what has been well stated and badly stated.”
“… so too those beings are few who examine the meaning of the teachings that have been retained in mind; more numerous are those who do not examine the meaning of the teachings that have been retained in mind.”
“… so too those beings are few who gain concentration, one-pointedness of mind, based on release; more numerous are those who do not gain concentration, one-pointedness of mind, based on release.”
“… so too those beings are few who get to hear the Dhamma and discipline expounded by the Tathāgata; more numerous are those who do not get to hear it.”
“… so too those beings are few who get to see the Tathāgata; more numerous are those beings who do not get to see him.”
“… so too those beings are few who obtain the exquisite taste of delicious food; more numerous are those who do not gain such food but subsist on scraps brought in a bowl.”
“… so too those beings are few who obtain the taste of the meaning, the taste of the Dhamma, the taste of liberation; more numerous are those who do not obtain the taste of the meaning, the taste of the Dhamma, the taste of liberation.
“… so too those beings are few who understand the meaning and the Dhamma and then practice in accordance with the Dhamma; more numerous are those who do not understand the meaning and the Dhamma and do not practice in accordance with the Dhamma.”
“… so too those beings are few who, having heard the Dhamma, retain it in mind; more numerous are those who, having heard the Dhamma, do not retain it in mind.”
“… so too those beings are few who, when inspired with a sense of urgency, strive carefully; more numerous are those who, when inspired with a sense of urgency, do not strive carefully.”
“… strong desire … … fewness of desires …”
“… strong desire … … fewness of desires …”
“… strong desire … … fewness of desires …”
“… the pursuit of unwholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of wholesome qualities … … the pursuit of wholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of unwholesome qualities.
“… the pursuit of unwholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of wholesome qualities … … the pursuit of wholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of unwholesome qualities.
“… With the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, he becomes an attainer of nibbāna through exertion.
“… With the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, he becomes an attainer of nibbāna upon landing.
“… With the utter destruction of the five lower fetters, he becomes an attainer of nibbāna without exertion.
“… – develops the faculty of faith … develops the power of wisdom accompanied by compassion … – develops the faculty of faith … the power of wisdom accompanied by altruistic joy … – develops the faculty of faith … the power of wisdom accompanied by equanimity … … he is called a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
“… – develops the faculty of faith … the power of wisdom accompanied by the second jhāna … – develops the faculty of faith … the power of wisdom accompanied by the third jhāna … – develops the faculty of faith … the power of wisdom accompanied by the fourth jhāna …”
“… ‘The result of divisive speech is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons divisive speech; he descends from divisive speech.
“… ‘The result of false speech is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons false speech; he descends from false speech.
“… ‘The result of harsh speech is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons harsh speech; he descends from harsh speech.
“… ‘The result of idle chatter is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons idle chatter; he descends from idle chatter.
“… ‘The result of ill will is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons ill will; he descends from ill will.
“… ‘The result of longing is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons longing; he descends from longing.
“… ‘The result of sexual misconduct is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons sexual misconduct; he descends from sexual misconduct.
“… ‘The result of taking what is not given is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons taking what is not given; he descends from taking what is not given.
“… ‘The result of wrong action is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong action; he descends from wrong action.
“… ‘The result of wrong concentration is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong concentration; he descends from wrong concentration.
“… ‘The result of wrong effort is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong effort; he descends from wrong effort.
“… ‘The result of wrong knowledge is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong knowledge; he descends from wrong knowledge.
“… ‘The result of wrong liberation is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong liberation; he descends from wrong liberation.
“… ‘The result of wrong livelihood is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong livelihood; he descends from wrong livelihood.
“… ‘The result of wrong mindfulness is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong mindfulness; he descends from wrong mindfulness.
“… ‘The result of wrong speech is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong speech; he descends from wrong speech.
“… ‘The result of wrong view is bad both in this present life and in future lives.’
Having reflected thus, he abandons wrong view; he descends from wrong view.
…  … It is in this way that a bhikkhu is a noble one with banner lowered, with burden dropped, detached.”
… Because his brahmin wife does not serve for sensual pleasure, amusement, or sensual delight, but only for procreation.
… Bhante, did I hear that correctly from the Blessed One, grasp it correctly, attend to it correctly, remember it correctly?” 
… But when a bhikkhu is endowed with faith and is virtuous, and he gains internal serenity of mind and also gains the higher wisdom of insight into phenomena, then he is complete with respect to that factor.’
… by means of knowledge and conduct?
… Does the Tathāgata both exist and not exist after death?
… Does the Tathāgata neither exist nor not exist after death?
… Does the Tathāgata neither exist nor not exist after death?
… Does the Tathāgata not exist after death?
… Having undertaken the training rules, he trains in them.
… He does not obtain food … and lighting.
… I thought: ‘This mango grove is truly lovely and delightful, suitable for the striving of a clansman intent on striving.
… In this way, too, it can be understood how nibbāna is happiness.
… Is the soul one thing, the body another?
… Is the world infinite?
… Is there both something else and nothing else?
… Is there neither something else nor nothing else?’ you say: ‘Do not say so, friend.’
In what way should the meaning of this statement be understood?”
… Just as cloth from Kāsi is of great value, so, I say, this person is similar.
… Just as cloth made of bark fabric is of little value, so, I say, this person is similar.
… Let Master Gotama accept me as a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… Let Master Gotama accept me as a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.” 
… Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.” 
… Let the Blessed One accept me as a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… Let the Blessed One accept me as a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.” 
… Let us approach the Venerable Mahākaccāna and ask him the meaning of this.
… otherwise than by means of knowledge and conduct?’ you say: ‘This is not the case, friend.’
Then in what way does one become an end-maker?”
… Right there I went for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha, and undertook the training rules with celibacy as the fifth.
… Sāriputta and Moggallāna are well behaved.”
… Then he rose from his seat and entered his dwelling without expounding the meaning in detail.
… We go for refuge to the Blessed One, to the Dhamma, and to the Saṅgha of bhikkhus.
… What seven things?
… What six things?
… When she asked me this, I replied: ‘It was just in this way, sister, that the Blessed One declared it.’”
… With the utter destruction of the five lower fetters he becomes an attainer of nibbāna in the interval.
… – Are the soul and the body the same?
… – Does the Tathāgata exist after death?
… … … … … … Bhikkhus, there are these seven successes of a lay follower.
… … Bhikkhus, there are these seven victories for a lay follower.
… … Bhikkhus, when a donor gives food, he gives the recipients these four things.”
… … having a painful outcome and result.
… … having a painful outcome and result.
… … It is in this way that righteous conduct, conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, is threefold by way of the mind.
… … It is in this way that unrighteous conduct, conduct contrary to the Dhamma, is threefold by way of the mind.
… … Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.
… … Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… … Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… … Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… … Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… … Let Master Gotama consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… … Let Master Kaccāna consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… … Let the Blessed One consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… … Let the Blessed One consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… … Let the Blessed One consider me a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… … Let the Blessed One consider me as a lay follower who from today has gone for refuge for life.”
… … Let us approach the Venerable Ānanda and ask him the meaning of this.
… … Possessing these seven qualities, an expert in the discipline is resplendent.”
… … Possessing these seven qualities, an expert in the discipline is resplendent.”
… … Possessing these seven qualities, an expert in the discipline is resplendent.”
… … Possessing these seven qualities, an expert in the discipline is resplendent.”
… … These are the five benefits in bodily good conduct.”
… … These are the five dangers in bodily misconduct.
… … These are the seven successes of a lay follower.”
… … These are the seven victories for a lay follower.” 
… … This is called dark-and-bright kamma with dark-and-bright result.
… … this is called kamma that is neither dark nor bright with neither-dark-nor-bright result, kamma that leads to the destruction of kamma.
… … This is called the blistering way of practice.
… … This is called the coarse way of practice.
… … What is their consummation?’ you should answer them as follows.
… … What is their essence?’ you should answer them as follows.
…What you meditate in dependence on’?”Again, some ascetic or Brahmin recalls various existence..., but “up to ten, twenty, thirty, forty aeons...”).
And Brahmā Sanankumāra was pleased, overjoyed and filled with delight and happiness at what he had heard in the Lord’s praise.
And he saw beings with little dust on their eyes and with much dust, with faculties sharp and dull, of good and bad disposition, easy and hard to teach, and few of them living in fear of transgression and of the next world.
and he travels in the body as far as the Brahma world.
and it was not long before their minds were freed from the corruptions without remainder.
and the rice grows in separate clusters.
And the Venerable Ananda came to the Lord, saluted him, sat down to one side, and said: ‘It is wonderful, Lord, it is marvellous how profound this dependent origination is, and how profound it appears!
And then it may come about that, if you perform the duties of an Ariyan wheel-turning monarch, on the fast-day of the fifteenth, when you have washed your head and gone up to the verandah on top of your palace for the fast-day, the sacred Wheel-Treasure will appear to you, thousand-spoked, complete with felloe, hub and all appurtenances.”
And, Ananda, the faithful monks and nuns, male and female lay-followers will visit those places.
But one of them remained addicted to sensual pleasures.
Equally hard to see would be the calming of all the mental formations, the abandonment of all the substrates of rebirth, the waning of craving, dispassion, cessation and Nibbāna.
Excellent, Reverend Kassapa, excellent!
For he said:
He has feet with level tread.
He has feet with level tread.
He has high-raised ankles.
He has jaws like a lion’s.
He has soft and tender hands and feet.
He has the seven convex surfaces.
He knows the mind with hate to be with hate; he knows the mind without hate to be without hate.
His body-hairs are separate, one to each pore.
His head is like a royal turban.
His legs are like an antelope’s.
How does he do so?
How does it lead to the gaining of knowledge-and-vision?
It is this self that at the breaking-up of the body perishes...”
It is, monks, the knowledge of suffering, the knowledge of the origin of suffering, the knowledge of the cessation of suffering, and the knowledge of the way of practice leading to the cessation of suffering.
King Mahāvijita is endowed with these eight things.
No such situation can exist.”
That is his benefit as a Buddha.’
That is the third station.
Thatone-pointedness of mind that is produced by these seven factors is called the Ariyan right concentration with its bases and requisites.
The front part of his body is like a lion’s.
Thinking: “It is beautiful”, one becomes intent on it.
This is the unsurpassed teaching in regard to the designation of individuals...
When King Bandhumā was trying a case, he took Prince Vipassi on his knee and instructed him in the case.
Your teacher is not fully enlightened...You cannot live according to that doctrine..., but deviate from it.”
".
(Nānamoliʹs translation).
).
:
:
] Finally you would tell them to lead him up to your palace and let him indulge in the pleasures of the five senses, and they would do so.
a beryl-gem, clear, of finest water, So purified, we’ll follow in your wake.
A Brahmin is well-born on both the mother’s and the father’s side, of pure descent to the seventh generation,...
A Brahmin should walk with a walking Brahmin, stand with a standing Brahmin, sit with a sitting Brahmin, and lie down with a Brahmin who is lying down.
a Buddha, a Blessed Lord”.
A Buddha, called the Sakyan Sage, 
A disciple goes forth and practises the moralities, etc..
A disciple goes forth and practises the moralities, etc..
A disciple goes forth and practises the moralities, guards the sense-doors, attains the first jhāna.
A disciple goes forth and practises the moralities.
A disciple goes forth and practises the moralities.
A disciple goes forth and practises the moralities.
A disciple goes forth and practises the moralities; he guards the sensedoors, etc..
A disciple goes forth and practises the moralities; he guards the sensedoors, etc.; attains the four jhānas.
A disciple goes forth, practises the moralities, attains the first jhāna.
a fleshless skeleton smeared with blood, connected by sinews,...
A gift for taming the untamed, A gift for every kind of good;
A horrid din, as when a storm-cloud bursts
A hundred thousand yakkhas follow him.
a kettle-drum”, so the monk with mind concentrated...
a kind of elixir of life.
A lion’s roar, but only howls instead.
A lion’s roar, but only howls instead.
A man who was walking along behind them came to Āḷāra Kālāma and said: “Lord, did you not see five hundred carts go by?” “No, friend, I did not.” “But didn’t you hear them, Lord?” “No, friend, I did not.” “Well, were you asleep, Lord?” “No, friend, I was not asleep.” “Then, Lord, were you conscious?” “Yes, friend”.
A man with good eyesight, taking it in his hand and inspecting it, would describe it as such.
A mighty roar, but only howls instead.
A monk refrains from such base arts and wrong means of livelihood.
A monk should be mindful and clearly aware, this is our charge to you!’
A mother with her dearest child.
A second time the Lord said: ‘Ananda, bring me some water...’, and Ananda replied as before.
a skeleton detached from the flesh and blood, connected by sinews,...
A stupa should be erected at the crossroads for the Tathāgata.
A Tathāgata, Arahant, fully-enlightened Buddha is one, a Pacceka Buddha is one, a disciple of the Tathagata is one, and a wheel-turning monarch is one.
A third time the Lord said: ‘Ananda, bring me some water: I am thirsty and want to drink.’ ‘Very good, Lord’, said Ānanda and, taking his bowl, he went to the stream.
A white umbrella was held over him night and day, that he might not be harmed by cold or heat or grass or dust.
Abandoning doubt, he dwells with doubt left behind, without uncertainty as to what things are wholesome, his mind is purified of doubt.
Abandoning doubt, he dwells with doubt left behind, without uncertainty as to what things are wholesome, his mind purified of doubt.
Abandoning hankering for the world, he dwells with a mind freed from such hankering, and his mind is purified of it.
Abandoning harsh speech, he refrains from it.
Abandoning idle chatter, he speaks at the right time, what is correct and to the point, of Dhamma and discipline.
Abandoning ill-will and hatred, he dwells with a mind freed from them, and by compassionate love for the welfare of all living beings, his mind is purified of them.
Abandoning ill-will and hatred...
Abandoning malicious speech, he does not repeat there what he has heard here to the detriment of these, or repeat here what he has heard there to the detriment of those.
Abandoning sloth-and-torpor,...
Abandoning sloth-and-torpor,...
Abandoning the taking of life, he dwells refraining from taking life, without stick or sword, scrupulous, compassionate, trembling for the welfare of all living beings.
Abandoning the taking of what is not given,...
Abandoning unchastity, the ascetic Gotama lives far from it, aloof from the village-practice of sex.
abandoning unchastity,....
Abandoning worry-and-flurry,...
Abandoning worry-and-flurry...
able to hold his own, then you be quiet, and let him discuss with me.’
About that it was said:
About this it was said:
About this it was said:
About this it was said:
About this it was said:
About this it was said:
About this it was said:
About this it was said:
About this it was said:
About this it was said:
About this it was said:
About this it was said:
About this it was said:
About this it was said:
About this it was said:
About this it was said:
About this it was said:
About this it was said:
About this it was said:
About this it was said: 
above).
Accordingly those who indulged for an excessively long period in such immoral practices began to build themselves dwellings so as to indulge under cover.
Accordingly, Cunda, let the robe I have allowed you be simply for warding off the cold, for warding off the heat, for warding off the touch of gadfly, mosquito, wind, sun and creeping things, just so as to protect your modesty.
acquisition conditions decision-making,...
acquisition,...
Addiction to strong drink and sloth-producing drugs is one way of wasting one’s substance, haunting the streets at unfitting times is one, attending fairs is one, being addicted to gambling is one, keeping bad company is one, habitual idleness is one.
after death because of loss or relatives, wealth or health; but beings do fall into such states by loss of morality and right view.
After my parents’ deaths I will distribute gifts on their behalf.ʺ And there are five ways in which the parents, so ministered to by their son as the eastern direction, will reciprocate: they will restrain him from evil, support him in doing good, teach him some skill, find him a suitable wife and, in due time, hand over his inheritance to him.
After this greeting, Sakka entered the Indasāla Cave, saluted the Lord, and stood to one side, and the Thirty-Three Gods, with Pañcasikha, did the same.
After this the Venerable Ananda said: ‘Lord, may the Blessed Lord not pass away in this miserable little town of wattle-and-daub, right in the jungle in the back of beyond!
After two or three days’ journey he saw a dark red-eyed man coming towards him wearing a quiver and a wreath of white water-lilies, with his clothes and hair all wet, driving a donkey-chariot whose wheels were splashed with mud.
After what Brahma has told me about the stench of the world, which cannot be easily overcome by one living the household life, I am going forth into homelessness.’ ‘Reverend Steward, do not do so!
After what Brahmā has told me about the stench of the world, which cannot easily be overcome by one living the household life, I am going forth into homelessness:
Aftr two or three days’ journey this leader saw a dark red-eyed man coming towards him...
Again Ambattha remained silent, and the Lord said: ‘Answer me now, Ambattha, this is not a time for silence.
Again he was seized and rebuked, and some hit him with their fists, some with stones, and some with sticks.
Again, a monk is content with any alms-food he may get...
Again, a monk is content with any old lodging-place...
Again, a monk is mindful, with the highest mindfulness and discrimination, remembering and bearing in mind what has been done or said in the past.
Again, a monk through the extinction of the corruptions reaches in this very life the uncorrupted deliverance of mind, the deliverance through wisdom, which he has realised by his own insight.
Again, a monk who has abandoned the five lower fetters takes a spontaneous rebirth  and, without returning from that world, gains enlightenment.
Again, a monk who has abandoned the three fetters, and has reduced his greed, hatred and delusion, becomes a Once-Returner who, having returned to this world once more, will make an end of suffering.
Again, a monk, having stirred up energy, continues to dispel unwholesome states, striving strongly and firmly, and not casting off the yoke of the wholesome.
Again, a self-mortifier practises a certain austerity for the sake of gains, honours and fame, thinking: “Kings and their ministers will honour me, Khattiyas and Brahmins and householders, and religious teachers.”
Again, a self-mortifier practises a certain austerity, and he divides his food into two heaps, saying: “This suits me, that doesn’t suit me!” And what does not suit him he eagerly rejects, while what suits him he eats up greedily, recklessly and passionately, not seeing the peril, with no thought for the consequences.
Again, an ascetic or Brahmin, being unable to live on tubers and roots, makes a fire-hearth at the edge of a village or small town and sits tending the fame...
Again, an ascetic or Brahmin, being unable to tend the flame, erects a house with four doors at the crossroads thinking: “Whatever ascetic or Brahmin arrives from the four quarters, I will honour to the best of my strength and ability.”
Again, an ascetic or Brahmin..., being unable to live on windfalls, takes a spade and basket, thinking: “I will live on tubers and roots.”...
Again, having done this and gone further, he comes to know the unbroken stream of human consciousness as established both in this world and in the next.
Again, having done this and gone further, he contemplates the bones covered with skin, flesh and blood.
Again, having done this and gone still further, he comes to know the unbroken stream of human consciousness that is not established either in this world or in the next.
Again, having given up pleasure and pain, and with the disappearance of former gladness and sadness, he enters and remains in the fourth jhāna, which is beyond pleasure and pain, and purified by equanimity and mindfulness.
Again, he does not elevate himself and disparage others....
Again, I see one practiser of mortification...
Again, I see one who practises little austerity...
Again, I see one who practises little austerity...
Again, if I were asked: “Have there been any such in the past equal in enlightenment to the Blessed Lord?”
Again, some ascetic or Brahmin recalls various existences..., but “up to twenty aeons...
Again, with the fading of delight, remaining imperturbable, mindful and clearly aware, he experiences in himself that joy of which the Noble Ones say: “Happy is he who dwells with equanimity and mindfulness”, he enters and remains in the third jhāna.
aged and venerable.
Alike revered in all his glory.”’
All beings are maintained by nutriment ).
All beings, all living things, all creatures, all that lives is without control, without power or strength, they experience the fixed course of pleasure and pain through the six kinds of rebirth.
All his followers are well-disposed to him: monks, nuns, male and female lay-folowers, devas and humans, asuras, nagas, gandhabbas.
All his retinue are well-disposed to him: Brahmin householders, citizens and villagers, treasurers, guards, doorkeepers,...
All of these are vain speculations, not conducive to enlightenment, and as stated with reference to numbers and in DN, for one who ‘thus knows and thus sees’ it is not proper to speculate on such things: in other words, the questions will drop away as meaningless.
All restraining bonds, they broke
All the Arahant Buddhas of the future will do likewise, and you, Lord, who are now the Arahant, fully-enlightened Buddha, have done the same.
All the Arahant Buddhas of the future will do likewise, and you, Lord, who are now the Arahant, fully-enlightened Buddha, have done the same.’
All the forms assumed with one voice speak, And having spoken, all at once are silent.
All the quarters of the world.ʺʹ 
all the rest in fame and splendour, The mighty Sage’s pupils singled out.
All these people have come to your park and the ascetic Gotama has gone there for his midday rest.
All these people have come to your park, and the ascetic Gotama has gone there for his midday rest.
All this time Jivaka Komarabhacca was sitting silently near King Ajatasattu.
All those Arahant Buddhas of the past attained to supreme enlightenment by abandoning the five hindrances, defilements of mind that weaken the understanding, having firmly established the four foundations of mindfulness in their minds, and realised the seven factors of enlightenment as they really are.
All those Arahant Buddhas of the past attained to supreme enlightenment by abandoning the five hindrances, defilements of mind which weaken understanding, having firmly established the four foundations of mindfulness in their minds, and realised the seven factors of enlightenment as they really are.
All took their proper seats, each hoping Brahmā would sit on his couch.
Also, a monk continually contemplates the rise and fall of the five aggregates of grasping, thinking: “Such is material form, its arising and passing; such are feelings, such are perceptions, such are the mental formations, such is consciousness, its arising and passing.”
Also, a monk, having learnt much, remembers and bears in mind what he has learnt, and those things that are beautiful in the beginning, in the middle and in the ending, which in spirit and letter proclaim the absolutely perfected and purified holy life, he remembers and reflects on, and penetrates them with vision.
Also, there were three monks who, having observed the holy life under the Blessed Lord, had been reborn in the inferior condition of gandhabbas.
Am now reborn a male, a god, Rejoicing in celestial bliss!”
Ambaravatiya, 
Ambattha approached them and said: ‘Where is the Reverend Gotama to be found just now?
Ambattha went up to the dwelling and on to the verandah, coughed, and knocked.
Ambattha, you have not perfected your training.
among the animals,...
among the asuras,...
among the petas,...
Among them, fierce enmity will prevail one for another, fierce hatred, fierce anger and thoughts of killing, mother against child and child against mother, father against child and child against father, brother against brother, brother against sister, just as the hunter feels hatred for the beast he stalks...
Among them, kudrūsa-grain will be the chief food, just as rice and curry are today.
Among whom dwelling I shall make my final home.” 
An end of doubts, our homage due, The Buddha, Victor, Lord, we give.”
an immeasurable, splendid light....
An important reference to the two truths referred to in DA as ‘conventional speech’ and ‘ultimately true speech’.
Ananda replied: ‘Lord, five hundred carts have passed this way.
Ananda, in Nādikā more than fifty lay-followers have by the destruction of the five lower fetters been spontaneously reborn, and will gain Nibbāna from that state without returning to this world.
And a Brahmin did likewise, a Vessa did likewise, and so did a Sudda.
And a certain practiser of mortification called Nigrodha consulted me about the practice of austerity.
And a certain tribe was on the move, and its leader stayed for one night near the fire-worshipper’s dwelling, and then left.
And a certain Ājīvika chanced to be coming along the main road towards Pāvā, and he had picked a coral-tree flower in Kusinārā.
and a disciple lives according to that doctrine, and conforms to it.
And a lot of people went out of Atuma to where the two brothers and the four oxen were killed.
And a man from the crowd came to me, saluted me and stood to one side.
And a man with good eyesight, taking it in his hand, would describe it as such.
And a second and a third time the Venerable Ananda made the same request.
And a second time the Great Brahmā replied as before.
And a second time..., and a third time....
And a young Brahmin called Uttara was put in charge of the distribution.
and adopting the ascetic Gotama’s own words!
And after having eaten the meal provided by Cunda, the Lord was attacked by a severe sickness with bloody diarrhoea, and with sharp pains as if he were about to die.
And after many hundreds and thousands of years the man saw that the sacred Wheel-Treasure had slipped from its position.
And after that reward was done, He reappeared with turbaned head.
And after the battle, as victor, I thought: “Whatever is now the food of the gods, and what is the food of the asuras, henceforth we shall enjoy both.”
And after thus reflecting in solitude on behalf of the Magadhan devotees, the Venerable Ananda rose at the crack of dawn, went to the Lord and saluted him.
And again, a monk, being fond of abandoning, rejoices in abandoning, and being fond of developing, rejoices in developing, is not therefore conceited...
And all the five hundred garments, even the innermost and the outermost cloth, were burnt up.
And all the non-human beings, full of rage, would overwhelm him with abuse.
And all this has come about.
And all who lived in the villages round about started their daily work, thinking it was daylight.
And Ambapālī met the young Licchavis axle to axle, wheel to wheel, yoke to yoke.
And Ambapālī, when night was nearly over, having had choice hard and soft food prepared at her home, announced to the Lord that the meal was ready.
And among a number of monks who had gathered together after their meal, after the alms-round, sitting in the Kareri pavilion, there arose a serious discussion on former lives, as they said: ‘This is how it was in a former life’, or ‘That was how it was.’
And Ananda came to them and delivered the Lord’s words.
And Ananda thought: ‘If I allow the Mallas of Kusinārā to salute the Lord individually, the night will have passed before they have all paid homage.
And another said:
And another said: “No, that is not how it is.
And any foolish people who have doubts or queries about the Tathagata will, by listening to such talk, have their doubts and queries resolved.’
And any monk who is an Arahant, whose corruptions are destroyed, who has lived the life, done what was to be done, laid down the burden, gained the true goal, who has completely destroyed the fetter of becoming, and is liberated by supreme insight, is incapable of doing nine things: He is incapable of deliberately taking the life of a living being; he is incapable of taking what is not given so as to constitute theft; he is incapable of sexual intercourse; he is incapable of telling a deliberate lie; he is incapable of storing up goods for sensual indulgence as he did formerly in the household life; he is incapable of acting wrongly through attachment; he is incapable of acting wrongly through hatred; he is incapable of acting wrongly through folly; he is incapable of acting wrongly through fear.
And any who die while making the pilgrimage to these shrines with a devout heart will, at the breaking-up of the body after death, be reborn in a heavenly world.
And are rightly praised by all.’
And as a result of the disappearance of their self-luminance, the moon and the sun appeared, night and day were distinguished, months and fortnights appeared, and the year and its seasons.
and as a result, the children of those whose life-span had been a thousand years lived for only five hundred.
and as a result, the children of those whose life-span had been five hundred years lived, some for two hundred and fifty years, some for only two hundred.
And as far as a Nigantha is bound by this fourfold restraint, thus the Nigantha is called self-perfected, self-controlled, self-established.”
And as he did so, I gained insight into that Dhamma, and from among the various things I established one in particular, which was serene confidence in the Teacher, that the Blessed Lord is a fully-enlightened Buddha, that the Dhamma is well taught by the Blessed Lord, and that the order of monks is well-trained.
And as he did so, on the fast-day of the fifteenth, when he had washed his head and gone up to the verandah on top of his palace for the fast-day, the sacred Wheel-Treasure appeared to him, thousand-spoked, complete with felloe, hub and all appurtenances.
And as he receives the teaching, he gains a grasp of both the spirit and the letter of the teaching.
And as he remained contemplating the rise and fall of the five aggregates of dinging, before long his mind was freed from the corruptions without remainder.’ 
And as he walked along with the Lord, Ambattha looked out for the thirty-two marks of a Great Man on the Lord’s body.
And as I dwelt there in seclusion it occurred to me: “There is no abode of beings easily accessible that has not been visited by me for so long as that of the devas of the Pure Abodes.
And as I spoke with them they did not know me and wondered: “Who is it that speaks like this — a deva or a man?”
And as Pokkharasati sat there, the Lord delivered a graduated discourse on generosity, on morality and on heaven, showing the danger, degradation and corruption of sense-desires, and the profit of renunciation.
And as the night was ending Cunda had a fine meal of hard and soft food prepared with an abundance of ‘pig’s delight’, I have chosen this ambiguous expression to translate the controversial term sūkara-maddava.
And as they continued to feed on the fungus, so their bodies became coarser still, and the difference in their looks increased still more.
And as they did so, their bodies became coarser still, and the difference in their looks became even greater.
And as they did so, their bodies became coarser, and a difference in looks developed among them.
And as they did so, their bodies became even coarser, and the difference in their looks increased still more...
And as they sat there, the Lord thanked them with these verses:
And as they sat, the Lord instructed, inspired, fired and delighted them with a talk on Dhamma.
And as this exposition was being proclaimed, the ten-thousand world-system shook.
And at his death the Niganthas were split into two parties, quarrelling and disputing, fighting and attacking each other with wordy warfare: ‘You don’t understand this doctrine and discipline — I do!’ ‘How could you understand this doctrine and discipline?’ ‘Your way is all wrong — mine is right!’ ‘I am consistent — you aren’t!’ ‘You said last what you should have said first, and you said first what you should have said last!’ ‘What you took so long to think up has been refuted!’ ‘Your argument has been overthrown, you’re defeated!’ ‘Go on, save your doctrine — get out of that if you can!’ You would have thought the Niganthas, Nataputtaʹs disciples, were bent on killing each other.
And at his death the Niganthas were split into two parties, quarrelling and disputing....
And at his end to heaven went, To dwell in joy and happiness.
And at my words Sunakkhatta left this Dhamma and discipline like one condemned to hell.
And at my words Sunakkhatta left this Dhamma and discipline like one condemned to hell.
And at that moment Vajirapāni the yakkha, holding a huge iron club, flaming, ablaze and glowing, up in the sky just above Ambattha, was thinking: ‘If this young man Ambattha does not answer a proper question put to him by the Blessed Lord by the third time of asking, I’ll split his head into seven pieces!’ The Lord saw Vajirapāni, and so did Ambattha.
And at that the Brahmins and householders, leaving Khānumata in great numbers, went to Ambalatthika.
And at that time a large number of Brahmin emissaries from Kosala and Magadha were staying at Vesālī on some business.
And at that time a lot of Sakyans were sitting on high seats in their meeting-hall, poking each other with their fingers, laughing and playing about together, and it seemed to me that they were just making fun of me, and no one offered me a seat.
And at that time a multitude of thousands of devas were taking up lodging in Pataligama.
And at that time a wanderer called Subhadda was in Kusinārā, and he heard that the ascetic Gotama was to attain final Nibbāna in the final watch of that night.
And at that time King Ajatasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha, having gone up to the roof of his palace, was sitting there surrounded by his ministers, on the fifteenth-day fast-day, the full-moon of the fourth month, called Komudi.
And at that time many very well-known and prosperous Brahmins were staying at Manasakata, including Canki, Tārukkha, Pokkharasati, Jāṇussoni, and Todeyya.
And at that time Prince Payasi was living at Setavya, a populous place, full of grass, timber, water and corn, which had been given to him by King Pasenadi of Kosala as a royal gift and with royal powers.
And at that time Sakka, lord of the gods, felt a strong desire to see the Lord.
And at that time several hundred Brahmins were staying at Khānumata intending to take part in Kūṭadanta’s sacrifice.
And at that time Sigalaka the householder’s son, having got up early and gone out of Rajagaha, was paying homage, with wet clothes and hair and with joined palms, to the different directions: to the east, the south, the west, the north, the nadir and the zenith.
And at that time the Brahmin Lohicca was living at Sālavatikā, a populous place, full of grass, timber, water and corn, which had been given to him by King Pasenadi of Kosala as a royal gift and with royal powers.
And at that time the Lord was explaining the rebirths of various devotees up and down the country who had died and passed away: Kāsis and Kosalans, Vajjians and Mallas, Cetis and Vamsas, Kurus and Pañcālas, Macchas and Sūrasenas, saying: ‘This one was reborn there, and that one there.’
And at that time the naked ascetic Korakkhattiya the “dog-man” was going round on all fours, sprawling on the ground, and chewing and eating his food with his mouth alone.
And at that time the wanderer Nigrodha was staying at the Udumbarikā lodging for wanderers, with a large company of some three thousand wanderers.
And at that time the wanderer Poṭṭhapāda was at the debating-hall near the Tinduka tree, in the single-halled park of Queen Mallikā, with a large crowd of about three hundred wanderers.
And at that time the youth Subha, Todeyya’s son, was staying at Savatthi on some business.
And at that time there was a naked ascetic living in Vesālī called Kaḷāramuṭṭhaka who enjoyed great gains and fame in the Vajjian capital.
And at that time there was a naked ascetic living in Vesālī called Patikaputta, who enjoyed great gains and fame in the Vajjian capital.
And at that time Vasettha and Bhāradvāja were living among the monks, hoping to become monks themselves.
And at the Blessed Lord’s final passing there was a great earthquake, terrible and hair-raising, accompanied by thunder.
And at the end of four months, those monks who are established in mind may let him go forth and give him ordination to the status of a monk.
And at the end of one year the devas would proclaim: “Gentlemen, one year has passed, five remain.
And at the first camping-place they did not find any grass, wood or water, nor at the second, the third, fourth, fifth, sixth or seventh, but there they saw the other caravan that had come to ruin and destruction, and they saw the bones of those men and cattle that had been gobbled up by the yakkha-spirit.
And at the news he was overcome with fear and trembling, and his hair stood on end.
And at the sight, Ambattha was terrified and unnerved, his hairs stood on end, and he sought protection, shelter and safety from the Lord.
And at the thought: “Cessation, cessation”, there arose in the Bodhisatta Vipassi, with insight into things never realised before, knowledge, vision, awareness, and light.
And at the thought: “Origin, origin”, there arose in the Bodhisatta Vipassi, with insight into things never realised before, knowledge, wisdom, awareness, and light.
And at these words Nigrodha was silent and upset, his shoulders drooped, he hung his head and sat there downcast and bewildered.
And at these words Poṭṭhapāda the wanderer said to the Lord: ‘Excellent, Lord, excellent!
and attains the four jhānas.
And because it was said that he was unblinkingly watchful, the prince came to be called “Vipas-Sī”.
And because they became arrogant and conceited about their looks, the savoury earth disappeared.
And because they became arrogant and conceited about their looks, the sweet fungus disappeared.
And before each gate were set seven pillars, three or four times a man’s height.
And being thus delighted, Ambapālī said: ‘Lord, may the Lord consent to take a meal from me tomorrow with his order of monks!’ The Lord consented by silence, and Ambapālī, understanding his acceptance, rose from her seat, saluted the Lord and, passing him by to the right, departed.
And being thus delighted, they said: ‘Lord, may the Lord consent to take a meal from us tomorrow with his order of monks!’ ‘But, Licchavis, I have already accepted a meal for tomorrow from the courtesan Ambapālī!’
And being thus unattached he has experienced for himself perfect peace, and having truly understood the arising and passing away of feelings, their attraction and peril and the deliverance from them, the Tathāgata is liberated without remainder.
And being thus unattached he has experienced for himself perfect peace, and having truly understood the arising and passing away of feelings, their attraction and peril and the deliverance from them, the Tathāgata is liberated without remainder.
And being thus unattached he has experienced for himself perfect peace, and having truly understood the arising and passing away of feelings, their attraction and peril and the deliverance from them, the Tathāgata is liberated without remainder.
And beyond this there is no further development of knowledge and conduct that is higher or more perfect.
And beyond this there is no sacrifice that is greater and more perfect.’
And Bharadvaja agreed.
And Bhesika the barber followed the Lord close at hand.
And Brahmā Sahampati uttered this verse:
and by compassionate love for the welfare of all living beings, his mind is purified of ill-will and hatred.
And by passing entirely beyond the Sphere of Infinite Consciousness, seeing that there is no thing, he reaches and remains in the Sphere of No-Thingness.
And by passing entirely beyond the Sphere of Infinite Space, seeing that consciousness is infinite, he reaches and remains in the Sphere of Infinite Consciousness.
And by passing entirely beyond the Sphere of No-Thingness, he reaches and remains in the Sphere of Neither-Perception-Nor-Non-Perception.
And by right liberation many wholesome states are developed and perfected.
And by right view many wholesome states are developed and perfected.
And by the understanding, the penetration of the same Noble Truth of Suffering, of the Origin of Suffering, of the Cessation of Suffering and of the Path Leading to the Cessation of Suffering, the craving for becoming has been cut off, the support of becoming has been destroyed, there is no more re-becoming.’
And calling his minister-chaplain, he told him his thought.
And Citta, son of the elephant-trainer, received the going-forth at the Lord’s hands, and the ordination.
And compassion, with a splendid train, These ten, with tenfold varied hosts, Endowed with mighty powers, and fair to see, Rejoicing came to see the Buddha’s monks.
and concerning him a good report has been spread about...
And concerning that Blessed Lord a good report has been spread about...
And concerning that Blessed Lord a good report has been spread about: “This Blessed Lord is an Arahant, a fully-enlightened Buddha, perfected in knowledge and conduct, a Well-Farer, Knower of the worlds, unequalled Trainer of men to be tamed, Teacher of gods and humans, a Buddha, a Blessed Lord.”
And concerning that Blessed Lord a good report has been spread about: “This Blessed Lord is an Arahant, a fully-enlightened Buddha, perfected in knowledge and conduct, a Well-Farer, Knower of the worlds, unequalled Trainer of men to be tamed, Teacher of gods and humans, a Buddha, a Blessed Lord.”
And concerning that Blessed Lord Gotama a good report has been spread about: “This Blessed Lord is an Arahant, a fully-enlightened Buddha, perfected in knowledge and conduct, a Well-Farer, Knower of the worlds, unequalled Trainer of men to be tamed, Teacher of gods and humans, a Buddha, a Blessed Lord.”
And concerning that Blessed Lord Gotama a good report has been spread about: “This Blessed Lord is an Arahant, a fully-enlightened Buddha, perfected in knowledge and conduct, a Well-Farer, Knower of the worlds, unequalled Trainer of men to be tamed, Teacher of gods and humans, a Buddha, a Blessed Lord.”
And concerning the Blessed Gotama this fair report has been spread about: “This Blessed Lord is an Arahant, a fully-enlightened Buddha, endowed with wisdom and conduct, the Well-Farer, Knower of the worlds, incomparable Trainer of men to be tamed, Teacher of gods and humans, enlightened and blessed.”
And condescend to kindly speech.
And Cunda heard that the Lord had arrived at Pāvā and was staying at his mango-grove.
And Cunda, understanding his consent, rose from his seat, saluted the Lord and, passing by to the right, departed.
And cut the bonds of worldly living, Delicious food he’d still receive!’
And delightful to their ears.
And devas from ten world-systems frequently came there to visit the Lord and his order of monks.
And did you not think: ‘I might cause this real Arahant ascetic offence.
And during the Rains the Lord was attacked by a severe sickness, with sharp pains as if he were about to die.
And even at these words, Pāṭikaputta still wriggled about, but could not rise.
And every one of the gods he spoke to thought: ‘He is sitting on my couch, he is speaking to me alone.’
And feeling this fear and the rising of the hairs, the King said to Jīvaka: ‘Friend Jivaka, you are not deceiving me?
And finest-tasting drinks he was.
And five hundred carts went rumbling by very close to him.
And for fear of contaminating the stock they cohabited with their own sisters.
And for that reason the Thirty-Three Gods were pleased, happy, filled with delight and joy, saying: ‘The devas’ hosts are growing, the asuras’ hosts are declining!’ 
And for this reason he was all the more called Vipassi.
And from the moment of his ordination the Venerable Subhadda, alone, secluded, unwearying, zealous and resolute, in a short time attained to that for which young men of good family go forth from the household life into homelessness, that unexcelled culmination of the holy life, having realised it here and now by his own insight, and dwelt therein: ‘Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further here.’
And from these four classes the class of ascetics came into existence.
and gets his fill...
and gets his fill...
And goes with others’ well-loved wives.
And grasped its meaning.
and has been banished from the country or the city.
and have right views will, after death at the breaking-up of the body, be born in a happy state, a heavenly world.
And having been made King, Renu abandoned himself to the pleasures of the five senses.
And having passed away from there, I arose here.”
And having passed away from there, I arose here.”
And having stayed at Nāḷandā as long as he wished, the Lord said to Ananda: ‘Let us go to Pāṭaligāma.ʹ And they did so.
And having thereby delivered that company from the great bondage, thus rescuing eighty-four thousand beings from the great path of peril, I entered into the fire-element and rose into the air to the height of seven palm-trees, and projecting a beam for the height of another seven so that it blazed and shed fragrance, I then reappeared in the Gabled Hall in the Great Forest.
And having thus instructed them, I disappeared, and still they did not know: “He who has just disappeared — was he a deva or a man?”
And he abides detached, not grasping at anything in the world.
And he abides detached, not grasping at anything in the world.
And he abides detached, not grasping at anything in the world.
And he abides detached, not grasping at anything in the world.
And he abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world.
And he abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world.
And he abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world.
And he abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world.
And he abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world.
And he abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world.
And he addressed Brahmā in these verses:
And he asked the Lord about this.
And he could see all of them except for two.
And he could, Ananda, undoubtedly live for a century, or the remainder of one.’
and he could, Ananda, undoubtedly live for a century, or the remainder of one.”
And he did accordingly.
And he did likewise with compassion, sympathetic joy, and equanimity.
And he did so.
And he did so.
And he did so.
And he did so.
And he did so.
And he did so.
And he did so.
And he did so.
And he dwells, letting his mind, filled with compassion,...
And he gave instructions accordingly to his Counsellor-Treasure, and so it was done.
And he gets this thought well-set, well-developed, well raised up, well freed and disconnected from sense-desires.
And he is not angry or bad-tempered.
And he is not mean and spiteful, envious and jealous, crafty and deceitful, obstinate and proud, he is without evil desires and not under their sway, without wrong views and not given to extremist opinions, he is not tainted with worldliness, does not hold on firmly and is not unwilling to give up.
And he is possessed of morality dear to the Noble Ones, unbroken, without defect, unspotted, without inconsistency, liberating, praised by the wise, uncorrupted, and conducive to concentration.
And he is possessed of morality dear to the Noble Ones, unbroken, without defect, unspotted, without inconsistency, liberating, uncorrupted, and conducive to concentration.
And he knows as it really is: “These are the corruptions”, “This is the origin of the corruptions”, “This is the cessation of the corruptions”, “This is the path leading to the cessation of the corruptions.”
And he knows how an unarisen fetter comes to arise, and he knows how the abandonment of an arisen fetter comes about, and he knows how the non-arising of the abandoned fetter in the future will come about.
And he knows how an unarisen fetter comes to arise, and he knows how the abandonment of an arisen fetter comes about, and he knows how the non-arising of the abandoned fetter in the future will come about.’
And he knows how the non-arising of the abandoned sloth-and-torpor in the future will come about.
And he knows how the non-arising of the abandoned worry-and-flurry in the future will come about.
And he knows how the unarisen enlightenment-factor of equanimity comes to arise, and he knows how the complete development of the enlightenment-factor of equanimity comes about.’
And he knows how the unarisen enlightenment-factor of mindfulness comes to arise, and he knows how the complete development of the enlightenment-factor of mindfulness comes about.
And he knows how unarisen doubt comes to arise, and he knows how the abandonment of arisen doubt comes about, and he knows how the non-arising of the abandoned doubt in the future will come about.’
And he knows how unarisen sensual desire comes to arise, and he knows how the abandonment of arisen sensual desire comes about, and he knows how the non-arising of the abandoned sensual desire in the future will come about.
And he knows: “...There is nothing further here.”
And he knows: “This my body is material, made up from the four great elements, born of mother and father, fed on rice and gruel, impermanent, liable to be injured and abraded, broken and destroyed, and this is my consciousness which is bound to it and dependent on it.” 
And he knows: “This my body is material, made up of the four great elements,...
And he made a good and fair division into eight portions, and then said to the assembly: ‘Gentlemen, please give me the urn, and I will erect a great stupa for it.’
And he made this declaration in the assembly of Vesālī: “The ascetic Gotama claims to be a man of wisdom, and I make the same claim.
And he might think: “It is strange, it is wonderful, the destiny and fruits of meritorious deeds!
And he might think: “These are entering a house...”
And he might think: “This pond is clear,...
And he said to the charioteer: “What is the matter with that man?
And he said: ‘It is wonderful, Lord, it is marvellous how clear and bright the Lord’s skin appears!
And he said: ‘It is wonderful, Lord, it is marvellous!
And he said: ‘Lord, this evil thought has occurred to the Brahmin Lohicca...Truly, Lord, this is what the Brahmin Lohicca has been thinking.’ ‘It may well be so, Bhesika, it may well be so.’
And he said: “Stay there, Queen!
And he says: “The self and the world are eternal, barren like a mountain-peak, set firmly as a post.
And he sits suffusing his body with that mental purity and clarification so that no part of his body is untouched by it.
And he spread out his cloak, gathered up the dung in it, made it into a bundle and put it on his head, and went on.
And he stayed in the dense jungle of Icchanankala.
And he that sings: “Lift up your hearts!” 
And he thinks: “So my body is light and fit.
And he thinks: “So my body is strong and fit.
And he thinks: “That Brahmā,...he made us, and he is permanent, stable, eternal, not subject to change, the same for ever and ever.
and he thinks: “This indisposition might get worse, so I’ll stir up energy...
and he thinks:”...it might be that the illness will recur.
And he thought: ‘There were also Magadhan disciples of long standing who have died and passed away.
And he thought: ‘What difference is there between me and the lion, king of beasts?
And he thought: “Alas, the world is perishing, it will be destroyed because the mind of Vipassi, the Blessed Lord, the Arahant, the fully-enlightened Buddha is inclined to inaction rather than to teaching the Dhamma!”
And he thought: “These eighty-four thousand elephants wait on me evening and morning.
And he was delighted with my explanation beyond all measure.’ ‘Lord, who on hearing Dhamma from you would fail to be delighted beyond all measure?
And he was devoted to the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha, and observed the discipline perfectly.
And he would rejoice and be glad about that.
And he, constantly patrolling and following along a path, might not see the joins and clefts in the bastion, even such as a cat might creep through.
And he, constantly patrolling and following along a path, might not see the joins and clefts in the bastion, even such as a cat might creep through.
And he, having thus gone forth might dwell, restrained in body, speech and thought, satisfied with the minimum of food and clothing, content, in solitude.
And he, having thus gone forth might dwell...
And He-Who-Knows-by-Insight saw all this
And He-Who-Knows-with-Insight was aware
And here he said to the monks: ‘Monks, I will teach you four criteria.
And here, Lord, having been sent by King Vessavana on some business to King Virūlhaka, I saw the Lord entering the Brick House and sitting down and considering the question of the Magadhan devotees...
and his disciples have fully mastered the true Dhamma, the full purity of the holy life has become clear and evident to them in the logic of its unfolding, and has been sufficiently grounded among them while being thus well-proclaimed among humans by the time of the Teacher’s passing from them.
and his gross tendencies of body, speech and thought are allayed.
And how does a monk dwell as an island unto himself, as a refuge unto himself with no other refuge, with the Dhamma as his island, with the Dhamma as his refuge, with no other refuge?
And how does a monk dwell as an island unto himself...?
And how does a monk live as an island unto himself,...
And how does this craving come to be abandoned, how does its cessation come about?
And however much one declares, it is so and not otherwise.
And however much one declares, it is so and not otherwise.
And I am not under the sway of what I know, and not being under its sway I have come to know for myself that quenching, by the realisation of which the Tathagata cannot fall into perilous paths.
And I am not under the sway of what I know, and not being under its sway I have come to know for myself that quenching, by the realisation of which the Tathāgata cannot fall into perilous paths.
And I do not see this division of Ariyan concentration fulfilled thus anywhere among the ascetics and Brahmins of other schools.
And I do not see this division of Ariyan morality fulfilled thus anywhere among the ascetics and Brahmins of other schools.
And I do not see this division of Ariyan wisdom fulfilled thus anywhere among the ascetics and Brahmins of other schools.
And I don’t say it is not, and I don’t not say it is not.” “Is there no other world?...” “Is there both another world and no other world?...” “Is there neither another world nor no other world?...” “Are there spontaneously-born beings?...” “Are there not...?” “Both...?” “Neither...?” “Does the Tathāgata exist after death?
And I don’t say otherwise.
And I go for refuge to the Blessed Lord Gotama, to the Dhamma and to the Sangha.
And I have heard say that when this happens to a wheel-turning monarch, he has not much longer to live.
And I instructed, inspired, fired and delighted them with a discourse on Dhamma.
And I might not be able to reply.
And I perceived the destiny and fate of each one of them.
And I replied:
And I said to him:
And I said to him: “Well, Sunakkhatta, what do you think?
And I say to you, I declare to you, Sunakkhatta, there will be those who will say: ‘Sunakkhatta the Licchavi was unable to maintain the holy life under the ascetic Gotama, and being thus unable he abandoned the training and reverted to a base life.’
and I say: “Kill this man without wounding his cuticle, skin, flesh, sinews, bones or marrow′′, and they do so.
And I say: “Take this man and put him alive in a jar.
and I say: “Weigh this man on the scales alive, then strangle him, and weigh him again.”
And I thought: “Of all these ascetics and Brahmins, Sañjaya Belatthaputta is the most stupid and confused.”
And I, knowing his thought in my own mind, said to him: “You foolish man, do you claim to be a follower of the Sakyan?” “Lord, what do you mean by this question?” “Sunakkhatta, did you not, on seeing that naked ascetic going around on all fours, think: ‘Now that is a real Arahant ascetic, who goes round on all fours, sprawling on the ground, and chewing and eating his food with his mouth alone’?” “I did, Lord.
And I, Lord, go for refuge to the Blessed Lord, the Dhamma and the Sangha.
And I, Lord, go for refuge to the Blessed Lord, the Dhamma and the Sangha.
And I, Lord, go for refuge to the Blessed Lord, to the Dhamma, and to the Sangha.
And I, Reverend Kassapa, go for refuge to the Blessed Lord, to the Dhamma, and to the Sangha.
And if any of them were to have found this perfection in themselves, they would have been so delighted that they would have said: “We’ve done enough!
And if any of them were to have found this perfection in themselves, they would have been so delighted that they would have said: “We’ve done enough!
And if anyone blames that teacher, his blame is improper, untrue, not in accordance with reality, and faulty.
And if anyone blames that teacher, his blame is improper, untrue, not in accordance with reality, and faulty.’
And if anyone were despised by this company, his reputation would suffer, and then his income would suffer, for our income depends on the gaining of a reputation.
And if anyone were to say to such a disciple: “Well reverend sir, by following that system you will be successful”, then the one who thus commended it, and that which was commended, and the one who, on hearing such commendation, should-make still greater efforts, would all gain much merit.
And if anyone were to say to that pupil: “Come now, reverend sir, and practise according to the doctrine proclaimed and given out by your teacher” — then the one who urged this, the thing urged and the one who so practised would all gain much demerit.
And if anyone were to say: “Well, reverend sir, by following that system you will be successful”, the one who so recommended it, that which was recommended, and the one who, on hearing such recommendation, should make still greater efforts, would all gain much demerit.
And if anyone were to say: “Well, reverend sir, you should follow the teaching proclaimed by your teacher”, then the one who urged this, that which was urged and the one who so practised would all gain much merit.
And if he goes forth into homelessness, he will become a fully-enlightened Buddha...
And if he goes forth into homelessness, he will become a fully-enlightened Buddha...As such, how does he benefit?
and if he is learned and wise, and is the first or second to hold the sacrificial ladle — then he can be recognised as a true Brahmin and truthfully claim to be so.’ 
And if he performs four, I will perform eight.
And if he replies: “They mean this”, then his words should be neither rejected nor disparaged, but you should explain to him carefully the correct meaning.
And if he thinks otherwise, his head will split in pieces.” 
And if he thinks otherwise, his head will split in pieces.”’
And if he were to add anything to it, thinking: “In this way it will be more complete”, then he does not see it.
And if I were distressed, that would be a hindrance to me.”
And if I were then asked: “Venerable Sariputta, why do you accord this highest recognition to one and not the other?”
And if I were to teach Dhamma to others and they did not understand me, that would be a weariness and a trouble to me.”
And if on entering the assembly I should take off my turban, may you take it as if I had bowed at your feet.
And if people were to tell you this...
And if, having come into the presence of the ascetic Gotama, I were to turn away without showing myself, this company might despise me...’
And in connection with this the Great King Vessavana reflected in his mind: ‘It is marvellous, it is wonderful, that such a glorious Teacher should arise, that there should be such a glorious proclamation of Dhamma, and that such glorious paths to the sublime should be made known!’ Then Brahmā Sanankumāra, reading King Vessavana’s mind, said to him: ‘What do you think, King Vessavana?
and in mastering these, one is aware that one knows and sees them.
And in return, we would grant him a share of the rice.”
And in the evening, emerging from meditative seclusion, the Lord came out of the Brick House and sat down on the prepared seat in the shade of his lodging.
And in the evening, the Lord rose from his secluded meditation and came out of the mansion, and started walking up and down in its shade.
And in the parts where powerful devas settled, they caused the minds of the most powerful royal officials to pick those sites for their dwellings, and where middle and lower-ranking devas settled, so too they caused the minds of royal officials of corresponding grade to pick those sites for their dwellings.
And in the time of those people this continent of Jambudipa will be powerful and prosperous, and villages, towns and cities will be but a cock’s flight one from the next.
And in this present fortunate aeon the Lords Buddhas Kakusandha, Konagamana and Kassapa arose in the world.
And in this sacrifice no bulls were slain,...
And in this way, Vasettha, taking what was not given, and censuring, and lying, and punishment, took their origin.
And in those days, whenever anyone sneezed or stumbled, they used to say: ‘Praise be to the Great Steward!
And in whatever country the Wheel stopped, the King took up residence with his fourfold army.
And in whatever country the Wheel stopped, the King took up residence with his fourfold army.
And indeed all this came about.
And indeed it is good to see such Arahants.’
And indeed it is good to see such Arahants.’
And indeed it is good to see such Arahants.’
And indeed it is good to see such Arahants.’
And indeed, as that night was ending, the Venerable Ananda dressed in the early morning, took his robe and bowl and, accompanied by the Venerable Cetaka, came to Subha’s dwelling, and sat down on the prepared seat.
and inform them of the way in which Prince Pāyāsi and the young Brahmin Uttara have been reborn.’
And is he of such nature, and not otherwise?’ ‘Sir, he is as he is reported to be, and he is of such nature and not otherwise.
And it is by understanding and penetrating the Ariyan morality, the Ariyan concentration, the Ariyan wisdom and the Ariyan liberation that the craving for becoming has been cut off, the tendency towards becoming has been exhausted, and there will be no more rebirth.’
And it is good to see such Arahants.’
And it may be that he will tell you: ‘Friend Sunakkhatta, I know my fate.
And it may happen that a being falls from that realm and arises in this world.
And it may happen that some being falls from that realm and arises in this world.
And it occurred to four devas of the Pure Abodes: ‘The Blessed Lord is staying at Kapilavatthu, with a large company of some five hundred monks, all Arahants.
And it seems to me that if these good ascetics and Brahmins who are so moral and well-conducted know that after death they will be better off, then these good people would now take poison, take a knife and kill themselves, hang themselves or jump off a cliff.
And it seems to me, Lord, that the drift of the Dhamma is the same.
And it seems to me, Lord, that the drift of the Dhamma is the same.
And it was not long before their minds were freed from the corruptions without remainder.
And it was through having undertaken these seven rules that he enjoyed the greatest gains and fame of all in the Vajjian capital.
And it was twelve yojanas long from east to west, and seven yojanas wide from north to south.
And it was twelve yojanas long from east to west, and seven yojanas wide from north to south.
And just as a clean cloth from which all stains have been removed receives the dye perfectly, so in Prince Khanda and Tissa the chaplain׳s son, as they sat there, there arose the pure and spotless Dhamma-Eye, and they knew: “Whatever things have an origin must come to cessation.”
And just as a clean cloth from which all stains have been removed receives the dye perfectly, so in the Brahmin Kūṭadanta, as he sat there, there arose the pure and spotless Dhamma-eye, and he knew: ‘Whatever things have an origin must come to cessation.’
And just as a clean cloth from which all stains have been removed receives the dye perfectly, so in the Brahmin Pokkharasati, as he sat there, there arose the pure and spotless Dhamma-eye, and he knew: ‘Whatever things have an origin must come to cessation.’ 
And just as a clean cloth...receives the dye perfectly, so in those eighty-four thousand, as they sat there, there arose the pure and spotless Dhamma-eye, and they knew: “Whatever things have an origin must come to cessation.”
And just as in a pool of blue, red or white lotuses some are born in the water, grow in the water, and, not leaving the water, thrive in the water; some are born in the water and reach the surface; while some are born in the water and, having reached the surface, grow out of the water and are not polluted by it, in the same way, monks, the Lord Buddha Vipassi, surveying the world with his Buddha-eye, saw some beings with little dust on their eyes...
And just then Nigrodha was sitting in the midst of a large crowd of wanderers who were all shouting and screaming and making a great clamour, and indulging in various kinds of unedifying conversation about kings, robbers, ministers, armies, dangers, war, food, drink, clothes, beds, garlands, perfumes, relatives, carriages, villages, towns and cities, countries, women, heroes, street- and well-gossip, talk of the departed, desultory chat, speculation about land and sea, talk of being and non-being.
And just then, Prince Payasi had gone up to the verandah for his midday rest.
And just then, the river was so full that a crow could drink out of it.
And King Ajatasattu said to his chief minister the Brahmin Vassakāra: ‘Brahmin, go to the Blessed Lord, worship him with your head to his feet in my name, ask if he is free from sickness or disease, if he is living at ease, vigorously and comfortably, and then say: “Lord, King Ajatasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha wishes to attack the Vajjians and says: ‘I will strike the Vajjians...,bring them to ruin and destruction!ʹʺ And whatever the Lord declares to you, report that faithfully back to me, for Tathagatas never lie.’
And King Ajatasattu, on that fast-day, gave vent to this solemn utterance: ‘Delightful, friends, is this moonlight night!
And King Ajātasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha heard that the Lord had passed away at Kusinārā.And he sent a message to the Mallas of Kusinārā: ‘The Lord was a Khattiya and I am a Khattiya.
And King Ajātasattu, having placed his wives each on one of the five hundred she-elephants, mounted the royal tusker and proceeded in royal state, accompanied by torch-bearers, from Rajagaha towards Jīvaka’s mango-grove.
And King Mahasudassana, thinking: “What is this great noise, as of a crowd of people?” came out of the door and saw Queen Subhadda leaning against the door-post.
And King Okkāka, furiously angry, exclaimed: “So this fellow, the son of a slave-girl, wants my daughter!”, and put an arrow to his bow.
And Korakkhattiya sat up and rubbed his back with his hand, and said: “Friend Sunakkhatta, I know my fate.
And Kutadanta planned a great sacrifice: seven hundred bulls, seven hundred bullocks, seven hundred heifers, seven hundred he-goats and seven hundred rams were all tied up to the sacrificial posts.
And Kūṭadanta served the Buddha and his monks with the finest foods with his own hands until they were satisfied.
And later, because of this burning, they indulged in sexual activity.
And leaving that he entered the second, the third, the fourth jhāna.
And leaving the road, the Venerable Kassapa the Great sat down under a tree.
And led the life the Buddha taught.
And led the matchless life he taught, Have reappeared in humble state, And not attained your proper rank, A sorry sight it is to see
And likewise about the future?
And likewise with compassion, sympathetic joy, and equanimity.
And likewise, do the ways of the various Brahmins...lead the one who follows them to union with Brahmā?’
And Lohicca said to Bhesika the barber: ‘Friend Bhesika, go to the ascetic Gotama, ask in my name after his health and then say: “May the Reverend Gotama consent to take tomorrow’s meal, with his order of monks, from the Brahmin Lohicca!’”
And Lohicca, as the night was ending, had choice hard and soft foods prepared at his own home.
And many thousands of them came to me, saluted me and stood to one side.
And Mara’s hosts drew back from those on whom
And may the Reverend Gotama and his order of monks accept a meal from me tomorrow!’
And Māra the Evil One came to me, stood to one side and said: ʺMay the Blessed Lord now attain final Nibbāna, may the Well-Farer now attain final Nibbāna.
and my body is heavy and useless as if I were pregnant...”...
And night, The Shrouder, as men say, Comes again in daylight’s place, There too this moving watery mass, The deep and mighty ocean swells, This they know, and this men call
And no one knows any way of escape from this suffering, this ageing and death.
and not being under the sway of what I know I have come to know that quenching by the realisation of which the Tathāgata cannot fall into perilous ways.
And now in his last hour the Lord tells him to stand aside and not stand in front of him.
And now is the time for the Blessed Lord to do as he sees fit.’
And now, Ananda, let us go to the River Kakutthā.’ ‘Very good, Lord’, said Ānanda.
And now, as for your doubts and perplexities concerning me, we will clarify these by your asking me, and by my answering your questions.’
And now, monks, my father was King Suddhodana, my mother was Queen Maya, and the royal capital was Kapilavatthu.’
And now, Reverend Gotama, may I depart?
And now, sir, we must go: we have many duties, many things to do.’ ‘Do so, Kings, when you think fit.’
And now, Sunakkhatta, I will go into Vesālī for alms.
And of the three, two struggled hard, And bore in mind the Teacher’s word.
And of these four castes three — the Khattiyas, the merchants and the artisans — are entirely subservient to the Brahmins.
And of this world with its devas and māras and Brahmās, with its ascetics and Brahmins, its princes and people, the Tathāgata is the unvanquished conqueror, the seer and ruler of all.
And of those who have not fully mastered it, some by the destruction of the five lower fetters will be reborn spontaneously, attaining thence to Nibbana without returning to this world; some by the destruction of three fetters and the reduction of greed, hatred and delusion will become Once-Returners, who will return once more to this world before making an end of suffering; and some by the destruction of three fetters will become Stream-Winners, incapable of falling into states of woe, assured of enlightenment.
And on the seventh day the Mallas of Kusinara thought: ‘We have paid sufficient honour with song and dance...
And once installed, Jotipāla carried out the business his father had carried out, not doing any business his father had not done.
And once the King, to try him, mounted the Elephant-Treasure at crack of dawn and rode him from sea to sea, returning to Kusāvatī in time for breakfast.
And once the King, to try it, went on night-manoeuvres on a dark night with his four-fold army, with the Jewel-Treasure fixed to the top of his standard.
And once, the King, to try him, went on board a ship and had it taken to the current in the middle of the Ganges.
And one knows: “Thus conditioned, knowledge arises.”
And one man said to his friend: “Come along, let’s go to that neighbourhood, we might find something valuable!” His friend agreed, so they went to that district, and came to a village street.
And one morning early, the householder Sandhana came to Rājagaha in order to see the Lord.
And one who is thus skilful, not lax, clearly aware and mindful, is known as a monk who is true to the ancient, original Ariyan lineage.
And one who is thus skilful, not lax, clearly aware and mindful, is known as a monk who is true to the ancient, original Ariyan lineage.
And out of this body he produces another body, having a form, mind-made, complete in all its limbs and faculties.
And Pātaliputta will face three perils: from fire, from water and from internal dissension.’
And people said: ‘This Brahmin is truly a steward!
And Pokkharasati heard say: ‘The ascetic Gotama, son of the Sakyans, who has gone forth from the Sakya clan,...is staying in the dense jungle of Icchanankala.
And Pokkharasati said to Ambattha: ‘Ambattha, my son, the ascetic Gotama...
And Pokkharasati, having seen, attained, experienced and penetrated the Dhamma, having passed beyond doubt, transcended uncertainty, having gained perfect confidence in the Teacher’s doctrine without relying on others, said: ‘Excellent, Lord, excellent!
And Pokkharasāti said to the Lord: ‘May the Reverend Gotama accept a meal from me today together with his order of monks!’ And the Lord consented by silence.
And Prince Payasi developed the following evil opinion: ‘There is no other world, there are no spontaneously born beings, there is no fruit or result of good or evil deeds.′ Meanwhile, the Brahmins and householders of Setavya heard the news: ‘The ascetic Kumāra-Kassapa, a disciple of the ascetic Gotama, is touring round Kosala with a large company of about five hundred monks; he has arrived at Setavya and is staying to the north of Setavya in the Simsapā Forest; and concerning the Reverend Kassapa a good report has been spread about: “He is learned, experienced, wise, well-informed, a fine speaker, able to give good replies, venerable, an Arahant.”
And Prince Pāyāsi heard of his words, so he sent for him and asked him if he had said that.
And Prince Pāyāsi, because he had established his charity grudgingly, not with his own hands, and without proper concern, like something casually tossed aside, was reborn after his death, at the breaking-up of the body, in the company of the Four Great Kings, in the empty Serīsaka mansion.
And Prince Vipassi gazed at the corpse of the dead man.
And Prince Vipassi mounted a carriage and drove in procession to the pleasure-park.
And Prince Vipassi questioned the man who had gone forth.
And Prince Vipassi was much beloved of the people.
And Prince Vipassi, shaving off his hair and beard and putting on yellow robes, went forth from the household life into homelessness.
And Pukkusa offered the robes to the Lord, saying: ‘Here, Lord, are two fine sets of robes of cloth-of-gold.
And Pāyāsi of the devas went to the Venerable Gavampati, saluted him, and stood to one side.
And Queen Subhadda said to the Counsellor-Treasure: “Friend Counsellor, draw up the fourfold army.
And Sahadhamma, Accuta, Anejaka, Sūleyya, Rucira, the Vasavanesis, These ten, with tenfold varied hosts...
And Sakka expressed his delight at the Lord’s answer.
And Sakka expressed his delight at the Lord’s answer.
And Sakka rejoiced at the answer as before.
And Sakka said to the Thirty-Three Gods: ‘Gentlemen, when such signs are seen, such light is seen and such radiance shines forth, Brahmā will appear.
And Sakka thought: ‘Where is the Blessed Lord, the fully-enlightened Buddha, now staying?’
And Sakka, ruler of the devas, uttered this verse:
And seeing Sigalaka paying homage to the different directions, he said: ‘Householderʹs son, why have you got up early to pay homage to the different directions?’ ‘Lord, my father, when he was dying, told me to do so.
And seeing the delight of the Thirty-Three Gods, he uttered these verses of rejoicing:
And seeing their intentions, he uttered this verse on the spot:
And seven days after the royal sage had gone forth the Wheel disappeared.
And she served the Buddha and his monks with choice hard and soft food till they were satisfied.
And should he choose to leave the world, Such things likewise he’ll receive:
And similarly with regard to pleasure and pain.
And similarly with the mind-made acquired self, and the formless acquired self?’
And since I had only just heard King Vessavana announce to his assembly what those folk’s fates were, it is no wonder that I thought: ‘I will go and see the Lord and report this to him.’
And since, sir, you praise that Blessed Lord so highly, let us meet today.”
And sitting in the group was one Subhadda, who had gone forth late in life, and he said to those monks: ‘Enough, friends, do not weep and wail!
And sitting thus cross-legged, he said to the Thirty-Three Gods: “For how long has the Blessed Lord been one of mighty wisdom?
And six thousand yakkhas from Himālaya, Of varied hue, and well-endowed with powers, Fair to see, with splendid train have come
And so at death he went to heaven
And so he continues to pervade the whole wide world, above, below, across and everywhere with a mind filled with loving-kindness, extensive, developed, measureless, free from hatred and ill-will.
And so it is, too, with nuns, with male and female lay-followers.
And so Kūṭadanta went with a large company of Brahmins to Ambalaṭṭhikā.
And so one name for this exposition is ‘The Serene Faith’.
And so Sonadanda went with a large company of Brahmins to Gaggarā’s lotus-pond.
and so suffuses, drenches, fills and irradiates his body, that there is no spot in his entire body that is untouched by this delight and joy born of detachment.
And so the Brahmins and householders of Setavya, leaving Setavya by the north gate in large numbers, made for the Simsapā Forest.
And so the gate by which the Lord went out was called the Gotama Gate.
And so the holy life waxed mighty and prospered and spread widely as it was proclaimed among mankind.
And so the Lord Buddha Vipassi, as swiftly as a strong man might stretch out his flexed arm, or flex it again, vanished there and then from the root of that tree of enlightenment, and reappeared in the royal capital of Bandhumati, in the deer-park of Khema.
And so the Thirty-Three, their leader too, Each thinks: ‘He speaks to me alone.’
And so the Venerable Gavampati, on his return to earth, declared: ‘You should give ungrudgingly, with your own hands, with proper concern, not carelessly.
And so these Brahmin emissaries from Kosala and Magadha went to the Great Forest, to the Gabled Hall.
And so these two, teacher and pupil, directly opposing each other’s arguments, followed close behind the Lord and his order of monks.
And so they took the embers.
And so they will abstain from the taking of life, and, having undertaken this good thing, will practise it.
And so this great crowd of eighty-four thousand left Bandhumati for the deer-park of Khema where the Lord Buddha Vipassi was.
And so too it is with Ananda.’
and so trains himself, thinking: “I will breathe out, calming the whole bodily process.”’
And so we should all recite it together  without disagreement, so that this holy life may be enduring and established for a long time, thus to be for the welfare and happiness of the multitude, out of compassion for the world, for the benefit, welfare and happiness of devas and humans.
And so, carried by such mounts, All the region they traverse
And so, gentlemen, it seems to me that the ascetic Gotama must have been at that time either King Mahavijita, the lord of the sacrifice, or else the Brahmin chaplain who conducted the sacrifice for him.
And so, Lord, I met the lady, not then but later.’
And so, Lord, out of respect for my father’s words, which I revere, honour and hold sacred, I have got up thus early to pay homage in this way to the six directions.’ ‘But, householder’s son, that is not the right way to pay homage to the six directions according to the Ariyan discipline.’ ‘Well, Lord, how should one pay homage to the six directions according to the Ariyan discipline?
And so, monks, a great crowd of eighty-four thousand, having shaved off their hair and beards and donned yellow robes, followed the Bodhisatta Vipassī into homelessness.
And so, Nigrodha, when you ask: “What, Lord, is this doctrine in which the Blessed Lord trains his disciples, and which those disciples whom he has so trained as to benefit from it recognise as their principal support, and the perfection of the holy life?”
And so, paying homage in the same way, they waited for a second, a third, a fourth, a fifth, a sixth day.
And so, Prince, I will question you about it, and you shall reply as you think fit.
And so, renounced or not, this sign
And so, sir, we shall all go to visit the ascetic Gotama.’
And some of the Brahmins and householders saluted the Venerable Kumāra-Kassapa and then sat down to one side, while some first exchanged courtesies with him, some saluted him with joined palms, some announced their name and clan, and some silently sat down to one side.
And some of the yakkhas saluted him and sat down to one side, some exchanged courtesies with him before sitting down, same saluted him with joined palms, some announced their name and clan, and some sat down in silence.
And some of the young Licchavis were all in blue, with blue make-up, blue clothes and blue adornment, while some were in yellow, some in red, some in white, with white make-up, white clothes and white adornment.
And some people were looking for a boat, and some were looking for a raft, and some were binding together a raft of reeds to get to the other side.
And sometimes a Khattiya takes life, takes what is not given, commits sexual misconduct, tells lies, indulges in slander, harsh speech or idle chatter, is grasping, malicious, or of wrong views.
And Sonadanda served the Buddha and his monks with the finest foods with his own hands until they were satisfied.
And sooner or later, after a very long period of time, savoury earth spread itself over the waters where those beings were.
And spends his time in wicked deeds, In this world and the next as well
And standing there he might say: “This is what King Pasenadi of Kosala says!” Would he be speaking the King’s words, as if he were the King’s equal?’ ‘No indeed, Reverend Gotama.’
And still among gandhabbas dwells, These two, on highest wisdom set, In deep absorption spurn the gods!
And stinginess destroy a man.
and strives to overcome evil unwholesome mental states that have arisen.
and strives to overcome evil unwholesome mental states that have arisen.
and strives to produce unarisen wholesome mental states.
And Subha said to a certain young man: ‘Go, my lad, to where the ascetic Ananda is, ask him in my name if he is in good health, free from fatigue, strong, vigorous and dwelling in comfort, and say: “It would be good if the Reverend Ananda would, out of compassion, visit the dwelling of Subha the son of Todeyya.”’
And Subhadda made his request a second and a third time, but still Ananda refused it.
And Subhadda said to the Venerable Ānanda: ‘Friend Ānanda, it is a great gain for you all, it is very profitable for you, that you have obtained the consecration of discipleship in the Teacher’s presence.’ 
And such people will know only three kinds of disease: greed, fasting, and old age.
And Suppiya  was finding fault in all sorts of ways with the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha, whereas his pupil Brahmadatta was speaking in various ways in their praise.
And Suppiya too stopped there for the night with his pupil Brahmadatta.
And Suppiya went on abusing the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha, while his pupil Brahmadatta defended them.
And suppose he were to step aside and some workman or workman’s servant were to come along and stand in his place.
And suppose that after a time, when it had grown cold and gone out, he weighed it again.
And that has been renounced, given up, rejected, abandoned, forsaken: the Tathagata has renounced the life-principle.
And that is how the Counsellor-Treasure appeared to King Mahasudassana, and how he was equipped with all the seven treasures.
And that is how the Elephant-Treasure appeared to King Mahasudassana.
And that is how the Horse-Treasure appeared to King Mahasudassana.
And that is how the Householder-Treasurer appeared to King Mahāsudassana.
And that is how the Jewel-Treasure appeared to King Mahāsudassana.
And that is how the Woman-Treasure appeared to King Mahasudassana.
And that is the reason why Sunakkhatta comes to see heavenly sights but not to hear heavenly sounds.’ 
and that is the way in which the cessation of perception is brought about by successive steps.”’ ‘That is right, Poṭṭhapāda.’
And that is why, Reverend Kassapa, I believe there is no other world...’
And that is why, Reverend Kassapa, I believe there is no other world...’
And that is why, seeing the danger of such miracles, I...
And that man might say: “Sir, there is something called the Gandhāra charm.
And that man might say: “Sir, there is something called the Manika charm.
And that monk attained to such a state of mental concentration that the way to the deva-realms appeared before him.
And that monk went up to him and said: “Friend, where do the four great elements — earth, water, fire, air — cease without remainder?” to which the Great Brahmā replied: “Monk, I am Brahmā, Great Brahmā, the Conqueror, the Unconquered, the All-Seeing, All-Powerful, the Lord, the Maker and Creator, the Ruler, Appointer and Orderer, Father of All That Have Been and Shall Be.”
And that stream whose water had been churned up by the wheels and was not good, dirty and disturbed, as Ananda approached it began to flow pure, bright and unsullied.
And that, monks, is called the Noble Truth of Suffering.
And that, monks, is called the Noble Truth of the Cessation of Suffering.
And that, monks, is called the Noble Truth of the Origin of Suffering.
And that, monks, is called the way of practice leading to the cessation of suffering.’
And that, monks, is how a monk abides contemplating body as body.
And that, monks, is how a monk abides contemplating body as body.’
And that, monks, is how a monk abides contemplating body as body.’
And that, monks, is how a monk abides contemplating body as body.’
And that, monks, is how a monk abides contemplating body as body.’
And that, monks, is how a monk abides contemplating body as body.’
And that, monks, is how a monk abides contemplating body as body.’
And that, monks, is how a monk abides contemplating feelings as feelings.’
And that, monks, is how a monk abides contemplating mind as mind.’
And that, monks, is how a monk abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects in respect of the five aggregates of grasping.’
And that, monks, is how a monk abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects in respect of the five hindrances.’
And that, monks, is how a monk abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects in respect of the Four Noble Truths.’
And that, monks, is how a monk abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects in respect of the seven factors of enlightenment.’
And that, monks, is how a monk abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects in respect of the six internal and external sense-bases.’
And that, Poṭṭhapāda, is the way in which the cessation of perception is brought about by successive steps.
And that, Reverend Kassapa, is my reason for maintaining that there is no other world...’
And that, Reverend Kassapa, is my reason for maintaining: “There is no other world...”’
And the answer is:
And the ascetics and Brahmins, thus ministered to by him as the zenith, will reciprocate in six ways: they will restrain him from evil, encourage him to do good, be benevolently compassionate towards him, teach him what he has not heard, clarify what he has heard, and point out to him the way to heaven.
And the Blessed Lord has said: “I will not take final Nibbāna till I have nuns and female disciples who are accomplished,...
And the Blessed Lord taught me Dhamma most excellently and perfectly, contrasting the dark with the light.
And the Brahmins and householders of Campa heard say: ‘The ascetic Gotama of the Sakyans, who has gone forth from the Sakya clan is travelling among the Angas...and is staying by Gaggara’s lotus-pool.
And the Brahmins and householders of Khānumata heard say: ‘The ascetic Gotama...is staying at Ambalatthika.
And the Brahmins asked him why he did not applaud the ascetic Gotama’s fine words.
And the children of those whose life-span was ten years will live for twenty years.
And the city of Kusavati was never free of ten sounds by day or night: the sound of elephants, horses, carriages, kettle-drums, side-drums, lutes, singing, cymbals and gongs, with cries of “Eat, drink and be merry” as tenth.
And the city of Kusāvatī was never free of ten sounds by day or night: the sound of elephants, horses, carriages, kettle-drums, side-drums, lutes, singing, cymbals and gongs, with cries of “Eat, drink and be merry!” as tenth.
And the devas as well as the Mallas of Kusinara honoured the Lord’s body with divine and human dancing, song...; and they carried the body to the north of the city, brought it in through the north gate, through the middle of the city and out through the eastern gate to the Mallas’ shrine of Makuta-here they set the body down.
and the disciple, having taken it up, follows it, practising it properly and keeping to it.
And the females developed female sex-organs, and the males developed male organs.
And the Four Great Kings stood up, saluted the Lord, passed by on his right side, and vanished.
And the Four Great Kings, with a great array of yakkhas, of gandhabbas, of kumbhandas and of nagas, having set up a guard, a defensive force, a watch over the four quarters, as night was drawing to a close, went to see the Lord, lighting up the entire Vultures’ Peak with their radiance, saluted him and sat down to one side.
And the gold staircase had gold posts with silver railings and banisters, the silver had silver posts with gold railings and banisters, and so on.
And the good-looking ones despised the others, saying: “We are better-looking than they are.”
And the good-looking ones despised the others...
And the Great King Vessavana, having heard and received it in person, related it to his followers.
And the Great Steward felt fear and trembling, and his hair stood on end at such a sight as he had never seen before.
And the householder Kevaddha  came to the Lord, prostrated himself before him, and sat down to one side.
And the householder Sandhāna also returned to Rājagaha.
And the King said: “Do not take life.
And the King thought: “What a wonderful mount, if only he could be brought under control!” And this Horse-Treasure submitted to control just like a thoroughbred that had been trained for a long time...
And the King was the ancestor of the Sakyans.
And the lay-followers of Pāṭaligāma came to the Lord, saluted him, sat down to one side, and said: ʹMay the Lord consent to stay at our rest-house!’ And the Lord consented by silence.
And the lay-followers of Pāṭaligāma, having washed their feet, went in and sat down with their backs to the east wall, facing west and with the Lord before them.
And the Licchavis of Vesālī heard that the Lord had arrived at Vesālī and was staying at Ambapālīʹs grove.
And the Licchavis snapped their fingers, saying: ‘We’ve been beaten by the mango-woman, we’ve been cheated by the mango-woman!’ Then, having rejoiced and delighted in his talk, they rose from their seats, saluted the Lord and, passing him by on the right, departed.
And the Lord Buddha Vipassi instructed them with a discourse on Dhamma...
And the Lord Buddha Vipassi replied to the Great Brahma in verse:
And the Lord consented by silence.
And the Lord said to Ambattha: ‘Well now, Ambattha, would you behave like this if you were talking to venerable and learned Brahmins, teachers of teachers, as you do with me, walking and standing while I am sitting, and uttering vague words of politeness?’ ‘No, Reverend Gotama.
And the Lord said to Ananda: ‘Ananda, it may be that you will think: “The Teacher’s instruction has ceased, now we have no teacher!” It should not be seen like this, Ananda, for what I have taught and explained to you as Dhamma and discipline will, at my passing, be your teacher.
And the Lord said: ‘Ananda, have you heard that the Vajjians hold regular and frequent assemblies?’ ‘I have heard, Lord, that they do.’
And the Lord said: ‘Ananda, these sāl-trees have burst forth into an abundance of untimely blossoms...
And the Lord said: ‘Enough, Ananda, do not weep and wail!
And the Lord saw those people who were looking for a boat, looking for a raft, and binding together a raft of reeds to get to the other side.
And the Lord spent the remainder of the night in the rest-house left empty by their departure.
And the Lord stayed in the royal park at Ambalatthikā,  and there he delivered a comprehensive discourse: ‘This is morality, this is concentration, this is wisdom...’
And the Lord told him to move: ‘Move aside, monk, do not stand in front of me.’
And the Lord went with the Venerable Ananda to the Gabled Hall in the Great Forest.
And the Lord, being aware of his doubts, effected by his psychic power that Ambattha could see his sheathed genitals, and then, sticking out his tongue, he reached out to lick both ears and both nostrils, and then covered the whole circle of his forehead with his tongue.
And the Lord, having dressed in the early morning and taken his robe and bowl, went with his order of monks to Pokkharasāti’s residence, and sat down on the prepared seat.
And the Lord, having heard it himself and also come to know it by his own super-knowledge, related it to the Venerable Ananda, who in turn related it to the monks and nuns, the male and female lay-followers.
And the Lord, having risen early and dressed, took his robe and bowl and went to Rajagaha for alms.
And the Lord, having risen early and taken his robe and bowl, went with his order of monks to Sālavatikā.
And the Lord, having risen early, went with robe and bowl and attended by his monks to Kūṭadanta’s place of sacrifice and sat down on the prepared seat.
And the Lord, having risen early, went with robe and bowl and attended by his monks to Sonadanda’s residence and sat down on the prepared seat.
And the Lord, having seen the Licchavis from afar, said: ‘Monks, any of you who have not seen the Thirty-Three Gods, just look at this troop of Licchavis!
And the Lord, reading his mind, thought: ‘This Sonadanda is worried.
And the Lord, with his divine eye surpassing that of humans, saw the thousands of devas taking up residence in Pataligama.
And the Lord, with the purified divine-ear faculty surpassing the powers of humans, heard what they were talking about.
And the lotus-ponds were provided with two kinds of parapet, gold and silver — the gold parapets having gold posts, silver railings and banisters, and the silver parapets having silver posts, gold railings and banisters.
And the majority of those monks left that very day to wander about the country.
And the Mallas of Kusinārā poured perfumed water over it for the same purpose.
And the monks strove eagerly to see.
And the monks told him.
And the monks were delighted and rejoiced at his words.
And the monks were delighted and rejoiced at his words.
And the monks, having washed their feet, went in and sat down with their backs to the west wall, facing east, and with the Lord sitting in front of them.
And the newly-ordained Venerable Citta, alone, secluded, unwearying, zealous and resolute, in a short time attained to that for the sake of which young men of good birth go forth from the household life into homelessness, that unexcelled culmination of the holy life, having realised it here and now by his own super-knowledge and dwelt therein, knowing: ‘Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further here.’
And the newly-ordained Venerable Kassapa, alone, secluded, unwearying, zealous and resolute, in a short time attained that for which young men of good birth go forth from the household life into homelessness, that unexcelled culmination of the holy life, having realised it here and now by his own super-knowledge and dwelt therein knowing: ‘Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further here.’
And the one on whose couch he sits down is as thrilled and delighted as a duly-anointed Khattiya king on assuming his royal office.
and the people with joy in their hearts...
And the realisation dawned on him: “Becoming conditions birth”...
And the result of this was that their self-luminance disappeared.
And the rough clothes with ball-fringes - you would not care to set foot on them, much less wear them!
And the royal sage said to him: “My son, you should not grieve or feel sad at the disappearance of the Wheel-Treasure.
And the same applies to ill-will, cruelty, forms,  personality.
And the same applies to things perceived by the ear, the nose, the tongue, the body and the mind.
And the same thing happened to eighty thousand devas as well.
And the six nobles went aside and consulted together: ‘These Brahmins are greedy for money.
And the steward conveyed this message to the Brahmins and householders of Campā.
And the Teacher is passing away, who was so compassionate to me!’
And the touch of the skin of the Woman-Treasure was like cotton or silk, and her limbs were cool when it was hot, and warm when it was cold.
And the twice-born, winged and clear of sight, Fierce garuda birds have come 
And the Venerable Ananda came to the Lord, saluted him, sat down to one side, and said: ‘Lord, the monk Sāḷha and the nun Nandā have died at Nadikā.
And the Venerable Ananda heard of the Lord’s report and the Nādikans’ delight.
And the Venerable Ananda rejoiced and was delighted at his words.
And the Venerable Ananda said: ‘It is wonderful, Lord, it is marvellous!
And the Venerable Ananda thought: ‘It is marvellous, it is wonderful how this great earthquake arises, this terrible earthquake, so dreadful and hair-raising, accompanied by thunder!
And the Venerable Ananda thought: ‘This Venerable Upavāṇa has for long been the Lord’s attendant, keeping close at hand, at his beck and call.
And the Venerable Ananda thought: ‘Wonderful, marvellous are the Tathagata’s great and mighty powers!
And the Venerable Ananda uttered this verse:
And the Venerable Ananda went into his lodging and stood lamenting, leaning on the door-post: ‘Alas, I am still a learner with much to do!
And the Venerable Anuruddha said: ‘Now go, friend Ananda, to Kusinara and announce to the Mallas: “Vasetthas, the Lord has passed away.
And the Venerable Anuruddha uttered this verse:
And the Venerable Citta, son of the elephant-trainer, became another of the Arahants.
And the Venerable Cundaka sat down in front of the Lord.
And the venerable Gavampati said to him, as he stood there: ‘Who are you, friend?’ ‘Lord, I am Prince Pāyāsi.’ ‘Friend, are you not the one who used to say: “There is no other world, there are no spontaneously born beings, there is no fruit or result of good or evil deeds”?’ ‘Yes, Lord, I am the one who used to say that, but I was converted from that evil view by the Noble Kumāra-Kassapa.’ ‘And where has the young Brahmin Uttara, who was in charge of the distribution of your charity, been reborn?’
And the Venerable Kassapa became another of the Arahants.
And the Venerable Sāriputta said:
And the Venerable Subhadda became another of the Arahants.
And the Venerable Sāriputta addressed the monks, referring to this situation, and said: ‘So ill-proclaimed was their teaching and discipline, so unedifyingly displayed, and so ineffectual in calming the passions, having been proclaimed by one who was not fully enlightened.
And the Venerable Sāriputta came to see the Lord, saluted him, sat down to one side, and said: ‘It is clear to me, Lord, that there never has been, never will be and is not now another ascetic or Brahmin who is better or more enlightened than the Lord.’
And the Venerable Ānanda came to them and delivered the Venerable Anuruddha’s message.
And the very lowest realm that any of them attained was that of the gandhabbas.
And the wanderer Bhaggava-gotta said: ‘Come, Blessed Lord, welcome, Blessed Lord!
And the wanderer Suppiya was also travelling on that road with his pupil the youth Brahmadatta.
And the Well-Farer having spoken thus, the Teacher added: 
And the Well-Farer having spoken, the Teacher added:
And the Well-Farer having spoken, the Teacher added:
And the Well-Farer having spoken, the Teacher added:
And the Well-Farer having spoken, the Teacher added:
And the Well-Farer having spoken, the Teacher added: 
And the women became excessively preoccupied with men, and the men with women.
And the yakkha Janavasabha, having heard it himself, related it to the Lord.
And the yakkhas stood up, and some saluted the Lord, passed by on his right, and vanished, some exchanged courtesies with the Lord, some saluted him with joined palms, some announced their name and clan, some remained silent, and they all vanished.
And the young Brahmin Bharadvaja said: ‘This is the only straight path...
And the young man rose, returned to Subha and reported what had passed between him and the Venerable Ananda, adding: ‘My mission has been thus far accomplished, that the Reverend Ananda will probably take the opportunity to come tomorrow.’
And then he perceived the destiny and fate of each one of them.
And then he thought: “I have attained to this Dhamma which is profound, hard to see, hard to grasp, peaceful, excellent, beyond reasoning, subtle, to be apprehended by the wise.
And then I said to them: “Pāṭikaputta the naked ascetic is not capable of meeting me face to face unless he takes back his words, abandons that thought, and gives up that view.
And then if people were to announce to you: “Sire, you remember that slave who worked in your presence, and who shaved off his hair and beard and went forth into homelessness?
And then one being, from exhaustion of his life-span or of his merits, falls from the Abhassara world and arises in the empty Brahmā-palace.
And then Sakka, ruler of the gods, touched the earth with his hand and called out three times:
And then the Bodhisatta Vipassi thought: “With what being present, does consciousness occur.
And then the company might despise me...
And then the Lord came to the River Ganges.
And then the Lord, while staying at Vultures’ Peak, gave a comprehensive discourse: ‘This is morality, this is concentration, this is wisdom.
And then — shrank back, enraged, but powerless!
And then, as a result of the wisdom born of profound consideration, the realisation dawned on him: “Birth being absent, ageing-and-death does not occur.
And then, as a result of the wisdom born of profound consideration, the realisation dawned on him: “Mind-and-body conditions consciousness.”
And then, as swiftly as a strong man might stretch his flexed arm, or flex it again, I vanished from Ukkatṭhā and appeared among the Aviha devas.
And then, in him, just these perceptions arise, but other, coarser perceptions do not arise.
And then, monks, as a result of the wisdom born of profound consideration the realisation dawned on him: “Birth being present, ageing-and-death occurs, birth conditions ageing-and-death.” 
And then, with the purified divine eye, he sees beings passing away and arising: base and noble, well favoured and ill-favoured, to happy and unhappy destinations as kamma directs them.
And there are five ways in which a wife, thus ministered to by her husband as the western direction, will reciprocate: by properly organising her work, by being kind to the servants, by not being unfaithful, by protecting stores, and by being skilful and diligent in all she has to do.
And there are five ways in which friends and companions, thus ministered to by a man as the northern direction, will reciprocate: by looking after him when he is inattentive, by looking after his property when he is inattentive, by being a refuge when he is afraid, by not deserting him when he is in trouble, and by showing concern for his children.
And there are five ways in which servants and workpeople, thus ministered to by their master as the nadir, will reciprocate: they will get up before him, go to bed after him, take only what they are given, do their work properly, and be bearers of his praise and good repute.
And there are five ways in which their teachers, thus ministered to by their pupils as the southern direction, will reciprocate: they will give thorough instruction, make sure they have grasped what they should have duly grasped, give them a thorough grounding in all skills, recommend them to their friends and colleagues, and provide them with security in all directions.
And there are middle-ranking monks who are disciplined and experienced, there are novices who are disciples, there are senior, middle-ranking and novice nuns who are disciples, there are white-robed lay followers, male and female, celibate and non-celibate, and the holy life I proclaim prospers and flourishes, is widespread, widely-known, proclaimed far and wide, well-proclaimed among humans.
And there are prominent yakkhas living there who have no faith in the word of the Blessed Lord.
And there for ever beauteous lies
And there he dwells, mind-made, feeding on delight, self-luminous, moving through the air, glorious — and he stays like that for a very long time.
And there he stayed at the Ambalatthika park.
And there I said: “Ānanda, Rājagaha is delightful, the Vultures’ Peak is delightful.
And there is nothing further to be done!
And there many thousands of devas came, saluted me and stood to one side, saying: “Sir, it is ninety-one aeons since the Lord Buddha Vipassi appeared in the world...”.
And there such food was given out as broken rice with sour gruel, and also rough clothing with ball-fringes.
And there the Lord addressed the monks: ‘It is, monks, through not understanding, not penetrating four things that I as well as you have for a long time fared on round the cycle of rebirths.
And there the Lord addressed the monks: ‘Monks!’ ‘Lord’, they replied, and the Lord said:
And there the Lord addressed the monks: ‘Monks, a monk should be mindful and clearly aware, this is our charge to you!
And there the one who brought a load of hemp gave no pleasure to his parents, nor to his wife and children, nor to his friends and colleagues, and he did not even get any joy or happiness from it himself.
And there they dwell, mind-made, feeding on delight, self-luminous, moving through the air, glorious — and they stay like that for a very long time.
And there they dwell, mind-made, feeding on delight, self-luminous, moving through the air, glorious — and they stay like that for a very long time.
And there they dwell, mind-made,...
And there they honoured, paid respects, worshipped and adored the Lord’s body with dance and song and music, with garlands and scents, making awnings and circular tents in order to spend the day there.
And there they saw a pile of hemp that had been thrown away, and one said: “Here’s some hemp.
And therefore, monk, you have acted wrongly, you have acted incorrectly by going beyond the Blessed Lord and going in search of an answer to this question elsewhere.
And these are the three kinds of teacher that I spoke of as blameworthy.’
And these beings set to and fed on this rice, and this lasted for a very long time.
And these Brahmins learned in the Three Vedas are caught up, hemmed in, obstructed, entangled in these five hindrances.
And these four qualities apply to a wheel-turning monarch: if he is visited by a company of Khattiyas, of Brahmins, of householders, or of ascetics, they are pleased at the sight of him and when he talks to them, and when he is silent they are disappointed.
And these good folk are fond of quiet, they are taught to be quiet and speak in praise of quiet.
And these, being banished, made their home on the flank of the Himālayas beside a lotus-pond where there was a big grove of teak-trees.
And these, Lord, are the two reasons why I came to see the Lord.” 
And they became still more arrogant, and so the creepers disappeared too.
And they dealt with the Tathāgata’s body accordingly...
And they did so.
And they did so.
And they do all these things, but although he has eyes he does not perceive objects or their spheres, although he has ears he does not hear sounds..., although he has a nose he does not smell smells..., although he has a tongue he does not taste tastes..., although he has a body he does not feel tangibles or their spheres.
And they do so.
And they do so.
And they explained to him the duties of a wheel-turning monarch.
And they fall from that place.
And they got up, saluted the Lord, and went out, passing him by on the right.
And they heard say: ‘The ascetic Gotama, son of the Sakyans, who has gone forth from the Sakya clan, is staying at Vesālī, at the Gabled Hall in the Great Forest.
And they might say: “Well then, you don’t know or see the one you seek for and desire?” and he would say: “No.”
And they might say: “Well then, you don’t know or see the one you seek for and desire?” and he would say: “No.”
And they might say: “Well then, you don’t know or see what kind of a palace you are building the staircase for?” and he would say: “No.”
And they might say: “Well then, you don’t know or see what kind of a palace you are building the staircase for?” and he would say: “No.”
and they question him, but he does not answer.”...
and they question him.”
And they said to Ambattha: ‘That is his dwelling, with the door closed.
And they said to her: ʹAmbapālī, why do you drive up against us like that?’ ‘Because, young sirs, the Blessed Lord has been invited by me for a meal with his order of monks.’
And they said: “As soon as he was born, he spoke.
And they said: “We have heard this, Reverend Gotama, as you have explained.”
And they said: “We have heard this, Reverend Gotama, as you have explained.”
And they said: “We have heard this, Reverend Gotama, as you have explained.”
And they said: “We have heard this, Reverend Gotama, as you have explained.”
and they stay like that for a very long time.
And they thought: ‘It is too late to cremate the Lord’s body today.
And they thought: “Suppose we were to appoint a certain being who would show anger where anger was due, censure those who deserved it, and banish those who deserved banishment!
And they thought: “This is a great caravan of a thousand carts.
And they thought: “This is certainly no common teaching and discipline, no common going-forth, for which Prince Vipassi has shaved off hair and beard, donned yellow robes and gone forth into homelessness.
And they thought: “This is certainly no common teaching and discipline...for which Prince Khanda and Tissa the chaplain’s son have gone forth into homelessness.
And they told him.
And they told him.
And they were beloved by the King as children are beloved by their father.
And they who from this world are freed, 
And they, saying: “Very good” in assent, might...
And this immeasurable light shines forth.
And this is a fault in that self-mortifier.
And this is a fault in that self-mortifier.
And this is a fault in that self-mortifier.
And this is a fault in that self-mortifier.
And this is a fault in that self-mortifier.
And this is a fault in that self-mortifier.
And this is a fault in that self-mortifier.
And this is a fault in that self-mortifier.
And this is a fault in that self-mortifier.
And this is a fault in that self-mortifier.
And this is a fault in that self-mortifier.
And this is a fault in that self-mortifier.
And this is how the Wheel-Treasure appeared to King Mahasudassana.
and this is my consciousness which is bound to it and dependent on it.”
And this is that training’, said the Lord.
And this is that training’, said the Lord.
And this King Mahasudassana had this very Kusinara, under the name of Kusāvatī, for his capital.
And this lasted for a very long time.
and this person is born in the Middle Country and is intelligent, not stupid, and not deaf or dumb, and well able to tell whether something has been well said or ill said.
And this they will do for seven days.
And this thought leads to rebirth right there...
And this thought, being launched at such a low level, and not developed to a higher level, leads to rebirth right there.
And this Woman-Treasure was not unfaithful to the King even in thought, much less in deed.
And this, Ruler of the Gods, is the practice that monk has undertaken who has acquired the restraint required by the rules.’
And this, Ruler of the Gods, is the practice that monk has undertaken who has reached the right way...leading to the cessation of the tendency to proliferation.’
And those beings set to and ate the fungus.
And those beings that have been reborn there recognise each other by this light and know: “Other beings, too, have been born here!” And this ten-thousandfold world-system trembles and quakes and is convulsed.
And those border folk thought: “It seems that when the trumpet is accompanied by a man, by effort, and by the wind, then it makes a sound.
And those devas who, having lived the holy life under the Lord, had recently appeared in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, outshone the other devas in brightness and glory.
And those Kings...
And those monks who had not yet overcome their passions wept and tore their hair, raising their arms, throwing themselves down and twisting and turning, crying: ‘All too soon the Blessed Lord has passed away, all too soon the Well-Farer has passed away, all too soon the Eye of the World has disappeared!’ But those monks who were free from craving endured mindfully and clearly aware, saying: ‘All compounded things are impermanent — what is the use of this?’
And those monks who had not yet overcome their passions wept and tore their hair...
And those twin sāl-trees burst forth into an abundance of untimely blossoms, which fell upon the Tathāgata’s body, sprinkling it and covering it in homage.
And those who had faced him in the eastern region became his subjects.
And those who had not fully mastered his teaching were reborn either among the Paranimmita-Vasavatti devas, among the Nimmanarati devas, among the Tusita devas, among the Yama devas, among the devas of the Thirty-Three Gods, or among the devas of the Four Great Kings.
And those who had opposed him in the eastern region became his subjects.
And those who now in my time or afterwards live thus, they will become the highest, if they are desirous of learning.’
And those who opposed him in the eastern region came and said: “Come, Your Majesty, welcome!
And those who were libertines and drunkards in Kusāvatī had their desires assuaged by the sound of those nets of bells.
And those who were ugly, being envious of those who were beautiful, committed adultery with others’ wives.
And through having undertaken such wholesome things, they will increase in life-span and beauty.
And through his knowing and seeing his mind is delivered from the corruption of sense-desire, from the corruption of becoming, from the corruption of ignorance, and the knowledge arises in him: “This is deliverance!”, and he knows: “Birth is finished, the holy life has been led, done is what had to be done, there is nothing further here.” 
And through their being inspired, fired and delighted with this discourse, it was not long before their minds were freed from the corruptions without remainder.
And through this restraint, through making this his austerity, he takes an upward course and does not fall back into lower things.
And thus adjured by the great Adept, Cundaka placed the fourfold robe.
And thus disputing, they followed close behind the Buddha and his order of monks.
And thus fearful, trembling, with hair standing on end, he addressed Brahmā Sanankumāra in these verses:
And thus he is freed from the corruptions, the vexations and fevers that arise from sense-desires, and he does not feel that feeling.
And thus he taught his disciples the way to union with the Brahmā-world.
And thus terrified and trembling, his hair standing on end, he made for the Tinduka lodging of the wanderers.
And thus this whole mass of suffering ceases.”
And thus this whole mass of suffering takes its origin.”
And to the lovers of his word the Lord, Turning said: ‘The deva-hosts approach.
And tonight in the last watch the ascetic Gotama will attain final Nibbāna.
And took a pure and righteous course.
And touch his knees with both his hands, And his tree-like girth and height
And two wanderers, Mandissa and Jāliya, the pupil of the wooden-bowl ascetic, came to him, exchanged courtesies with him and sat down to one side....
And two wanderers, Mandissa and Jāliya, the pupil of the wooden-bowl ascetic, came to me, exchanged courtesies with me, and sat down to one side.
And Vasettha and Bharadvaja went strolling along the road, and as they did so, an argument broke out between them on the subject of right and wrong paths.
And Vasettha could not convince Bharadvaja, nor could Bharadvaja convince Vasettha.
And waited on them in our homes.
and was reborn among the Thirty-Three Gods and am known as Gopaka the devas’ son.
And we
And we are here to see the unconquered brotherhood.’
And we can find no proclaimer of the path leading to Nibbāna...
And we can find no such teacher...
And we can find no teacher who does likewise, in every detail of doctrine...
And we can find no teacher who does this...
And we can find no teacher who has done the like, whether we consider the past or the present, other than the Lord.”
And we can find none who is a proclaimer of such things...
and we have fully mastered the true Dhamma...
And we should revere, honour, esteem and worship guests.
And we too will do the same as the monks: at the end of six years we will come together to the royal capital of Bandhumati to recite the disciplinary code.”
And we too would like to hear those eight truthful statements about the Lord.” “Very well, Great Brahmā”, said Sakka, and he repeated those eight statements:
And we, sir, who have lived the holy life under the Lord, having freed ourselves from sense-desires, have arisen here.”
And weariness all gone, he’ll see
And well over five hundred, by the destruction of three fetters, are Stream-Winners, incapable of falling into states of woe, certain of attaining Nibbāna.
and were to lie down on this bank, covering his head with a shawl.
And what are the things that you should recite together?
And what are these elementary, inferior matters for which the worldling would praise him?’
And what are these matters?’
And what are these matters?’
And what are those matters...?
And what is the “Ariyan” supernormal power?
And what is there in the world that is agreeable and pleasurable?
And what is this Dhamma that has been well proclaimed by the Lord...?
And what is this?
And what they had taken in the evening for supper had grown again and was ripe in the morning, and what they had taken in the morning for breakfast was ripe again by evening, with no sign of reaping.
And whatever ascetics and Brahmins come to our territory are our guests.
And whatever ascetics and Brahmins in your kingdom have renounced the life of sensual infatuation and are devoted to forbearance and gentleness, each one taming himself, each one calming himself and each one striving for the end of craving, from time to time you should go to them and consult them as to what is wholesome and what is unwholesome, that is blameworthy and what is blameless, what is to be followed and what is not to be followed, and what action will in the long run lead to harm and sorrow, and what to welfare and happiness.
And whatever ascetics or Brahmins are Eternalists and proclaim the eternity of the self and the world, they do so on one or other of these four grounds.
And whatever ascetics or Brahmins come to our territory are our guests...
And whatever ascetics or Brahmins have in the past realised such powers in different ways, they have all developed and strongly practised these four ways, and the same applies to all who may in the future, or who do now realise such powers.
And whatever dark spaces lie beyond the world’s end, chaotic, blind and black, such that they are not even reached by the mighty rays of sun and moon, are yet illumined by this immeasurable splendid light surpassing the glory of the most powerful devas.
And whatever sensations of lust that he previously had disappear.
And whatever there was of them, men and cattle, they were all gobbled up by that yakkha-spirit,  and only their bones remained.
And when a mighty wind blows, this stirs up the water, and through the stirring-up of the water the earth quakes.
And when a neutral feeling is felt, no pleasant or painful feeling is felt, but only neutral feeling.
And when all these had come in vast array, With Indra and the hosts of Brahma too, Then too came Mara’s hosts, and now observe
And when he is dead he will be cast aside on a heap of bīraṇa-grass in the charnel-ground.
And when he spoke in that voice to the assembly, its sound did not carry outside.
and when I am sure they will not recover, I go to them and say: “There are certain ascetics and Brahmins who declare and believe that those who abstain from taking life...
And when I am sure they will not recover, I go to them and say: “There are certain ascetics and Brahmins who declare and believe that those who take life,...
And when I found that I could not win the lady by any manner of means, I took my yellow beluva-wood lute and went to the home of King Timbarū of the gandhabbas, and there I sang these verses:
And when I observed that by the performance of such actions unwholesome factors decreased and wholesome ones increased, then such bodily action was to be followed.
And when I observed that in the pursuit of such happiness unwholesome factors decreased and wholesome ones increased, then that happiness was to be sought after.
And when I passed away from there I was reborn in such-and-such other circumstances.
and when it was ready he reported to the Lord: ‘Lord, the meal is ready.’
And when King Ajatasattu came near the mango-grove he felt fear and terror, and his hair stood on end.
And when King Mahāvijita was musing in private, the thought came to him: “I have acquired extensive wealth in human terms, I occupy a wide extent of land which I have conquered.
And when six years had passed, the devas announced: “Gentlemen, six years have passed, it is now time to go to the royal capital of Bandhumatī to recite the disciplinary code!” And those monks, some by their own psychic powers and some by that of the devas, all in one day came to Bandhumati to recite the disciplinary code.
And when the Buddha greets their gaze, Buddha, kinsman of the Sun, From afar they offer homage
And when the Buddha greets their gaze, Buddha, kinsman of the Sun, From afar they offer homage
And when the householder Sandhāna realised: ‘These wanderers of other views are actually listening and attending to the Lord’s words, and inclining their minds to the higher wisdom, he said to Nigrodha: ‘Reverend Nigrodha, you said to me: “Come now, householder, do you know whom the ascetic Gotama talks to?...
And when the Lord Buddha Vipassi had withdrawn into seclusion, he thought: “There is now this great gathering of monks here in the capital.
And when the Lord Buddha Vipassi knew that the minds of Khanda and Tissa were ready, pliable, free from the hindrances, joyful and calm, then he preached the Buddhas’ special sermon in brief: on suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.
And when the Lord had eaten and taken his hand away from the bowl, Kūṭadanta took a low stool and sat down to one side.
And when the Lord had eaten and taken his hand away from the bowl, Sonadanda took a low stool and sat down to one side.
And when the Lord had stayed at Ambapālīʹs grove as long as he wished,...he went with a large company of monks to the little village of Beluva, where he stayed.
And when the Lord had stayed at Bhaṇḍagāma for as long as he wished, he said: ‘Ānanda, let us go to Hatthigama..., to Ambagāma..., to Jambugāma...’ giving the same discourse at each place.
And when the Lord had stayed at Bhoganagara for as long as he wished, he said: ‘Ananda, let us go to Pāvā.’ ‘Very good, Lord’, said Ananda, and the Lord went with a large company of monks to Pāvā, where he stayed at the mango-grove of Cunda the smith.
And when the Lord had stayed at Nādikā as long as he wished,...he went with a large company of monks to Vesali, where he stayed at Ambapālīʹs grove.
And when the Lord had stayed at Rājagaha as long as he wished, he said to the Venerable Ananda: ‘Come, Ananda, let us go to Ambalatthikā.’ ‘Very good, Lord’, said Ananda, and the Lord went there with a large company of monks.
And when the Lord had stood up, he said to the Venerable Sariputta: ‘Good, good, Sariputta!
And when the Lord had taken his hand from the bowl, Ambapālī took a low stool and sat down to one side.
And when the Lord had taken his hand from the bowl, Pokkharasati sat down to one side on a low stool.
And when the Lord knew that Kūṭadanta’s mind was ready, pliable, free from the hindrances, joyful and calm, then he preached a sermon on Dhamma in brief: on suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.
And when the Lord knew that Pokkharasāti’s mind was ready, pliable, free from the hindrances, joyful and calm, then he preached a sermon on Dhamma in brief: on suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.
And when the Lord saw this he uttered this verse:
And when the Lord took his hand away from the bowl they sat down on low stools to one side.
And when the Lord’s body was burnt up, a shower of water from the sky, and another which burst forth from the sāl-trees extinguished the funeral pyre.
And when the Lord’s body was burnt, what had been skin, under-skin, flesh, sinew, or joint-fluid, all that vanished and not even ashes or dust remained, only the bones remained.
And when the night was nearly over, Pañcasikha of the gandhabbas, lighting up the entire Vultures’ Peak with a splendid radiance, approached the Lord, saluted him, stood to one side and said: ‘Lord, I wish to report to you what I have personally seen and observed when I was in the presence of the Thirty-Three Gods.’ ‘Tell me then, Pañcasikha’, said the Lord.
And when the night was over, the Lord said to the monks: ‘Monks, this night the Four Great Kings...
And when there is milk we don’t speak of curds, of butter, of ghee or of cream of ghee, we speak of milk; when there are curds we don’t speak of butter...; when there is cream of ghee...
And when these nets of bells were stirred by the wind their sound was lovely, delightful, sweet and intoxicating, just like that of the five kinds of musical instruments played in concert by well-trained and skilful players.
And when they heard the Venerable Ānanda’s words, the Mallas...
And when they heard Ānanda’s words, the Mallas, with their sons, daughters-in-law and wives were struck with anguish and sorrow, their minds were overcome with grief so that they were all weeping and tearing their hair...Then they all went to the sāl-grove where the Venerable Ananda was.
And when this was done, the Lord’s funeral pyre ignited of itself.
And whenever he came to a village or town, he was like a king to kings, like Brahma to the Brahmins, like a deity to householders.
And whenever the pupil of a teacher attains to such excellent distinction, that is a teacher who is not to be blamed in the world.
And whenever the Reverend Gotama visits other families or lay-followers in Ukkattha, may he also visit the family of Pokkharasati!
And wherever they went, they rapidly consumed all the grass, wood and greenstuff.
And while he had been speaking in this dialogue, the pure and spotless Dhamma-Eye arose within Sakka, ruler of the gods, and he knew: ‘Whatever things have an origin must come to cessation.’
and who are caught up,...
and who has gained the goal of asceticism.
And whoever cuts off a man’s head with a sharp sword does not deprive anyone of life, he just inserts the blade in the intervening space between these seven bodies.” 
And whoever lays wreaths or puts sweet perfumes and colours there with a devout heart, will reap benefit and happiness for a long time.
And why is each of these worthy of a stupa?
And why not?
And why should not a man like me express approval of such a true and real practice, so well taught by the ascetic Gotama?’
and with an inwardly calmed heart his mind is purified of worry-and-flurry.
and with an inwardly calmed mind his heart is purified of worry-and-flurry.
And with him went the seven anointed Khattiya kings, the seven wealthy and distinguished Brahmins with their seven hundred advanced pupils, his forty equal wives, several thousand Khattiyas, several thousand Brahmins, several thousand householders, even some harem-women.
And with that wise leader they passed safely through the jungle.
And with that, he fell back again.
And with the fading away of delight, remaining imperturbable, mindful and clearly aware, he experienced in himself that joy of which the Noble Ones say: “Happy is he who dwells with equanimity and mindfulness”, he entered and remained in the third jhāna.
And with the fading away of delight, remaining imperturbable, mindful and clearly aware, he experiences in himself that joy of which the Noble Ones say: “Happy is he who dwells with equanimity and mindfulness”, he enters and remains in the third jhāna.
And with the fading away of delight, remaining imperturbable, mindful and clearly aware, he experiences in himself the joy of which the Noble Ones say: “Happy is he who dwells with equanimity and mindfulness”, he enters the third jhvna.
And with the perfumes and wreaths, and all the musicians, and with five hundred sets of garments they went to the sāl-grove where the Lord’s body was lying.
And with the subsiding of thinking and pondering, by gaining inner tranquillity and oneness of mind, he entered and remained in the second jhana, which is without thinking and pondering, born of concentration, filled with delight and joy.
And with the subsiding of thinking and pondering, by gaining inner tranquillity and oneness of mind, he enters and remains in the second jhāna, which is without thinking and pondering, born of concentration, filled with delight and happiness.
And with the subsiding of thinking and pondering, by gaining inner tranquillity and oneness of mind, he enters and remains in the second jhāna, which is without thinking and pondering, born of concentration, filled with delight and joy.
And with the subsiding of thinking and pondering, by gaining inner tranquillity and oneness of mind, he enters and remains in the second jhāna, which is without thinking and pondering, born of concentration, filled with delight and joy.
And with them, girls will be marriageable at five years old.
And with them, the ten courses of moral conduct will completely disappear, and the ten courses of evil will prevail exceedingly: for those of a ten-year lifespan there will be no word for “moral” so how can there be anyone who acts in a moral way?
And with them, these flavours will disappear: ghee, butter, sesame-oil, molasses and salt.
And with this delight and joy born of concentration he so suffuses his body that no spot remains untouched.
And with this delight and joy born of detachment, he so suffuses, drenches, fills and irradiates his body that there is no spot in his entire body that is untouched by this delight and joy born of detachment.
And with this following the Bodhisatta went on his rounds through villages, towns and royal cities.
And with this joy devoid of delight he so suffuses his body that no spot remains untouched.
And without having gained this goal, he teaches his disciples a doctrine, saying: “This is for your good, this is for your happiness.”
and would come to have even more faith in the Lord.”’ And the Lord replied as before.
and would that not be wrong view?’ ‘It would, Reverend Gotama.’
And Yasa too.
And yet ill-will still grips my heart.”
And yet it appears to me as clear as clear!’
And yet the King does not allow him to have audience face to face.
And yet these womb-born Brahmins talk about being born from Brahma’s mouth...
And yet you and your teacher the Brahmin Pokkharasāti utter these words: “These shaven little ascetics, menials, black scrapings from Brahmā’s foot, what converse can they have with Brahmins learned in the Three Vedas?” — even though you can’t even manage the duties of one who has failed.
And yet, Ananda, whatever monk, nun, male or female lay-follower dwells practising the Dhamma properly, and perfectly fulfils the Dhamma-way, he or she honours the Tathāgata, reveres and esteems him and pays him the supreme homage.
and you are following the doctrine of your teacher.”
And you might say: “Bind this man’s arms tightly behind him with a strong rope, shave his head closely, and lead him to the rough sound of a drum through the streets and squares and out through the southern gate, and there cut off his head.”
And you should reply: “They can expect four fruits, four benefits.
And you, you have deserted the highest class and gone over to the base class of shaveling petty ascetics, servants, dark fellows born of Brahmā’s foot!
And “He Gladdens Others With Dhamma” is the meaning of Raja, the third title to be introduced.
And, Ambattha, I am the passer-on of the mantras, and you are the receiver.’
And, Ambattha, I too say this:
And, Ananda, this King Mahasudassana had this very Kusinara, under the name of Kusāvatī, for his capital.
And, Ananda, those who were libertines and drunkards in Kusavati had their desires assuaged by the sound of the leaves in the wind.
And, Ananda, those who were libertines and drunkards in Kusāvatī had their desires assuaged by the sound of the leaves in the wind.
And, Bhaggava, at my words Sunakkhatta left this Dhamma and discipline like one condemned to hell.
And, Bhaggava, at my words Sunakkhatta left this Dhamma and discipline like one condemned to hell.
And, descending from the Vultures’ Peak, he came to the Peacocks’ Feeding Ground beside the Sumāgadha Tank, and walked up and down there in the open air.
And, getting up at break of day, he said to the Venerable Ananda: ‘Ananda, who is building a fortress at Pataligama?’ ‘Lord, Sunidha and Vassakāra, the Magadhan ministers, are building a fortress against the Vajjians.’
And, having given up pleasure and pain, and with the disappearance of former gladness and sadness, he entered and remained in the fourth jhāna which is beyond pleasure and pain, and purified by equanimity and mindfulness.
And, having given up pleasure and pain, and with the disappearance of former gladness and sadness, he enters and remains in the fourth jhāna which is beyond pleasure and pain, and purified by equanimity and mindfulness.
And, having given up pleasure and pain, and with the disappearance of former gladness and sadness, he enters and remains in the fourth jhāna, which is beyond pleasure and pain, and purified by equanimity and mindfulness.
And, having installed his eldest son in due form as king, King Daḷhanemi shaved off his hair and beard, donned yellow robes, and went forth from the household life into homelessness.
And, having listened to them, the King established guard and protection, but he did not give property to the needy, and as a result poverty became rife.
And, having practised the four divine abidings, at the breaking-up of the body he was reborn in the Brahmā-world.
And, having saluted him, he passed him by on the right and vanished from the spot.
And, just as swiftly as a strong man might stretch forth his flexed arm, or flex it again, Sakka, surrounded by the Thirty-Three Gods and attended by Pañcasikha, vanished from the heaven of the Thirty-Three and appeared in Magadha...on Mount Vediya.
And, just as the Sakyans offer the King humble service..., so likewise does the King offer humble service to the Tathāgata,  thinking: “If the ascetic Gotama is well-born, I am ill-born; if the ascetic Gotama is strong, I am weak; if the ascetic Gotama is pleasant to look at, I am ill-favoured; if the ascetic Gotama is influential, I am of little influence.”
And, Kassapa, there is nothing further or more perfect than this perfection of morality, of the heart and of wisdom.
And, leaving the fourth jhāna, the Lord finally passed away.
And, Lord, I thought: “How should one like me think despitefully of any ascetic or Brahmin dwelling in my territory?” so I neither applauded nor rejected Pūraṇa Kassapa’s words but, though displeased, not expressing my displeasure, saying nothing, rejecting and scorning speech, I got up and left.
And, Lord, my body was like a drunkard’s.
And, Lord, when Brahmā Sanankumāra appears to the Thirty-Three Gods, not one of them salutes him, or rises, or offers him a seat.
And, monks, in this present fortunate aeon I too have now arisen in the world as a fully-enlightened Buddha.
And, monks, the Lord Buddha Vipassī’s reasoning became mentally known to a certain Great Brahma.
And, Reverend Gotama, I set free the seven hundred bulls, seven hundred bullocks, seven hundred heifers, seven hundred he-goats and seven hundred rams.
And, Reverend Kassapa, I want to make a great sacrifice.
And, seven days after the royal sage had gone forth, the sacred Wheel-Treasure vanished.
And, sir, we shall all go to visit the ascetic Gotama.’
And, Sire, there is no fruit of the homeless life, visible here and now, that is more excellent and perfect than this.’ 
And, still disputing, they follow closely behind the Blessed Lord and his order of monks.’
And, too, none of them has seen Brahmā face to face,...
And, Vasettha, those Brahmins learned in the Three Vedas are enslaved, infatuated by these five strands of sense-desire, which they enjoy guiltily, unaware of danger, knowing no way out.
Another man denounced him to the King, saying: “Sire, such-and-such a man has taken what was not given”, thus speaking evil of another.
Another minister said: ‘Sire, there is Ajita Kesakambali...’
Another minister said: ‘Sire, there is Makkhali Gosala, who has many followers...
Another minister said: ‘Sire, there is Pakudha Kaccayana...’
Another minister said: ‘Sire, there is Sañjaya Belatthaputta...’
Another minister said: ‘Sire, there is the Nigantha Nataputta, who has many followers, a teacher of many, who is well-known,...
Another said:
Another said:
Another said: “That is not how it is.
Antelope-legged is such a man:
Anupiya is the name of a Malla town, and the Lord, having dressed in the early morning and taken his robe and bowl, went to Anupiya for alms.
Any honour and respect, Nor father either, as their due.
Anyone going about his business like that ought when he dies, at the breaking-up of the body, to go to the downfall, to the evil path, to ruin, to hell!
applies and directs his mind to the divine ear.
applies and directs his mind to the knowledge of previous existences.
applies and directs his mind to the knowledge of the passing-away and arising of beings.
applies and directs his mind to the various supernormal powers.
Approach him, Vasetthas, approach him, lest later you should regret it, saying: ‘The Tathagata passed away in our parish, and we did not take the opportunity to see him for the last time!’”’ ‘Very good, Lord’, said Ananda and, taking robe and bowl, he went with a companion to Kusinara.
Approach, Sire, approach.
appropriation,...
Are all dispelled, my fears are allayed, And now to the Enlightened One I pay
Are found to bear the mark of wheels, Each a thousand-spoked, complete.
Are his, who all bear Indra’s name, All well-endowed with mighty skills...
are impermanent, unstable, short-lived, fated to fall away, and we have come to this world.”
Are the Brahmins learned in the Three Vedas encumbered with wives and wealth, or unencumbered?’ ‘Encumbered, Reverend Gotama.’
Are the sun and the moon in this world or another, are they gods or humans?’
Are these things faults in the higher austerity, or not?’ ‘Certainly they are, Lord.
Arise, hero, victor in battle, leader of the caravan, traverse the world!
arising after death in a good place, a heavenly state.
arising after death in a good place, a heavenly state.
arising in a state of woe...
arousing desire.
Arranging his robe over one shoulder and saluting the Lord with joined palms, he said: “Just so, O Lord, just so, O Well-Farer!
Arranging his upper robe over one shoulder and kneeling on his right knee, he saluted the Lord Buddha Vipassi with joined hands and said: “Lord, may the Blessed Lord teach Dhamma, may the Well-Farer teach Dhamma!
Arrived at Pāvā, the Mallas’ capital, he stayed in the mango-grove of Cunda the smith.
Arrived there, Prince Vipassi was overcome with grief and dejection, crying: “Shame on this thing birth, since he who is born must experience sickness!”
Arrived there, Prince Vipassi was overcome with grief and dejection, crying: “Shame on this thing birth, since to him who is born old age must manifest itself!”
Arrived there, Prince Vipassi was overcome with grief and dejection, crying:”Shame on this thing birth, since to him who is born death must manifest itself!”
As a Buddha he cannot be overcome by any foe or hostile thing from within or without, by lust, hatred or delusion, by any ascetic or Brahmin, deva, mara, Brahmā or anything in the world.’
As a Buddha he cannot lose anything: faith, morality, learning, renunciation or wisdom — losing nothing, he will succeed in all things.’
As a Buddha he will be obeyed by monks...’
As a Buddha he will be wealthy and rich, and these will be his treasures: faith, morality, moral shame, moral dread, learning, renunciation and wisdom.’
As a Buddha he will have great wisdom, extensive wisdom, joyous wisdom, swift wisdom, penetrative wisdom, discerning wisdom, and among all beings there will be none equal to him or superior to him in wisdom.’
As a Buddha likewise, he is also equable and tolerant of exertion.’
As a Buddha, he becomes the chief, foremost, highest, supreme among all beings.
As a Buddha, he will be popular with and loved by monks, nuns, male and female lay-followers, devas and humans, asuras, nagas and gandhabbas.’
as a Buddha, his followers...
As a Buddha, how does he benefit?
As a Buddha, likewise.’
As a Buddha, likewise.’
As a Buddha, likewise.’
As a Buddha, too, he will have a persuasive voice: all...monks, nuns...will take his words to heart.’
As a child he’ll get in plenty, 
as a guest?’ ‘No, Reverend Gotama.’
As a result of this allaying, pleasant feeling arises, and what is more, gladness...
As a result of this dissociation, pleasant feeling arises, and what is more, gladness.
As a result, he comes to know in reality what is right and wrong, what is blameworthy and what is not, what is to be practised and what is not, what is base and what is noble, and what is foul, fair or mixed in quality.
As a result, he is not pleased and satisfied at having attained his end.
As a result, he is pleased and satisfied at having attained his end.
As a result, he is pleased and satisfied at having attained his end...
as a ruler he cannot be overcome by any human foe or opponent.
as a ruler he will be obeyed by Brahmin householders...
as a ruler he will be rich, of great wealth and resources, having a full treasury of gold and silver, all sorts of goods, and his granary will be full of corn.
as a ruler he will be very wise, and among the unrenounced there will be none equal or superior to him in wisdom...
as a ruler, his followers: Brahmin householders, citizens...will not be divided among themselves.
As a ruler, how does he benefit?
As a ruler, how does he benefit?
As an elephant, urged by the goad, Pays no heed to pricks of lance and spear, So I, unheeding, know not what I do, Intoxicated by your beauteous form.
As day was breaking, he caused hard and soft food to be prepared at his place of sacrifice, and when it was ready he announced: ‘Reverend Gotama, it is time; the meal is ready.’
As day was breaking, he caused hard and soft food to be prepared in his own home, and when it was ready he announced: ‘Reverend Gotama, it is time; the meal is ready.’
As far, Ananda, as designation and the range of designation reaches, as far as language and the range of language reaches, as far as concepts and the range of concepts reaches, as far as understanding and the range of understanding reaches, as far as the cycle reaches and revolves — that monk is liberated from all that by super-knowledge, and to maintain that such a liberated monk does not know and see would be a wrong view and incorrect.
As for the future, this knowledge, born of enlightenment, arises in him: “This is the last birth, there will be no more becoming.”
As for those bases of speculation about the beginning of things which I have explained to you as they should be explained, why should I now explain them to you as they should not be explained?
As for those bases of speculation about the future which I have explained to you as they should be explained, why should I now explain them to you as they should not be explained?
As from some path of panic fear.
As greed, hate and folly wane, Nibbāna’s gained.’
As he thus dwells contemplating his own body as body, he becomes perfectly concentrated and perfectly serene.
As he thus dwells contemplating his own mind-objects as mind-objects, he becomes perfectly concentrated and perfectly serene.
As I understand it, the Lord has said: “Poṭṭhapāda, from the moment when a monk has gained this controlled perception, he proceeds from stage to stage until he reaches the limit of perception...
as is taught by the Brahmin Pokkharasati”, and Bhāradvāja said: “This is the only straight path...as is taught by the Brahmin Tārukkha.”
As Jambudipāʹs Lord he’ll rule.
As king his pure retainers will
As layman or as wanderer:
As layman thus he’ll be throughout
As less than straws, and like a man
As long as he was alive, he was lighter, softer and more flexible, but when he was dead he was heavier, stiffer and more inflexible.
as long as it was well-proclaimed among humans, and now our Teacher has passed away from among us!” That way, the Teacher’s death would be a sad thing for his disciples.
As long as monks both in public and in private show loving-kindness to their fellows in acts of body, speech and thought,...
As long as monks continue with faith, with modesty, with fear of doing wrong, with learning, with aroused vigour, with established mindfulness, with wisdom...
As long as monks develop the perception of impermanence, of non-self, of impurity, of danger, of overcoming, of dispassion, of cessation,...
As long as monks do not rejoice, delight and become absorbed in works,...
As long as monks hold to these six things and are seen to do so, they may be expected to prosper and not decline.’
As long as the body subsists, devas and humans will see him.
As long as the body subsists, devas and humans will see him.
As long as they do not authorise what has not been authorised already, and do not abolish what has been authorised, but proceed according to what has been authorised by the rules of training...; as long as they honour, respect, revere and salute the elders of long standing who are long ordained, fathers and leaders of the order...; as long as they do not fall prey to desires which arise in them and lead to rebirth...; as long as they are devoted to forest-lodgings...; as long as they preserve their personal mindfulness, so that in future the good among their companions will come to them, and those who have already come will feel at ease with them...; as long as the monks hold to these seven things and are seen to do so, they may be expected to prosper and not decline.
as long as they do not rest content with partial achievements...; as long as the monks hold to these seven things and are seen to do so, they may be expected to prosper and not decline.
As long as they meet in harmony, break up in harmony, and carry on their business in harmony, they may be expected to prosper and not decline.
As Lord of all the world he’ll rule.ʺʹ
As man, his skin was soft and tender.
As man, to many doing good, Dispelling fright and panic fear, Eager to guard and give defence, He undertook this mighty task, 
As regards the past, the Tathāgata has knowledge of past lives.
As regards the way in which the Lord has striven for the welfare of the many, for the happiness of the many, out of compassion for the world, for the welfare and happiness of devas and humans — we can find no teacher endowed with such qualities, whether we consider the past or the present, other than the Lord.
As reserve in times of need.
As soon as a perception arises in them, those devas fall from that realm.
As soon as a perception arises in them, those devas fall from that realm...
As soon as Ananda had gone, the Lord took his robe and bowl and went into Nādikā for alms.
As soon as the King had gone, the Lord said: ‘The King is done for, his fate is sealed, monks!
As soon as the Mallas had gone the Lord, surveying the monks sitting silently all about, said to the Venerable Sāriputta: ‘The monks are free from sloth-and-torpor, Sāriputta.
As such, how does he benefit?
as taught by the Brahmin Tarukkha!’
As the Dhamma is to Arahants.
As the rain-god pours down showers.
As the Sakyans’ Son in jhāna rapt
Ask us, Your Majesty, and we will tell you!”
Ask, monks!
asked, he answered: I now can stay no more.’
Assembled augurs then declared, Fine food and drink he would enjoy:
Assembled augurs then declared, Seeing these many marks of merit:
Assembled augurs then declared:
Assembled augurs thus declared
Assembled augurs thus declared
Assembled augurs thus declared:
Assist me in this, gentlemen, that it may be to my lasting benefit and happiness.’”
Association with good people, hearing the true Dhamma, practice of the Dhamma in its entirety ).
assuring for themselves a heavenly, happy reward...
Asuras too, whom Indra’s hand once struck, Ocean-dwellers now, in magic skilled, Vāsava’s replendent brothers came, The Kālakañjas, terrible to see, Dānaveghasas, Vepacitti, Sucitti and Pahārādha too, Fell Namuci, and Bali’s hundred sons with a band of warriors who joined their master Rāhu, Who had come to wish their meeting well.
At a time of contraction, beings are mostly born in the Abhassara Brahma world.
At a time of contraction, beings are mostly reborn in the Abhassara Brahmā world.
At a time of expansion, the beings from the Abhassara Brahma world, having passed away from there, are mostly reborn in this world.
At Bhoganagara the Lord stayed at the Ananda Shrine.
At Campa he stayed by Gaggara’s lotus-pond.
At last the Blessed Lord has gone out of his way to come here.
At last the Blessed Lord has gone out of his way to come here.
At last the reverend Lord has gone out of his way to come here.
At Nāḷandā the Lord stayed in Pāvārikaʹs mango-grove.
At one time King Okkāka, to whom his queen was dear and beloved, wishing to transfer the kingdom to her son, banished his elder brothers from the kingdom — Okkamukha, Karandu, Hatthiniya and Sinipura.
At Pāṭaligāma they heard say: ‘The Lord has arrived here’.
At some time he hears the Ariyan Dhamma, he pays close attention and practises in conformity with it.
At some time he hears the Ariyan Dhamma, he pays dose attention and practises in conformity with it.
At some time he hears the Ariyan Dhamma,...
At that moment Pukkusa the Malla, a pupil of Ālāra Kālāma, was going along the main road from Kusinara to Pava.
At that time a number of monks were walking up and down in the open air.
At that time even the sewers and rubbish-heaps of Kusinara were covered knee-high with coral-tree flowers.
At that time I fell in love with the lady Bhaddā, bright as the sun, the daughter of King Timbarū of the gandhabbas.
At that time I was the Brahmin, the Great Steward, and I taught those disciples the path to union with the Brahmā-world.
At that time it was regarded as a low designation, but now it is the higher.
At that time the Brahmin Pokkharasati was living at Ukkhattha, a populous place, full of grass, timber, water and corn, which had been given to him by King Pasenadi of Kosala as a royal gift and with royal powers.
At that time the Brahmin Sonadanda was living at Campa, a populous place, full of grass, timber, water and corn, which had been given to him by King Seniya Bimbisara of Magadha as a royal gift and with royal powers.
At that time the Mallas of Kusinara were assembled in their meeting-hall on some business.
At that time the Nigantha Nātaputta had just died at Pāvā.
At that time the Venerable Nāgita was the Lord’s personal attendant.
At that time the Vārānasi of today will be a royal city called Ketumatī, powerful and prosperous, crowded with people and well-supplied.
At that time there arises a true but subtle perception of delight and happiness born of concentration, and he becomes one who is conscious of this delight and happiness.
At that time there is present a true but subtle perception of delight and happiness, born of detachment, and he becomes one who is conscious of this delight and happiness.
At the breaking-up of the body after death they are reborn in a good destination, a heavenly world.”
At the breaking-up of the body after death they are reborn in a good destination, a heavenly world.”
At the breaking-up of the body after death they are reborn in a lower world, a bad destination, a state of suffering, hell.
At the breaking-up of the body after death they are reborn in a lower world, a bad destination, a state of suffering, hell.
At the end of five years you are to return to Bandhumati to recite the disciplinary code”, and similarly at the end of two, three, four, five years.
At the end of seven days we will go forth into homelessness.
At the same time, under modem conditions, especially in the West, the question does arise as to whether the Sangha might not educate the laity into offering only vegetarian food.
At the sight he said to the charioteer: “Charioteer, what is the matter with this man?
At the sight he said to the charioteer: “What is the matter with this man?
At the sight he said to the charioteer: “Why are those people doing that?” “Prince, that is what they call a dead man.” “Drive me over to where the dead man is.” “Very good, Prince, said the charioteer, and did so.
At the sight he thought: “It would not be right for me to look on and let a human being die.
At these words King Ajatasattu was silent.
At these words King Ajatasattu was silent.
At these words King Ajatasattu was silent.
At these words King Ajatasattu was silent.
At these words King Ajātasattu was silent.
At these words King Ajātasattu was silent.
At these words Sigālaka said to the Lord: ‘Excellent, Reverend Gotama, excellent!
At these words Sonadanda said: ‘Excellent, Lord, excellent!
At these words the Venerable Ananda said to the Lord: ‘It is marvellous, Lord, it is wonderful.
At these words the wanderers sat silent and upset, their shoulders drooped, they hung their heads and sat there downcast and bewildered, so possessed were their minds by Māra.
At these words Vasettha said: ‘Reverend Gotama, I have heard them say: “The ascetic Gotama knows the way to union with Brahmā.”’
At this Kassapa said to the Lord: ‘Reverend Gotama, it is hard to be an ascetic, it is hard to be a Brahmin.’
At this Kassapa said to the Lord: ‘Reverend Gotama, it is hard to understand an ascetic, it is hard to understand a Brahmin.’
At this King Ajātasattu exclaimed: ‘Excellent, Lord, excellent!
At this King Okkāha exclaimed: “They are strong as teak, these princes, they are real Sakyans!” And that is how the Sakyans got their well-known name.
At this Pokkharasāti exclaimed: ‘Well, you’re a fine little scholar, a fine wise man, a fine expert in the Three Vedas!
At this question the devas of the Four Great Kings said to him: “Monk, we don’t know where the four great elements cease without remainder.
At this Sonadanda replied: ‘Now listen, gentlemen, as to why it is fitting for us to visit the Reverend Gotama, and why it is not fitting for him to visit us.
At this the Brahmin Dona addressed the crowd in this verse:
At this the Brahmin lady said to the youth: “Wait, young man, until I give birth.
At this the Brahmin Lohicca said to the Lord: ‘Reverend Gotama, it is as if a man were to seize someone by the hair who had stumbled and was falling into a pit, and to set him on firm ground — just so, I, who was falling into the pit, have been saved by the Reverend Gotama!
At this the Brahmins said to Sonadanda: ‘Don’t say that, Sonadanda don’t say it!
At this the Brahmins shouted loudly and noisily: ‘What a splendid sacrifice!
At this the King was grieved and felt sad.
At this the King was grieved and felt sad.
At this the Lord said to Māra: ‘You need not worry, Evil One.
At this the Thirty-Three Gods rejoiced still more, saying: ‘The devas’ hosts are growing, the asuras’ hosts are declining!’
At this the Venerable Ananda said: ‘Lord, may the Blessed Lord stay for a century, may the Well-Farer stay for a century for the benefit and happiness of the multitude, out of compassion for the world, for the benefit and happiness of devas and humans!’ ‘Enough, Ananda!
At this the wanderer Subhadda said: ‘Excellent, Lord, excellent!
At this the wanderers fell silent.
At this the wanderers fell silent.
At this the wanderers made a great commotion and noise, exclaiming: ‘It is wonderful, it is marvellous how great are the powers of the ascetic Gotama in holding back with his own theories and in inviting others to discuss theirs!’
At this the wanderers made a great commotion and noise, exclaiming: ‘We and our teacher are ruined!
At this the young Brahmins Vāsettha and Bhāradvāja said to the Lord: ‘Excellent, Reverend Gotama, excellent!
At this they came together and lamented, crying: “Alas, our creeper’s gone!
At this they came together and lamented, crying: “Oh that flavour!
At this Vasettha said: ‘Reverend Gotama, I have heard them say: “The ascetic Gotama teaches the way to union with Brahma.”
At this, Ambattha remained silent.
At this, Citta, son of the elephant-trainer, said to the Lord: ‘Lord, whenever the gross acquired self is present, would it be wrong to assume the existence of the mind-made acquired self, or of the formless acquired self?
At this, Gopaka rebuked them, saying: “What were you about, sirs, that you did not listen to the Blessed Lord’s teaching?
At this, joy arises in him, and from this joy, delight; and by this delight his senses are calmed, he feels happiness as a result, and with this happiness his mind is established.
At this, joy arises in him, and from this joy, delight; and by this delight his senses are calmed, he feels happiness as a result, and with this happiness his mind is established;  he has not heard it thus, but in the course of teaching Dhamma to others he has learnt it by heart as he has heard it; or as he is chanting the Dhamma...; or ...
At this, Kassapa said to the Lord: ‘Gotama, these ascetic practices of certain practisers of self-mortification are considered proper to them: a naked ascetic uses no polite restraints,  licks his hands, does not come or stand still when requested.
At this, King Ajātasattu said: ‘Lord, permit me to depart now.
At this, Nigrodha said to the Lord: ‘Transgression overcame me, Lord!
At this, Pokkharasāti said to the Lord: ‘Reverend Gotama, Ambattha is a young fool.
